READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_kp_reader_5_transits_banned.json
Dataset number: 236 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 630,303 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_KP.reader 5_transits banned
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_KP.reader 5_transits banned
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 364
  • total_words: 106232
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.975
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
STELLAR ASTROLOGICAL
READER NO. V
TRANSIT
GOCHARAPALA NIRNAYAM
notice; PDF pages 36 to 185 included (150 pages)
are exactly same as pages 1 5 to 164 from KP reader
book 3. so do not read again the same ones
AUTHOR
Sothida Mannan, Jyotish Marthand
Prof. Late K.S. KRISHNAMURTI

CONTENTS
a. Introduction
B. Western System - Transit
c. Hindu System
d. Sun's Transit
e. Moon's Transit
F. Mars Transit
g. Mercury's Transit
h. Jupiter's Transit
I. Venus's Transit
j. Saturn's Transit
k. Nodes Transit
Page
for individual charts xvii

Page
1 1 . Systematic procedure to adopt K.P. method
for Transit rules. .151
12. Dasa, Bhukti, Anthra and Transit. .161
1 3. Tables for ready reference to follow
Krishnamurti Padhdhati. .164
14. Extract of lecture on the constellation and
sub theory. .188
15. Transit of Ascendant and Ruling planets.. ...192
16. Lucky time for playing cards 195
17. Lucky time for Horse Racing (Example-1). . . .199
18. Lucky time for Horse Racing (Example-2). . . . 206
LUCKY TIMINGS
19. To commence work to take treasure. 219
20. To start treatment for invalid child. 220
21. To prosper as an actress /. . 220
22. To submit a tender for contract work. 221
23. To start shooting of a cinema film. 221
24. To purchase a ticket for lottery. 221
25. To meet the Bank Agent to have over-draft. . . .222
26. To Lottery gains (with no pains). 224
27. To open an account in a Bank. 225
28. To start C.I.D. work to catch the thief. 226
29. To trap one receiving the bribe. 226
30. To file the case in the Court of Law. 227
31. To start a strike for fair deal. 228
32. Initiation of Manthra for siddhi. 228
33. Auspicious time to commence Music. 228

paae

INTRODUCTION
Astrology is the science which deals with the inter-relation
between the signs of the Zodiac, the constellations, planets and
with other celestial phenomena which control and direct every
happening on earth. It deals with all worldly occurrences and one
can read the past and future events with accuracy by applying the
cardinal principles of the Science of astrology.
To many, it would appear that it is a subject which can be
learnt and practised only by people who live on superstition and
whose minds are not scientifically bent. It is wrong to look upon
astrology as based on superstition or to view it with contempt or
denounce it as inaccurate, unscientific and empirical. The person
who has not studied it properly and applied it correctly or who has
been disappointed by consulting people with a half-baked
knowledge usually attacks this science. The books which are
available for study are (nothing but) similar to the notes written by
students in Colleges. By reading the notes alone without studying
the texts and sitting for an examination, one cannot always expect
to secure a first class or even a pass. He has to devote enough
time upon thinking, analysing and thereby improving his
knowledge. Similarly, the books on astrology are largely the notes
given by intelligent, industrious and eminent Hindu sages and
learned Western Savants - They are not exhaustive and complete
by themselves. Though, these books are necessarily incomplete,
the fundamental principles are very well expounded. Therefore, it
is necessary for us to do enough research to improve on it and
make it perfect. In my experience, I have found that certain
additions and explanations to the rules laid down by the Sages,
make the predictions complete and correct. Therefore, one should
first collect the various charts, study, write predictions, keep them
with him and note down the fulfilled predictions as well as those
unfulfilled. Then find out the cause of the failures and follow only
that method through which correct results are obtained. When one
feels confident that failures are greatly reduced, then alone, one
should start making predictions to anybody in any branch of this
Science.

This science will admit of a broad division into five branches:
1 .Medical Astrology; (Astro, Pathology;)
2. Astro-meteorology;
3. Judicial astrology;
4. Horary astrology and
5. Natal astrology.
1. Medical Astrology is concerned with the diagnosis of
diseases, the methods of healing, also the time of the onset of
the ailment, the duration of the disease and the psychiatric
aspects that may influence the progress and prognosis of the
diseases. Hippocrates renowned as the "Father of Medicine" has
stated, “A physician cannot safely administer medicine if he is not
acquainted with astrology". It means that in the absence of
astrological knowledge, to start with, he has often to proceed only
by trial and error methods and apply remedies by rule of thumb till
he eliminates many diseases by varied examinations and
ascertain the precise nature and cause of the diseases. But if he
knows astrology, he can locate the part of the body affected,
detect the disease and select the opportune time for treatment.
This will bring fame and satisfactory remuneration to the doctor
and at the same time restore the patient to good health; otherwise
the patient will have to become a guinea pig for experimental
tortures. This will result in loss of time and often life; it will be a
great loss to the nation too. But if a doctor knows astrology and
medicine sufficiently well, he will prove to be a really successful
practitioner
2. Astro-meteorology is useful for predicting the condition
of the weather. This has received considerable attention in other
countries, where they have found it to be very useful. It assists in
preplanning and thereby preventing any catastrophe which may
otherwise befall such as heavy rains causing floods and breaches
or drought, leading to famine.
3. Judicial Astrology will predict important events which a
country will pass through and also wars, earth quakes, financial
crisis, losses by fire, floods and famines.

4. Horary Astrology is used to predict particular aspects and
has a limited application. By applying it, one can predict if one's
efforts will be successful or not; whether a person will return from
a far-off land or stay there itself; whether and when marriage is
likely to come off; description of the partner; the nature of the
disease and duration of ill-health of persons, whether cure is
indicated or if it may prove fatal, etc. It is entirely based upon the
moment of the questioner's arrival or on being told to give a
number within 249. Here the astrologer visualises a map of the
horizon for that moment and studies it for that particular question.
Therefore horary astrology serves the people to derive mental
solace and have a correct picture of the immediate future (Horary
means "occurring every hour").
5. Natal Astrology concerns largely with the birth of a human
being. A chart is made out for the moment of birth for the particular
place of birth (latitude and longitude being taken into consideration)
and from such a chart one can read all events which he desires to
know. Here, not only the native's character, temperament and
peculiarities may be judged but also his longevity, condition of
health, accident - prone, finance and fortune, marriage, birth of
children and also prosperity or adversity. Moreover, the actual date
of any occurrence in his life can be calculated. Therefore, natal
astrology is most useful for all, whether he is born a King, a Kubera
or a beggar because health and longevity are really precious to
every individual. Fortune, prosperity and above all peace of mind
and happiness are desired by all. Hence natal astrology is the
most useful branch of this science and it therefore behoves all of
us to support and encourage genuine research by trained workers
and scholars to complete the incomplete phases just as in every
other branch of science.
Now let me deal with the sub-branch of Natal astrology; in
the Hindu system it is called “Gochara-Palan", which Westerners
call "Transit". I would like here to state with great humility, for the
information of the public and also of the scholars in astrology
that my method of prediction is in a way an improvement in the

application of the general principles of astrology handed down
to us by our ancient sages and scholars.
According to the Western system, the astrologers take the
radical position of the Sun at the time of birth, consider the relative
position of the planets transiting the zodiac and give out their
results. Whereas in India, according to our Hindu system, the
position of the Moon at the time of birth of native (Nirayana
system) is taken as the starting and determining point to which
the transiting position of the planets are related and according
to the relative position, we read the results and say whether the
time is auspicious or not. Both the methods are incomplete and
the percentage of failures is therefore large. This is no doubt not
desirable.
(a) The Western System: Let us take for example, two
persons who were born in different years but on the same date
say 10-8-1913 and 10-8-1916 respectively. Suppose the person
born on 10-8-1913 ask an astrologer whether he will come out
successful in the election and if the astrologer were to predict that,
at the time of the election, the relative positions of the planets
transiting the zodiac being very favourable, compared to the
position of the Sun at the time of the birth of the native, success
in the election is promised, then the same opinion must be offered
to the other who is born on 10-8-1916. Suppose both of them
stand for election to the same seat in the same locality, how is it
possible for both to win? only one can win while the other must
lose. So we should consider how far this method of prediction
will be of avail to the querist.
Again suppose one was born on 17th May 1926 and another
on 17th may 1940. Both play cards or one borrows money from
the other or one gives alms to the other; while at cards one should
gain and the other should lose; while lending money, one should
part with his money and the other should receive it, and thereby
the lender's financial position deteriorates and the borrower's
improves - similarly while giving alms one donates and the other
receives. Now, you will note that all these people, were born on

the same date but in different years and the position of the Sun in
both the case, was in the same sign and in the same degree. On
the basis of the principles followed by Westerners, i.e., according
to the relative position of the transiting planets to that of only Sun
in the birth chart, diametrically opposite results cannot be foretold.
There is no proper explanation for such effects when the rules on
Transits, taking Sun's position alone, are strictly adhered to.
(b) The Hindu System: You will find the above similarity in
the Hindu method also. We are not able to explain why quite
opposite results are enjoyed or experienced by one and the same
rasi-births, i.e., people born when the Moon was transiting a
particular constellation. For example, when the Moon was
transiting Bharani star i.e., Mesha Rasi.two people were born on
different dates, even in different years. Now one born in Bharani
star compete with the other Bharani native: one comes out
victorious while the other gets defeated. Again suppose a plaintiff
in a law-suit is born in Bharani, the defendant is also born in
Bharani and the Judge also happens to have been born in
Bharani. Now, look at the result. One of the two Bharani star
natives gets the favourable judgement, the other is vanquished
and the third Bharani star native delivers the judgement. We also
understand that
(a) An Aswini Nakshathra native is admitted in a hospital
at the time when another Aswini Nakshathra person gets
discharged after treatment.
(b) A Pushya Nakshathra Inspector of police arrests
another Pushya Nakshathra criminal. The Inspector is happy,
because he was able to trace the culprit and to discharge his
duty while the other is within bars.
(c) An Anuradha Nakshathra car driver runs over another
Anuradha Nakshathra pedestrian.
(d) Sravana Nakshathra person has a legal dispute
with another Sravana Nakshathra native. The judge born in
Sravana

Nakshathra passes a judgement by which one gains and the
other looses.
(e) Poorvashada star native owns a house. Another
Poorvashada star native is a tenant. The owner occupies on the
day, the tenant vacates.
(f) A Jyesta star native sells a car due to pressure for money,
while another Jyesta person purchases from him.
Thus, you will see that the same star people experience
diametrically opposite results.
So, to predict the Gochara or transit results taking only the
star position into consideration, is incomplete.
That is why the Rasipalans published in the dailies, weeklies
and monthlies vary even in the essentials so widely and so
erratically that they give scope to the public for ridiculing this
noble science. Therefore, there should be a fool-proof and
accurate method by which a correct prediction can be offered. For
doing this, a complete chart is necessary and the relative position
of all planets transiting is to be judged with the position of all
planets in the chart and especially the position of Lagna, etc.
The Public may ask: "Why then such an incorrect one is
handed down to us?" what is handed down to us is incomplete.
It appears that, if one knows only his date of birth or only his
birth-star (Nakshathra) he too should, to some extent get a
prediction that will give mental solace. Astrology includes also
psychotherapy; it should be able to give mental strength to the
people who are depressed so that they can work with enthusiasm,
entertaining hopes of better times to come; even when suspense
is threatened, such people will not worry any longer. They will
wait with pleasure for better days. So astrologers offer predictions
which may be true to a limited extent, especially to a few.
Actually, if the position of each and even/ planet in the chart
of a subject is taken into account, the prediction offered should

not fail. A cent percent success is assured by taking the lagna and
the position of various planets including Uranus and Neptune, as
well as that of most sensitive point, Fortuna, at the time of the birth
of the native and the position of the planets transiting in the Zodiac
along with the several aspects that are being formed and then
offering the results.
It will be observed that people born on the same date in
different years with different positions of the planets enjoy
different results. The readers will find this for themselves that,
when all planets are taken into consideration and the results so
derived are used and the general predictions are accordingly
modified, only correct results are obtained.
For example, two girls born in Rohini star, are taken of whom
one gets married in a particular year and the other gets married
the next year. In such cases, one can find that, according to the
position of the lords of 2, 7 and 11th houses in each horoscope
and to the relative position of the planets transiting in the Zodiac,
the planets promise marriage of the former in the particular year;
whereas for the latter, they portray the wedding only in the
following year. Thus one will find that even though both are born in
the same star, the events occur on different dates. This is due to
relative positions of the relevant planets at the time of birth and
transiting in the Zodiac.
If it were possible for any one to collect the charts of many
couples who get married on a particular date in a given place, city
or town, or at least note down their birth dates and birth stars
which will reveal the positions of the Sun and also of the Moon at
birth, it will be found that people born with the Sun in each of the
12 rasis and with the Moon in any of the 27 stars get married on
that very same date. You will also not find that only Aswini star
people get married on that particular day or only Bharani or any
other star. You will find actually that people born in all the 12
months of the year and under all 27 stars get married.
Now let us see what the sages have declared. Jupiter
while transiting in 2 or 5 or 7 or 9 or 1 1th house counted from the
Moon's

3ignZ offers Gurubalam which is good and in all other positions, in
relation to the Moon, there is no Gurubalam or Viyazhabalam or
Brihaspathi Balam. If to a girl, Jupiter transits in the third house
ordinary astrologers naturally will predict that, because Jupiter
is transiting in 3, Gurubalam is not found and hence marriage will
not materialise. Unfortunately, they will realise soon that their
prediction has miserably failed when, fortunately for the girl, the
marriage has come off. In 1961 Jupiter entered Makara. Only
after Jupiter transited through Makara, many anusham star girls
got married even though it (Jupiter) was in the third rasi. When we
follow the principles that Jupiter in 2, 5, 7, 9 and 1 1th houses alone
can give fruitful results, how can marriage take place when Jupiter
is in the third house? Again in every year, if you collect the charts
of the people born under the same star, you will find that, in all
years a few of the people born under the same star, e.g.;
Pushyam (Poosam) star get married or enjoy life or get promotion
or otherwise realise their ambitious. So when you compare the
position of the transiting planets with the position of the Moon or
Sun at the time of the birth of the natives, you will find that in all
positions on different dates, wedding was celebrated to one or the
other born under the star or born on the same date. Here also, you
will conclude that the science is incomplete. But when you apply
the method described herein, you will understand that there is not
even one percent error but everything comes out very accurately
and correctly, which will go to prove that astrology is really a
mysterious and wonderful science, given only to the few who have
the Divine Grace. So you have to consider the positions of all the
planets and Lagna at the time of birth and assess them in relation
to the relative positions of all the planets transiting in the Zodiac at
any future predicted date.
It may be argued that the Hindu method is better than the
Western. We Hindus, as stated already, take the relative position
of the Moon, while the Westerners take the position of the Sun
as the basis of computation. Probably the Westerners take into
consideration the vitality, health and the profession of the native,
as being all important and this trait is governed by the Sun.

The Hindus take into consideration the Moon's
position because of the following important reason:
The Moon is called 'Mathi' or the Mind. The transiting planets
may be harmonious or inharmonious in their aspects with the
Moon and accordingly one feels elated or upset. Our ancestors
always desired to have peace of mind and tried to avoid upsets.
So they cared more for the mental faculties so that they can
meditate, concentrate and pray to God.
Another reason is really the most appealing. If one takes the
pre-natal epoch, it will be seen that the Moon's position at the
time of the birth in the chart is exactly the ascendant (lagna) at
the time of epoch in 50% of the cases. So, at the time of the
epoch, a particular part of the Zodiac rose in the East. After
roughly 9 months when the Moon transits in that position, birth
takes place. Similarly that particular part of the Zodiac which
rose at the time of the birth called the ascendant or lagna was
exactly the same position of the Moon at the time of the epoch of
the child. Thus, Hindu sages compare the relative positive
position of the ascendant (lagna) at the time of the epoch as the
Moon's position in the birth chart. As the child grows from the time
of the epoch, it would be really more appropriate and correct to
take that into consideration. This may convince everyone.
Whatever be the reason, it is found that both the Western
and the Hindu methods of prediction on the transits of planets fall
in many cases, whether referred either only to the Sun or only to
the Moon.
Let us analyse. If one takes the ascendant and the Moon's
position (i.e. Rasi) separately and note the results, they are bound
to vary. If both are taken, one can have the truth. Suppose a
man bets in a race and makes some money; then naturally he
feels happy but in practical life he is found to be some what
worried and dissatisfied because he had missed an important
winner he was sure about. When his chart is examined, you will
find that the ascendant (success or failure) had only a moderately
beneficial aspect, whereas the Moon (reaction mind) had an

inauspicious one. Therefore, his attempts had been successful
only to a certain extent, but made him mentally ill at ease. Another
person goes to the race course and loses a few hundreds. But he
comes out merrily saying "Better luck next time". Why! He had a
particular horse in mind, but at the time he betted, he deliberately
changed over to another horse, a fluke. This he did with the fullest
knowledge that he was taking a chance and he lost because his
ascendant was in evil aspect. But the Moon was in a beneficial
aspect and so he did not mind the loss and vowed to win later.
Again when both the ascendant and the Moon have evil
aspects; the man's attempts fall and he mopes. If both the
ascendant and the Moon's position are in good aspect, he wins
and feels elated. It is one of the many fundamental points
confirmed by series of researches made, that, even though the
Moon's position be the same, if the ascendant were to be different,
the results will be variable and therefore we have to take the
ascendant primarily and then only the Moon, the Sun and the
other planets, in order to know all the results accurately.
One more example will confirm that the 'Gocharapalan'
offered by taking the date of birth. I.e., the Sun's position alone
will not be correct in all cases. Take the date of birth and also the
star of the students who are all declared successful in any given
Public Examination - several thousands sit for the same
examination on a particular date and their results are published
all at the same time. It is no wonder that people born under all
the 27 stars are found to have passed. If we collect the charts of
those who have failed, it will be found that they were also born on
all the days of the year and under all the 27 star. This particular
aspect has been the subject of detailed research by the editor
and his students.
We should also take into our main consideration the position
of Fortuna. Fortuna is otherwise called Pars Fortuna. This is the
most sensitive and fortunate Zodiacal point. Its distance from
the ascendant is as the Moon is from the Sun in longitude, i.e., if

you add the longitude of the Moon to that of the ascendant and
then deduct the longitude of the Sun, you arrive at the longitude of
Fortuna - it is the position of Thithi added to Lagna. Always the
position of all the planets and Moon's node are readily obtained by
referring to the ephemeris; but the place of the Fortuna is to be
worked out from the horoscope itself and it varies for every
moment because every fourth minute, the next degree of the
Zodiac rises in the East and thereby the longitude of the
ascendant is rapidly changing.
The Lagna moves very fast about one degree in every four
minutes. The fastest moving planet is Moon; So position of
Fortuna changes every moment and each birth will have its
position in different longitudes even though it may be within only a
few minutes of each other. Unless both are born at the same time
in the same latitude and longitude, the Fortuna cannot be in the
same position for those births. Fortuna has no influence on
character but is said to benefit the sign in which it is found to be.
For the transit results, in my personal experience, Fortuna
deserves serious attention and it indicates certain results which
are not shown by the aspects formed by the transiting planets to
those in the natal chart. As long as we have found out that the
results enjoyed by people born within a few minutes difference
of each other, show diametrically opposite results, then one
should try and find out what is it that is so fast moving as to
cause opposite effects. All research scholars will surely declare
that if the fast changing ascendant and Fortuna are always
included in all calculations and predictions offered, there can be
no great room for disappointment.
So far, I have shown by specific instances that predictions
made by applying 'Gocharapalan' taking the transit of planets
and referring to the position of only the Sun or only Moon of a
native at his birth are liable to serious gross errors.
I will now give instances to prove that identical results are
enjoyed by people whose birth took place at the same minute in
the same latitude and Longitude. I place before the readers in a

tangible and a systematic form, my reasons. It is for them to
accept or reject. I am sure it will be accepted.
My readers will do well at this stage to pause and
ponder over the significant truth i have placed before them.
The first instance related to two persons born at the same
time and both got married to carrier girls who were earning. They
had no children but both couples were very fond of domestic
pets, cats and dogs. The two mates were lecturers showing
identical interests in politics, social welfare, philosophy and
religion. Minor events also in their lives were strikingly similar,
as for example, both suffered from tooth-ache at the same time
and period and had their infected teeth pulled out at the same
time and on the same day. The two male partners were in no
way related to each other and they hailed from separate villages,
next to each other.
Another instance is about two men, born in the same village,
who narrated their experience after they had lived there for a
fairly long time. Their temperaments, behaviour and character
were identical. Both had pleasing manners always with a smile
and were never rude to anyone. Both were robust in health.
Whenever one fell ill, the other also ailed from the same disease
at the same time. Each of them got married in the same period
and had the same number of children of the same sex. Both of
them lost a child in the same month and brought up the same
number of children. One was a journalist and the other was a
writer of fiction. Mercury, Mars and Jupiter were the signs who
ruled over their profession. The culmination of this extraordinary
similarity was in the death of these two natives on the same day.
Yet another instance relates to a report that appeared in a
foreign journal in 1820. It mentioned that Samuel Hannings died at
the age of 82. He was born on 4-6-1738, at a place, situated in the
same latitude and longitude as King George III, who ascended the
throne in October 1760. Mr. Hennings was then an independent
businessman. On the same day when the King got married, Mr.
Hennings took Elsie for his wife. Both had the

same number of children of similar sexes. Both were
long- lived and died at the same hour on 2-9-1820.
Instances can be multiplied of such remarkable
coincident happenings.
It is recommended to judge the outstanding events
and episode that would happen to natives taking position of the
lagna.
Lagna or Ascendant, i.e. first house, indicates, health,
longevity, success or failure in one's attempts, etc.
To different births having different houses as Lagna, lordship
of Moon and Sun will vary, e.g. people born in Aries (Mesha) as
Lagna, Moon is lord of 4 and Sun is lord of 5. If the transiting
planets afflict Moon it shows the difficulties to be faced by mother
and not by the person. But, as Moon is the chief governor for the
mind he will not be happy due to the troubles to his mother.
Similarly if Sun, lord of 5 (according to date of birth), is afflicted by
the transiting planets, the children may suffer, whereas the native
will not have any adverse result.

Always one should necessarily note of which house Moon
is the lord and which house Sun governs. Good aspect to
Ascendant promises good health and success to the person. If
Moon is the lord of any particular house, one is to note down the
matters governed by that house. Good aspect to Moon improves
those matters. Bad aspect to Moon does harm to the matters
indicated by that house. Similarly one is to note down the aspect
to the Sun; find out to which house Sun happens to be the lord.
As each house-bhava-signifies certain matters, consider which
are shown by the house which Sun owns counting from the
Lagna. Good aspect to Sun indicates improvement of these
denoted by Sun whereas bad aspects spoil them. A few
Westerners take like this.
Suppose one is born in Virgo (Kanni) as Ascendant, 2
hours before another born in Libra (Thulam).
As sun owns Leo, to the person born in Virgo Ascendant,
Sun is lord of 12 indicating either loss or separation or

hospitalisation or life in a foreign place or away from relatives
and some changes.
But to the person born in Libra-Thulam-Sun is lord of 11, It
promises peace, pleasure, profit, progeny, prosperity, permanent
tie of friendship, partner reunion, etc.
Therefore, for persons born on the same day due to the
change in Lagna, the lordship of Sun changes. Therefore, it
indicates diametrically opposite results.
If both refer to the dailies wherein the prediction is offered
for the date of birth they understand that the astrologer has given
the prediction taking into consideration the position of Sun at birth
and the position of the planets transiting. Does it not appeal even
to a common man that good aspect and good result mentioned will
apply (a) to the person regarding the matters indicated by the 1 1th
to Libra-born, (b) to the good health and success of his elder
brother (1 1th house shows elder brother.)
The same good aspect to Sun shows loss of investment,
journey, separation, etc., to aVirgo-born native.
So the Libra-born will have re-union and profit whereas the
Virgo-born loses and gets separated, though the Sun is in the
same degree, in the same sign and all the other planets also do
not change their signs.
Also it is worth the while to note the following:-
(a) collect the horoscope ofthose born with Moon in Cancer.
(b) Sort out the Aries Ascendant, Taurus, Leo, Virgo, etc.
verify the results.
To the person born in Aries Ascendant and Moon in Cancer,
if a prediction is offered taking the Moon sign, the prediction will
apply to mother. If it is said that people born with Moon in Cancer
have Saturn in 8 and it will affect the health, actually the Ariesborns find (a) the mother is unhealthy and not he or she; (b) the car
gives trouble, needing a mechanic's attention and (c) the

house needs some repairs. Another born in Taurus ascendant
observes (a) he is not able to proceed on short journeys; (b)
cannot edit any book; (c) brother or younger sister is ill, etc. One
born in Leo, incurs loss; one born in Virgo gains. One born in
Capricorn says all the results read for Cancer sign agrees mostly
with those enjoyed by my wife, the reason being that Moon
governs the 7th house.
Therefore
(a) Predictions must be offered with reference to Lagna,
various cusps and all planets.
If you have a doubt or if your horoscope is to be cast very
accurately, send
(a) the place of birth-nearest town
(b) time of birth
(c) date, month and year
(d) sex
(e) name; to any of my students and have it corrected.
It is common knowledge that various predictions are routinely
given in the monthly and weekly journals based on
'Gocharapalan' and write that those who are running beneficent
dasa and favourable bhukthi will have a good time during the
auspicious transit. They add further that, if the dasa bhukthi will
appear to be menacing then the results will not happen. If the
transit and the dasa and bhukti are both beneficial, then the native
will get his desire fulfilled and will enjoy favourable results. If
both the dasa and bhukti as well as the transit are adverse, the
native will face untold miseries. This is what we find, mentioned
in these predictions.
it is necessary to point out in this context that the dasas which
are adopted by Astrologers are many. Among these Udu dasa,
Vimshottari, Astottari dasa, Kalachakra dasa are generally applied.
Which of these is to be followed is not stated by the

predicting astrologers of today; Vimshottari is perhaps
what they go by.
Let me pose to them the case of twins who have got the
same lagna and the same position of planets, with more or less
the same dasa and bhukthi, but running with a difference of 1
month and six days. Both are in Rahu dasa, Guru bhukthi at the
time they tried for a job. One was appointed and the other
rejected. In this case the dasa and bhukthi and anthra will be
found to be more or less the same in both. But the results of the
efforts have been diametrically opposite. A careful approach
and a critical study will soon reveal the reasons for the same.
Regarding a man's financial position and success in
competition, one has to take the beneficial transit to the 2nd cusp
and its lord: 1 ,2,3,6,10 and 11 are advantageous. Similarly the
evil transit to the cusps of 1 ,2, 3, 6, 1 0 and 1 1 as well as the
beneficial transit to the cusps of 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 12 are
unfavourable to the native. This relates only to the financial
position and also to success or failure in competition, litigation,
election, etc. as per western.
I wish here to impress upon the reader the imperative
necessity of bestowing deep thought and mature consideration,
analytical study and further research in order to predict correctly,
and where necessary, to interpret modifications and variations
that are bound to be noticed in actual practice of this Science,
just as is found in other sciences like medicine, that concern and
relate to human welfare.
Western System - T ransit for Individual Charts
No planet is stationary excepting those for a very short period
during the time when they commence retrograde motion or take
direct course after retrograde motion. All planets are ever moving.
Therefore, if we note down the position of the planets (a) at the
moment of the birth of a person or (b) in the progressed horoscope
these planets will be (a) either transiting over the point occupied by
the planets (b) while transiting they may form either

favorable or unfavourable aspects. They also take into
consideration, the Cusps of the 12 houses both in the birth chart
and also in the progressed horoscope. During transit a person feels
the results, if there is either conjunction or strong aspects for
e.g.,60 degrees; 120 degrees; 90 degrees, 150 degrees and so on
Whereas one may not even notice a result if the aspects were to
be minor like 18 degrees; 54 degrees and so on. One may pose
the question whether the effect of transit will be similar to that
enjoyed for the same aspect in progression. The answer is that the
nature of the result will be similar but the extent, strength and
duration varies. In progressed chart the experience will be for a
long period whereas in the transit the duration will be very little. Let
me explain giving an example; suppose Mars forms evil aspect
with 8th Cusp, no doubt it shows danger and difficulties. In a
progressed horoscope these results will be felt for some months.
But if Mars during transit forms evil aspect with 8th cusp then the
threatening period lasts only for a week. We may compare that the
effect of an aspect being formed by progression will be similar to
the rain in the rainy season which lasts for months. But the same
aspect being formed during transit will be similar to the rain in
summer for a day or for a few hours. To thoroughly understand the
results to be enjoyed according to transit, the student must study
the results contributed to the various aspects among two planets.
Because the results is for a short period, one has to modify the
results and put it in a mild tone. Supposing a lady has been born
with strong benefics occupying favourable houses and if it is
promised that she would be a career woman then any evil planet
forming adverse aspect during transit cannot cause strong adverse
results because there can be mild humiliation, irritation or worry.
According to Westerners the correct method of
judgment is as follows:-
1 . Find which planet moves to form the aspects with either
the cusp or the planet in the natal chart, and also in the progressed
chart. The duration depends on their speed. Therefore if Moon
forms an aspect, it lasts for a fortnight. Mercury, Venus, Sun and

Mars, forming similar aspects cause the results for a period of a
few months. Jupiter and Saturn while moving, forming an aspect
will cause the effect for at least six months. Uranus, Neptune, etc.,
will give the effect for years.
2. If the transiting planet moves forward and retraces i.e.,
retrogrades then the duration will be much longer. If a planet
while in direct motion, in retrograde motion and again in direct
motion forms the same aspect or a malefic aspect, it causes
repeatedly the same results. One should not ask whether it can
give marriage on all the three dates when it forms such aspects.
One has to take that on all these three occasions, negotiation,
fixation, celebration and if in one of the previous aspects, marriage
was celebrated, then during the next similar aspects, happy life
with wife is to be interpreted. Normally, the effect is said to last
from the time the planet is about 8 degree away from the position
for exact aspect and 8 degrees away from the same aspect.
Therefore, a planet offers the results when it transits for 16
degrees. The faster the movement of a planet the quicker will be
the results and it will be for a short period, whereas slow moving
planets have to move 16 degrees and the duration is long.
Therefore, the effect will be for a long period.
3. When one planet 'A' forms good aspect and another
planet 'B' forms adverse aspect, both will operate.
4. When the aspect is exact, the result will be the utmost.
5. The effect caused by the transiting planet is more
important in the natal chart, than that in the birth chart.
6. One should not omit to note the transit of the Sun over
the position of the planets in the natal chart. Sun indicates
major events. Mercury, Moon and Venus show minor results.
7. If a planet forms an aspect during its transit similar to the
aspect which it had at the time of the birth in the natal chart, the
results indicated by the aspect among them will be predominant.
Let it be explained with an example. Supposing Saturn at the time
of the birth was forming an adverse aspect with another planet,
then during transit whenever Saturn forms evil aspect with

the same planet will cause very strong evil effect. But if it forms
harmonious aspect then the extent to which it can do harm is much
less.
8. Every year, as soon as you get the ephemeris, note the
movement of each planet and find out when they transit over the
position of the planets (that is conjunction) and during those
days, they will give the results to a good extent.
"19. if a planet "A" forms good aspects with planet ‘B’ at the
moment of birth, then whenever during transit 'A' forms good
aspect with 'B' most advantageous results will be enjoyed. In all
these cases whenever planets form aspects, they will do
experience on the day when Moon by transit forms favourable
aspect, though not the same. For example if Jupiter forms good
aspect with Venus, the results will be enjoyed. Jupiter may form a
trine aspect, but Moon will give the results even though it may be
sextile, semi-sextile, etc.
10. Even though all aspects cannot be found between Sun
and Mercury, Sun and Venus, Mercury and Venus in the birth
chart, yet, during transit all aspects will be found. Therefore,
whatever aspect during transit may be found among these the
results will be mild. But at the same time as the duration is short,
one can realise it and experience it to a small extent, Duration is
short; the extent to which one can enjoy is also small.
1 1 . During transit one should include the aspects like parallel
also.
12. If in the Progressed Horoscope, there is favourable aspect
and in transit also a harmonious aspect is being formed, one
can enjoy most advantageous results. But if in the Progressed
Horoscope, the aspect is evil whereas in the transit the same
planets form favourable aspects then the advantage will be very
mild, the aspects formed in the Progressed Horoscope lasts for a
long period and if offers results to a good extent: the transit is not
so
13. The above is followed by Westerners and not included in
my system.

HINDU SYSTEM
What Westerners call as 'Transit' is known as 'Gocharapalan'
by the Hindus. As already mentioned, Hindus take only the
position of the Moon, i.e. , the sign which it occupies, whether it is
in the very beginning or in the middle or in the end of the sign. The
movement of planets are also taken sign by sign, and never the
relative position or the exact longitudinal distance between Moon
and the planet is taken for consideration. The effects of the Transit
of each planet is given. It is also mentioned that whenever Sun
and Mars enter into the neighbouring house they offer the result
immediately, whereas Jupiter and Venus while transiting in the
middle of the sign will offer the result indicated.
Saturn does not give as soon as it enters in a sign; but only at
the time when it leaves the house. But Moon and Mercury, always
give the results whether it is in the beginning or in the middle or in
the end of the sign. The extent to which a planet can give its
results would be according to the strength or weakness, followed
by Hindus, whether it is exalted or Vargothamamsa or Swakshetra
or in neutral sign or friend's house or enemy's camp or debilitated.
The position of the sign denotes only the extent to which it can do
good. One should not mistake that exalted planet will not offer evil
results whatever be the position which it occupies. In that case
whenever Jupiter is exalted, the whole world should thrive; none
can die; none can starve; every one must be successful. How can
it be possible? In the court of Law, one can win, the other is to
lose, for both, Jupiter is exalted. Therefore, we should not interpret
that exalted planets will invariably do good. Similarly also we can't
say that the debilitated planets will do harm. It is absurd, if one
were to interpret in that manner.
Again it is said that one should first consider the Dasa System
which is superior, and then alone find out what one can enjoy by
the transit. Our Sages are of opinion that unless the dasa agrees
with that of the transit what ever is said for transit system will not
operate. That is, unless the dasa is good, favourable transit

cannot do good. Unless the dasa is bad, adverse transit cannot
cause adverse results. Here I differ from them. Transit and dasa
must agree. Their method of judgement is wrong. If one follows
K.P, he can understand that both agree hundred per cent and the
transit is useful to find out the exact moment of the result and it is
just like a second-hand to note when exactly a matter will
materialise. If dasa can be compared to a day, Bhukthi may be
compared to hour, Anthra to minute and transit to second.
Again there is another dicta by which one is to modify by
noting whether the results indicated by a planet transiting in a
particular sign in relation to Moon, will operate or not. This is said
as Vedha, Sun offers advantageous results while it transits in the
signs 3, 6, 10 and 11 counted from Moon sign. But the same
result will not operate if Sun is in 3 and some other planet is in 9.
Sun is being aspected by any planet transiting in the 7th house,
counted from the sign where Sun was. So if Sun is in 6, no planet
should be in 12. When Sun is the 10th sign, 4th house should be
vacant, If sun is in 11 counted from Moon, the 5th counted from
Moon must be vacant. Similarly for Moon, it is said it can offer
beneficial results when it transits in the signs 1 , 3 , 6, 7, 1 0 and 1 1
counted from that of Moon. TherVedha position for Moon is 5, 9,
12, 2, 4 and 8 respectively. That is, say, if Moon transits in the 7th
sign counted from the position of Moon at the moment of the birth,
then no planet should be in 2 counted from birth Moon.
For Mars, the houses 3, 6 and 1 1 are auspicious and
the Vedha positions are 12,9 and 5 respectively.
For Mercury the signs 2, 4, 6, 8 and 11 are favourable;
Vedha positions are 5, 3, 9, 1 and 12 respectively. For Jupiter, the
favourable signs are 2, 5, 7, 9 and 11; and the Vedha positions
are 12, 4, 3, 10 and 8. For Venus, the signs 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 11,
12 are all favourable. The signs 6, 7, 10 are unfavourable; Vedha
positions are 8,7,1,10,9,5,11,6 and 3 respectively.

Saturn can do good when it transits in 3, 6, and 11: Vedha
positions are 12, 9 and 5. There is an exception in this. No
Vedha position need be considered if Vedha is between Sun and
Saturn; and also between Moon and Mercury. That is, if Sun is in
the third house and Saturn is in 9, then Sun will give the beneficial
result and Saturn will not rob away. So also, if Moon transits in
10, it is advantageous and if Mercury were to be in 4, it will
continue to do good and there is no Vedha.
Now, let us consider various results given for each planet
when it transits in each sign, counted from the position of Moon.
Sun's Transit:
(Sun normally transits in each sign for a period of one month.
The results are given for each sign. Therefore, one should not
take that all through the month the result will operate. But the
position of other planets also must be taken).
1 . When Sun transits in the first sign, that is, in the sign
where Moon was at the time of birth, one can expect indisposition,
ill-health, obstacles for success, less of prosperity, change of
place etc.
2. Income is reduced; Expenses increase; there can be
deception or eye-sore or head-ache.
3. Good health; increase in income.
4. Obstacles and delay; health fails; no happiness in
domestic life.
5. Enemies threaten; health fails; no happiness in domestic
life.
6. Increase in income; good health; success in every
attempt.
7. Falls ill; goes on journey; financial worry.
8. Mental agony; digestive disturbances; dispute; difficulty;
accident; injury.

9. Gives up hopes; meets with danger and ill-health.
10. Grand success; interviews great people; their friendship.
1 1 . Larger income; speedy turn over; business expands;
makes good gain; receives honour; maintain good health.
12. Gives up hopes; depressed much; wandering here and
there without aim.
Moon's Transit:
(Generally Moon transits each sign in 2 % days. During this
time one has to expect the following results).
I . Sound sleep; delicious food; gets clothing and gains
jewelleries.
2. Humiliation; expenses outweigh; obstacles.
3. Sound health; makes profit, successful in attempts.
4. Indisposition; aimless touring; anxious; worried.
5. Health fails; attempts given up; mentally worried;
depressed.
6. Pleasant; happy domestic life; gains money; health
maintained.
7. Enjoys life; makes profits.
8. Health fails; disease; dispute; depression; loss of money
sleeplessness.
9. Afraid of enemies.
10. Gains money; successful in attempts.
I I . Friends, relatives and feast at home.
12. Expenses outweigh.
Mars' Transit
(On an average Mars takes 1 t2 months to transit from
one sign to the other).

1. Makes journey; body gets heated; afraid of enemies,
gives up hopes.
2. Dispute with higher officials and failures in attempts.
3. Makes friendship with both learned and great people,
thereby success in attempts.
4. Disagreeable company and bodily injury.
5. Health fails; children also do not keep good health; fear;
anxiety; afraid of enemies.
6. Grand success and gains gold.
7. Dispute in family matters; money wasted; either there is
digestive disturbance or eye-sore.
8. Makes journey; irritation, injury to the body.
9. Delay and difficulty in the enterprise; disease and also
disharmony with higher officials.
10. Makes profit; success in the attempts; mentally happy.
11. Lucky.
12. Eye trouble; disputes; expenses outweigh; ill-repute.
Mercury's Transit:
(Normally it takes one month for Mercury to transit from one
sign to the other. But it is such an erratic planet that occasionally
it completes within 20 days or it takes even more than a month.
On an average it takes only one month).
1. Education gets spoiled; there may be disharmony with
relatives and there should be a control over the tongue.
2. Receipt of money; relishable dish and gains by one's
oration.
3. Disharmony and dispute with enemies, disagreement with
higher officials and also humiliation from opponents.

4. One can make money and enjoy life.
5. No peace of mind; disharmony in domestic circle and
also anxious.
6. Attempts come out successful. Gain of money and also
due to speech makes money.
7. Gets exhausted; there may be separation from close
relatives and also friends; disagreement.
8. Very happy, due to success.
9. Relatives disagree; health fails.
10. Maintains good health. Increase in income.
1 1 . Happy at home and makes money outside.
12. Irritation; disagreement; dispute; disease; ill-repute
Jupiter's Transit:
(On an average one year for each sign).
1 . Change of place; expenses outweigh; no peace of mind,
deterioration in position.
2. Makes money; Domestic life happy.
3. Danger; Hopeless - very bad.
4. Expenses outweigh; relatives pass away.
5. Increase in income. Improvement in status, rank and
position increases; mentally very happy.
6. Money is lost; change in service; health fails.
7. Success in enterprise but health is not good.
8. Health of wife and children not satisfactory; danger at
home; chances for imprisonment and roaming about.
9. New friendship formed; does charity; success.
10. Delay, disharmony; money lost; irritation; humiliation.

1 1 . Promotion in service; increase in income. Improvement
in status.
12. Wife makes a journey; expenses outweigh income.
Venus's Transit:
(it takes nearly one month for Venus to transit from one sign
to the other).
I . Relishable dish; sound sleep and enjoys life.
2. Happy at home; yield from field increases and one is
honoured.
3. Friends help; thereby success and also profit.
4. Improvement in the residence; relatives are helpful, useful
and pleasant journey.
5. Son well placed, there will be happiness from elders.
6. Wife falls ill and also there will be irritation.
7. No domestic happiness; disagreement with other sex.
8. Increase in landed property; union with partner; pleasure
through sex and makes money.
9. Romance and also donation; charitable undertakings.
10. Obstacles and impediments in the enterprise;
irritation and humiliation.
I I . Happy at home and increase in income.
12. Invest on jewels and improvement.
Saturn's Transit:
(Normally Saturn takes 2 1/2 years to pass in one sign
and move to the next).
1 . Health of wife fails; so also the children and close
relatives. Food not to the taste; afraid of enemies; disharmony;
disagreement and dispute.

2. Health fails; pet animals also lost; moving here and there;
dispute and money lost.
3. Success; pleasant functions; agreeable events and also
recognition of service; outstanding report.
4. Ailment; disagreement with relatives; health of parents
not satisfactory.
5. Money lost; false allegation; false rumours; dispute.
6. Enemy loses; thereby gain. Success in the enterprise.
7. Makes journey; separation and expenses.
8. Close relative passes away; action not approved by the
public; confined to one place.
9. Income decreases.
10. Disease, irritation; roaming about.
1 1 . Gains money and the other sex; sympathy; reward.
12. Danger; accident; mentally worried; heavy expenses.
Nodes Transit:
(It takes nearly 1.5 years for Rahu and Kethu to transit from
one sign to the other. The nodes Rahu and Kethu always move
in the opposite direction to that of Sun and Moon.)
Rahu offers the results similar to that of Mars in transit.
Kethu gives such of those indicated by Saturn.
Hindus do not include Uranus or Neptune.
The transit of the planets are used by the Hindus to reduce
the duration of a long period according to dasa, bhukthi and
Anthra. These rules must be included while judging the transit
results.
1 . A particular bhava results will be enjoyed at the time
the lord of the ascendant during its transit passes in a sign which

is 5 or 9 counted from the sign occupied by the lord of the house
which is judged. For e.g. if the 7th house matter of a person is
judged he will be successful if the lord of the ascendant transits
in a sign 5 or 9 counted from the sign occupied by lord of 7, both
in rasi and Navamsa.
2. When the lord of the ascendant transits the house in
question.
3. When the lord of the house transits the 5th or the 9'h house
counted from the sign in rasi and in Navamsa occupied by
the lord of the ascendant.
4. Or when the lord of the Bhava transits in the ascendant
itself.
5. When the lords of the houses and that of the ascendant
come in conjunction or aspect each other.
6. For each house there is a governor - Karaka. So if the
Karaka oft he house in question transits and comes in conjunction
with lord of the ascendant or the lord of the house where Moon
was deposited i.e., the chief governor of that house should come
in conjunction with the lord of the Lagna or the lord of the Rasi.
7. Jupiter during transit transiting in a sign which is 5 or 9
both in Rasi and in Navamsa to the sign occupied by the lord of
the house under judgment. Then the advantageous results of
that house may be looked for. The opponents will be subdued
and they come under the control of the person whenever lords
of the ascendant and that of the 6th house during transit conjoin
together, and in that sign lord of the 6th house is stronger, then the
result will be just opposite. Supposing one is born in Gemini
ascendant and both Mercury and Mars conjoin in Capricorn
where Mars is exalted then he will face adverse results and the
opponent will win. Whenever the lord of a house and the lord of
the ascendant happen to be either natural enemies or temporary
enemies and if they transit in 6 and 8 to each other there will be

enmity, jealousy, etc. But if they are friendly and if they transit in
favourable houses one is to predict desirable and agreeable
results. If the lord of the ascendant conjoins with the lord of a
house and the latter is strong, improvement of the matters
signified by the house is be expected. Otherwise, no. just like,
the above rules are given taking lord of Lagna into consideration,
so also one should take the lord of the sign where Moon was at
the time of the birth and offer the prediction.
Whenever Saturn transits either in Rasi or in Navamsa the
sign occupied by lord of 8 or 12 counted from that particular
bhava, the matters signified by those, both get destroyed in full.
So also one can expect such an adverse result whenever Saturn
moves in the signs which are 5 and 9 to Rasi and Navamsa
occupied by the lord of 8 or 12 counted from the same house.
One is to expect the death whenever Saturn transits in Rasi
and Navamsa occupied by (A) the lord of the 8th house (B) Gulika
(C) Saturn or (D) the lord of the 2nd decanate counted from the
ascendant.
Note the lord of the decanate to the ascendant; also find out
the lord of the 8th and that of the 22nd decanate. Death takes
place when Jupiter transits the Rasi or the Navamsa occupied by
any of the three planets or whenever Jupiter transits the Rasi or
Amsa which are 5 and 9 counted from the position occupied by
any of the three planets.
(The three planets are, the lord of the decanate of the
ascendant the lord of the 8th house and also the lord of the 22nd
decanate).
Again one is to note down the transit of Sun. The rule given
here by the sage is very much complicated. And one gets such an
answer that Sun transiting in any of the 12 Rasis can give death.
In the previous condition it is said that Jupiter should transit either
Rasi or Amsa that is two signs. Thrikona to them

another 4 signs i.e. 6 signs. These 6 signs are for each planet
that is lord of the 8th house for him 6 signs. Lord of 22nd
decanate 6 signs. Therefore, all sings are in any manner
connected with to cause evil. Therefore, if a person were to die in
any year, in any month this rule will answer, whether Jupiter is in
Aries or any one of the 12 signs. It is really most deplorable and
also paining to follow such rules. Similarly also they have said for
Sun. For Moon also they have pitched up similarly. I strongly
declare that this method followed by Hindus is really useless. If a
man were to die at the age of 20, there are rules; at the age of 30
there are rules; at the age of 40, there are other rules; at the age
of 90, even then there are rules. Oh God How long a time are the
traditional astrologers to make the best use of the various rules?
Is there no end to it? Can't they improve? Can't they give up and
study my method.

KRISHNAMURTI SYSTEM
DIVISION OF ZODIAC : The Zodiac is divided into twelve
equal parts; each division is called a Solar mansion (or Rasi or
Sign)
They are Aries,
Taurus, Gemini,
Cancer, Leo, Virgo,
Libra, Scorpio
Sagittarius,
Capricorn,
Acuarius 8.nd
Pisces.
The Hindus
have another division also. The Zodiac is divided into twenty
seven equal parts, each measuring 13°-20'. They commence
from Aries 0° and end by Pisces 30°. The 27 divisions are called
Lunar Mansions (Nakshatras, Asterisms, Stars Constellations).
They are called Ashwini, Bharani, Krithigai, Rohini...
Uthrapathrapada and Revathi.
The explanation that I can
offer why they
have taken 9
planets and
divided the
Zodiac into 27
Nakshatras is as
follows
The Zodiac is
360° in Longitude.
What is the
sanctity in the

number 360. Probably, Sun moves in between the stars, in its
path the Ecliptic - daily on a average about 1/360°
of the circle. So, every day in 24 hours Sun moves 1°. Further,
360 is divisible by 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10 when it will be easy
for other calculations. It is first divided into 3 equal parts of 120°
each. The four signs Aries, Taurus, Gemini and Cancer makeup
120° in the segment AEL. The next four signs Leo, Virgo, Libra
and Scorpio form 120° and they are in the segment LES;
Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces are the last 4 signs
in the segment SEA measuring 120°.
(A is Aries 0°, S is Sagittarius 0° and E is earth.)
1ZD
All planets moving from the point A (Vernal Equinox) Aries
Mesha according to Nirayana System get their results modified
as they move in the Zodiac. In the first 13°-20' i.e. 0
degree to 13°-20' and planet transiting in Mesha (Aries) will
be influenced by Kethu, and the constellation is called Ashwini.
Then when passes on, between 13°-20' and 26°-40' Venus
influences it; this area is called Bharani. Between 26°-40' and 30°
of Aries and 0°

Taurus to 10° Taurus, the planets results will be modified by Sun.
Karthigai is the name of the star, or constellation which I call as
Zone. Then from 10° Taurus to 23°-20' Moon modifies the results of the
planet occupying this Zone or Lunar Mansion called Rohini. Between 23°-20'
in Taurus and 30° Taurus as well as 0° Gemini to 6M0' in Gemini, the
mansion called Mrigasirisha is ruled by Mars and the planet in this Zone will
be under the control of Mars.
The next 13°-20' called Arudhra, is governed by Rahu; next
Punarvasu is ruled by Jupiter (Guru). It is followed by Pushya and
Ashlesha governed by Saturn and Mercury respectively.
Similarly, from Simha 0° (Leo) upto the end cf Scorpio, the four
sings are divided into 9 lunar mansions (called Nakshatras, Stars or
Constellations). They are called Makam, Poorvapalguni,
Uthrarpalguni, Hastham, Chithrai, Swathi, Visakam, Anuradha and
Jyesta which are ruled by 9 planets in the same order, viz. Kethu,
Venus, Sun, Moon, Mars (Sewai, Mangal, Angaraka, Kuja) Rahu,
Jupiter (Guru), Saturn (Sani) and Mercury (Budha).
The remaining 113 of a Zodiac SA contains the 4 signs
Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces and the nine
constellations in it are Moolam, Poorvashada, Uthrashada, Sravana,
Dhanishta, Sathabisha, Poorvapathrapada, Uthrapathrapada and
Revathi. The planets Kethu, Venus, Sun, Moon, Mars, Rahu,
Jupiter, Saturn and Mercury rule the stars in the same order.
Hence, planets in between 0° and 13 °-20' in Aries (Aswini), 0°
and 13°-20' in Leo (Makam), and 0° and 13°-20' in Sagittarius (Moolam) will
be under the sway of Kethu; 13°-20' in Aries to 26°-
40' (Bharani), 13°-20' in Leo to 26 -40' (Poorvapalguni;) 13°-20'
to 26M0' in Sagittarius (Poorvashada) these three zones are ruled
by Venus and Planets transiting in these zones are under the
influence of Venus and the results of Venus will be offered by the
planet, transiting in this zone.
Thus, each planet governs three zones in the Zodiac.

If a planet, were to be in Aswini, another in Makam and the
third in Moolam, all are under the influence of Kethu and are in Kethu's zone.
If the astrologer says that a planet is modified by the lord of the constellation,
Kethu, then the statement is not complete and clear. He has to add, whether it
is In Aries, or Leo, or Sagittarius, otherwise one cannot locate the position of
the planet correctly.
Suppose a father has three sons Brahma, Vishnu and Siva
presume that each son has nine children and every son gives the
same order of names. Rama, Baratha, Lakshmana Sathrugna,
Dharmaputhra, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva The first
issue of all three are called "Rama”, the second issue of each is
called "Bharatha" and so on, and the last issue of each of them
will be "Sahadev". If a postman has to deliver a letter with the
address Rama alone, how can he exactly fix up to which Rama it
refers. The moment he calls out Rama, three Ramas will
respond. Instead, suppose all the 27 children are given different
names, like Aswini, Bharani etc., how easy it is to identify.
Similarly, instead of calling each lunar mansion as Kethu 1
(Aswini), Kethu 2 (Makam), Kethu 3 (Moolam), Venus 1
(Bharani), Venus 2 (Pooram), Venus 3 (Pooradam), and so on,
or as Kethu in Mesha-Aries, Kethu in Simha-Leo, Kethu in
Dhanus (Sagittaritus) and so on; the ancients gave different
names to all the 27 stars (27 zones of 13°-20') commencing from
Aswini and ending with Revathi
They were aware that the stars are not equally elongated from
0° to 13°-20' and then another from 13°-20' to 26M0' a so on. The
Zodiac does not give the appearance of a circular wheel made of
a cane with 27 rings in it. But the Zodiac is an imaginary pathway
in the heavens. 360°in length and 15° in width with stars scattered
all over, in and outside the Zodiac, and the stars appear as dots
and not rods. The constellations selected by our sages are either
a group of stars or any single bright star so that they can be first
identified easily.

1. Aswini-Arietus-Stars-3
2. Bharani-Arietisa Mus-3
3. Krithika-Tauri Alcyoni-6
4. Rohini-Tauri Aldebaran-5
5. Mrigasira-Orionis-3
6. Arudra-Orionis-1
7. Punarvasu-Gemini Pollux-5
8. Pushyami-Cancri-3
9. Ashlesha-Hydrae-6
10. Makha-Leonis Regulas -5
11. And 12 Pubba and Uttara
Leonis-4
1 3. Hasta-Corvi-5
14. Chitra-Virginis Spica-1
15. Swathi-Bootis Arcturus-1
16. Vishaka-Librae-3
17. Anuradha-Scorpionis-3
18 Jyesta-Antares-3
19. Moola-Scopionis-6
20. And 21. Purvashada and
Uttarashada-Sagittari-4
22. Sravana-Aquilate-3
23. Dhanishta-Delphini-4
24. Sathabisha-Aquari-1
25. Purvabhadra-Pegasi-4
26. Uttarabhadra-Pegasi and
Andromedae-4
ac * tb
(S.tfV
8o-W
loti 40
\1C.oo
(b0.DC
iieb-m)
a aS3.iD
L52C.0S
U5t.fl.iro
27. Revathi-Pisclum-3

A few of them are in the Zodiac itself but the majority of the
groups are around the constellations which are named after these
groups. These stars (constellations) may be very close to the 27
divisions of the Zodiac or far away, and they may be either to the
North or to the South of the Zodiac. A few groups are very near
and in the next constellation and yet they are chosen because
they can be identified easily and they will be useful for reference
and calculation to locate where a particular constellation would
commence and end in the Heavens; further, there is no other
constellation within or near the zone which can be unmistakably
identified. Therefore, these 27 stars are to guide us, so that we
can calculate and ascertain the position of the 27 zones in the
Zodiac, each measuring 13"-20'.
These 27 constellations are governed by the 9 planets.
Hence, each planet rules over three zones at an interval of 1213°
(e.g.) KETHU - Aswini, Makam, Moolam, VENUS (Sukra) -
Bharani, Pooram, Pooradam and so on.
These zones modify the results of the planets transiting
the Zodiac and not the stars, scattered in the Heavens which are
far, far away. Planets are the immediate neighbours of our
Mother Earth and these belong to one family. Probably this is
the reason why they have selected only 27 groups of stars
even though there are numberless stars in the sky which can
influence the earth as much as these 27 groups.
Suppose (a) there is a light in the centre of a circular room
provided with 12 glass panes of different colours (b) around the
room there is a verandah and outside it, there are 27 glass panes
of which the colour, 1,10 and 1 9, is the same; 2,11 and 20 differ
from 1, 10, 19 but these three are of the same colour; 3, 12 and
21; differ from others but these three of the same colour as they
belong to one group. Similarly, all the 27 panes are of 9 different
colours.
If a person walks outside the circular verandah looking at
the light inside, he will find the colour of the light getting changed
according to the colour of the coloured panes. Similarly, the

results of the planets are modified by the lord of the sign and
indicated by the lord of the Nakshathra or constellation.
If a planet is compared to a torch light then the influence of the
sign - Solar Mansion occupied by it and the influence of the Zones
of 13°. 20' called stars, change the colour of the light. Suppose a
railway guard shows the light, It may be plain or green or red
according to the background mirror.
Similarly, imagine that the mirror used behind the bulb is the
lord of the sign. It may be clear and it may illuminate to a maximum
or it may be dull rendering the light, weak. The strength and
modification of the colour depends, on the mirror behind the bulb
(which is the reflector) which denotes whether a planet is exalted
and strong or debilitated and weak.
Also suppose one coloured slide is inserted between the torch
light and the observer this colour depends on the lord of the
constellation "C" when 'P' is the planet (which is the bulb).
Therefore, the results of a planet in different positions in the
Zodiac, in different signs and different constellations, is similar to
the light from the torch getting modified and the resultant becoming
absolutely different from the original light, unless all the colours are
similar to that of the planet.
In my researches, I found that one should not satisfy himself with
the modification of the lord of the constellation alone. But one has to
find out further subdivisions, which should be scientific, so that one
can explain the differences between twin births.

So I have divided each star in a manner which will be
explained shortly. Suppose, we do not subdivide, then we offer
prediction taking into consideration, the situation of a planet in a
particular sign and star. It will be similar to saying that a particular
dasa of a person will be brilliant. The dasa lord may be Venus. It
will run for 20 years. Even, though, in general, these 20 years
might have proved to be beneficial, yet there would have been
occasions when he could have had difficulties, trials and
tribulations also, but these difficulties when compared to the
beneficial results, may not be much. It may be similar to a person
being foretold that he would gain in a race on a particular day.
No doubt he may lose in the first race, lose in the second, gain in
the third, again lose in the fourth and gain in the last few races.
When we calculate, we may find that he had gained on that
particular day. But consider his anxiety whenever he lost,
especially in the first two races. It is similar to taking a planet, the
sign and the star in which it was and passing judgment. But
according to "Krishnamurti System" it will be possible to say that
he will gain at a particular time and also conclude that it is a day
of profit. This method of forecast is not merely advantageous,
but correct and convincing as well.
Suppose a person is told that during Venus Dasa, he will be
fortunate. No doubt during Venus Dasa, Venus Bhukthi he gets
married. Venus dasa Sun Bhukthi he starts business; Venus dasa,
Moon Bhukthi he goes overseas; Venus dasa, Mars Bhukthi he
has a son, Venus dasa Jupiter Bhukthi there is expansion in the
business and he has another child. During Venus class, Saturn
Bhukthi there is some labour trouble and minor losses. In Venus
dasa, Mercury Bhukthi he opens branches, takes up agencies
and during Venus dasa, Kethu Bhukthi he visits various pilgrim
centres. On the whole, no doubt, the person get married, started
business, went overseas, expanded business and stabilized it.
Also, one would not forget that he had lost a member of the
family, had labour trouble, suffered some loss and had worries
for some time. If a person is informed that in these 20 years,
Venus will cause Rajayoga itwill not help him much. But indeed,

it would be useful only when he is informed both; the time of
event and also the nature of event, both good and bad. So, the
dasa of 20 years is subdivided into subperiods otherwise called
bhukthis.
On the same analogy, I established that the division of a
constellation was necessary if correct results are to be forecast.
Suppose a person is informed that he will have very good
business and profit on a particular day, he feels depressed till 2
P.M.., as there was no business till then and in these hours he
loses his faith in astrology; but the planets so adjust that a few
marriage parties enter his shop and make purchases from him
for an amount much greater than what he had been normally
collecting daily. If the same astrologer could tell him that only
between 2 and 4 PM; on that day he would do excellent business,
would have been advantageous for both. So, the subdivision of
the constellation are an imperative necessity to predict exact time
of event.
Again, as a result of intensive research, it has been possible
to find out why a person receiving a few letters on a day in a
particular moment, feels very happy when he goes through the
contents of a latter, next feels dejected and depressed when he
reads the other, gets irritated when he goes through the third
and so on. It was found that the Ascendant and the cusp of the
houses move faster than the planets and it is the ascendant and the cusp of
the houses which explain such rapid changes, though the relative position
among planets and their occupation of the star and sub remain the same.
The ascendant can move in a sign for about 2 hours but in a
constellation, it can only be for about 50 to 58 minutes. But certain
events may happen within an interval of 10 or 15 minutes.
Therefore, there should be some other minute factor which brings
about varying results in a very short time. So it was found that
the ascendant in that constellation (Star) showed that he would
receive letters. But to indicate which moment he would read a pleasant letter,
which moment he would read a letter which would

irritate him and so on, further divisions of the constellation was
necessary. This method was found to be convincing and scientific.
Let us take another example. Suppose, we judge the results
according to the transit of the planets. It is generally stated that
Saturn while transiting the 11th house will produce most desirable
results.
Saturn will be passing through the 1 1th house, roughly for a period of two
and a half years. Saturn signifies certain matters to the person according to his
chart and only such of those matters alone will be expected by him. It is not
uncommon (1) that for a long time after the entry of Saturn into the 1 1th house,
the person continues to suffer and is not able to reconcile (2) some actually
suffer all the time whereas they enjoy when Saturn transits in the 12th sign.
When Saturn is in 11, what actually one will enjoy or experience depends on
the lord of the constellation and the lord of the sub, according to Krishnamurti
System and this would explain why the general rule fails.
First of all, I would like to say emphatically that all persons
having Saturn in 1 1 cannot expect favourable results because
the ascendant may be different and the lords of the constellations
in the 11th house may be ruling evil houses to that lagna-born.
Thereby the person will experience difficulties through the source
indicated by Saturn (the transiting planet). But, according to my
technique, when Saturn is passing in a constellation, throughout
that period, he neither enjoys nor suffer uniformly but during
certain periods he finds beneficial results compensating for the
difficulties. The method which I advocate will prove to be very
correct and it can never fail; because, I take the subdivision of
the constellation. The constellation indicates the matters signified
by its lord; the planet transiting influences such results denoted
by the lord of the star through the source denoted by the
transiting planet (by nature, lordship and occupation) and it is
the sub-lord which decides whether the result is favourable or unfavourable.
The lord of the constellation is similar to the lord of a dasa of the Vimshothari
system, whereas the sub is the lord

of the subperiod or Bhukthi. So, I have evolved a method to divide
the constellation based upon the sound principle of astrology,
which will appeal to one and all.
In Aswini, the first sub is allotted to Kethu, the second to
Venus, the third to Sun, the fourth to Moon and so on till the last
sub is given to Mercury. Aswini is ruled by Kethu. So the first
sub is allotted Kethu.
Suppose Moon enters a particular constellation, say Bharani
(the second star of the 27 stars), the longitude of which extends
from 13°-20' to 26°-40' of Aries (Mesha) and a child is born at that
moment. What do we say? Is it not that the child is to run Venus
dasa and it will have 20 years of Venus dasa left over at the time of
the birth? The child is having Venus dasa, Venus Bhukthi at the time
of the birth. If moon moves a lithe further, say 1° ( i e 14°-20' in Aries
- Mesha), we say that the child has a balance of 18 years 6 months
and also that the child will have Venus dasa, Venus Bhukthi at the
time of birth. But, when Moon has moved 20/120 of Bharani and a
child is born then, we say that the child has a balance of 1 6 years 8
months and that the child is having venus dasa, sun bhukthi just
starting. If moon further moves by 16/120 of the star, we say the
child will be having Venus dasa, Mars Bhukthi. Moon moves further
by 7/120 of Bharani. So, Mars sub is also over; Rahu sub-starts. Let
it go on. When it completes 18/120 of this star, Rahu sub is over and
Jupiter starts. Thus it will be seen that the Moon is influenced by the
exact position which it occupies in the constellation. Therefore,
Moon in the beginning is under the sway of Venus and the sub of
Sun. Next it passed in the same constellation belonging to Venus
but to the sub of Moon. It is followed by the sub of Mars, then by
Rahu, Jupiter, Saturn, Mercury, and lastly by Kethu. So according to
Krishnamurti System each constellation is subdivided into 9 parts.
They are not equal in the longitude but the longitude of each sub is
in the proportion in which they are allotted the total number of years
in Vimshothari dasa system.

The longitude of each constellation is 13°- 20' equal to 800
minutes. Therefore, in every constellation of 800 minutes each planet
will have an area equal to the number of years allotted to each in
the dasa multiplied by 62/3 minutes (800/120). T herefore,
Sun's sub extends to 40 minutes (6x62/3) whatever be the
constellation. Mars and Kethu extend for 46+2/3minutes
(7x62/3). Moon extends for 1°6'- 40", Saturn 2°-6'-40", Rahu
extends for exaclly 2°. Jupiter has an area of 1°46'40", Mercury
Even though the area allotted to each planet is the same in each
star, yet the order in which they occupy the constellation differs. To note
the order, one has to find out which planet rules the constellation, then
the beginning of the constellation is used by the lord of the star, lust
like in any dasa, the first sub period or bhukti is ruled by the dasa lord.
The second sub is ruled by the Bhuk ti lord who will follow the dasa
lord. Then in the same cycle order the subs will be ruled as in the
bhukthi.
If the star is Karthika, note the lord of the star. It is Sun. Hence,
allot the first sub to Sun. In the cyclic order, who will follow Sun? It
is Moon. So the second sub is given to Moon, the third to Mars,
the fourth to Rahu and so on, till the last sub is governed by Sukra.

If the star is Punarpoosam, otherwise called Punarvasu, the
first subdivision is governed by Jupiter; next by Saturn and the
last by Rahu.
If the star is Pushya, the lord is Saturn. Therefore, the first
sub is governed by Saturn, the second sub is ruled by Mercury,
the third is allotted to kethu and so on till the last sub is under the
sway of Jupiter.
If the star is Ashlesha, otherwise called Ayilyam, the first
subdivision is governed by Mercury, the next by Kethu and so
on, till the last subdivision is allotted to Saturn,
Thus all the twenty seven stars are divided among the nine
planets, It may appear as though the whole Zodiac is divided
into 27 multiplied by 9 parts. Actually, the lord of the sign, the
lord of the star and the lord of the sub will be 249 instead of
243, due to the change in the sign lord (lord of the sign), as
certain subs are found in 2 adjacent signs. (Furthermore one can
sub divide and record the results. This is for research students)

A few stars are called in different terms. They are
1. Krithik - Karthikal
2. Mrigasira - Mrigashirisha
3. Arudhra - Thiruvadhirai
4. Punarvasu - Punarpusam
5. Poorvapalguni - Pooram - Pubba
6. Uthrapalguni - Uthram
7. Anuradha - Anusham
8. Jyeshta - Kettai
9. Poorvashada - Pooradam
10. Uthrashada-Uthradam
11. Sravana-Thiruvonam
12. Dhanista-Avittam
13. Sathabisha-Sathayam
14. Poorvapathra - Poorattadhi
15. Uthrapathra - Uthrattadhi
The other 1 1 stars are called by the same name.

CONSTELLATIONS
AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE
(Each star is divided into 4 equal divisions. Each part is called either
pada or quarter = 3°-20'. Half of a star = 6°-40'. When a constellation
commences in one sign and extends in the next succeeding one, it is
mentioned as 'a' and 'b'. The numeral number given for each star is the
number of the star in the 27 constellation starting from Aswini)
PISCES
iRevathi Uthrattathi,
poorattathi - 4th Qr.
ARIES
Aswini, Bharani
and
Karthigai-lst.Qr,
TAURUS
Karthigai
Rohini,
MrigasirishaM
GEMINI
rigasirisha - 3,4 Qr^
Thlrvathirai,
Punarpusam
1,2 and 3 Qrs.
AQUARIUS
Poorattathi -1,2
and 3rd Qrs.,
Sathayam,
Avittam 3,4,Qts
CAPRICORN
Avittam - 1 ,2 Qrs
Sravanam
Utthiradam
2,3,4th Qrs
12 SINGS
OF
THE ZODIAC
AND
27 STARS IN THE
12 SIGNS
CANCER
Punarpusam 4th Q
Pushyam, Asleshd
LEO
Makham,
Pooram,
Utthiram- 1st Qr.
SAGITTARIUS
Utthiradam-lst Qr.
Pooradam,
Moolam
SCORPIO
Kettai, Anusham
Visakam - 4th Qr.
LIBRA
Visakam 1,2.3
Qrs. Swathi,
Chithrai 3rd & 4th
VIRGO
Uthiram 2nd 3rd
and
4th Qrs.,
Hastham, Chithrai
1 st 2nd Qrs

1. Aswini : 0° Aries to 13°-20' Aries (Mesha). The first
constellation. The sign Aries is ruled by Mars and the
constellation is governed by Kethu. Hence, this zone indicates
the following matters in general.
part of the body; Head, Cerebral hemispheres.
Diseases: Injury in the head, congestion in the brains,
thrombosis, cerebral anaemia, fainting, epilepsy, violence,
spasms, severe headache on any one side, neuralgia, coma,
trance, cerebral haemorrhages, paralytic stroke, insomnia,
malaria, meningitis, smallpox.
Mental qualities: Avarious, extravagant, worried about
landed properties, brother's ailment, dispute with brother,
partition, black magic, can pray Lord Ganesh or Subramanya or
Narasimha or Anjaneya. (Will be fond of Ornaments, lovely in
appearance, liked by all, clever and intelligent).
Profession: Service in factory, police, military, medical, surgery,
criminal courts, jail, railways, machinery, iron, steel, copper
(Commandants, Physicians, Attendants, horses, horse-riders,
horse-dealers, horse-groom, handsome persons as traders).
Does not contribute to child birth unless Kethu happens to
be a benefic to the INDIVIDUAL May induce abortion, surgical
aid for fertility but mostly remaining barren. When strong benefits
form favourable aspects, the evil results will be warded off.
When one runs Mars Dasa Kethu Bhukthi or Kethu dasa,
Mars Bhukthi, the matters signified by Mars and Kethu to that
native will materialize when either of them or either of the
luminaries transit in the Zone. Sun will transit in this area between
14th April and 27th April every year. Moon will transit on Aswini
star once in 27 days.
2. BHARANI : 13°-20' Aries to 26°-40' Aries (Mesha) the
second star. Sign ruled by Mars, Star governed by Venus.
part of the body; Head, Cerebral hemisphere, organs within
the head, eyes.

Diseases: Injury in the head, mostly in the forehead and just
around the eyes, cold venereal distemper, syphilis affecting face
and vision, catarrh in the head, moist humours, mucus, reins
afflicted, weakness due to gratifying one's tastes and pleasurable
emotions in dissipating habits.
Mental qualities : Chain smoker (Mars Venus .fiery sign)
(Tobacco cultivator) - mind, always fond of pleasure, enterprises,
aspiring, amorous, avaricious,- (cruel men, those that feed on
blood and flesh, slayers, low-born persons, cudgellers, husk grain
and wanting in character. Will carry out his purpose to the end,
will be truthful, free from malady, clever and happy).
Profession: Makes money through pleasure, sports, music
or musical instruments, art advertisement show display, exhibition,
silver utensils, eversilver, silk, mobile, automobile, fertilizer, industry,
railway, factory, wrestler, cinema theatre, studio, mansion for
marriage, animal husbandry, veterinary doctor, slaughter house,
tea or coffee estates, caterers, hotels, restaurants, criminal lawyer,
judge, leather manufacturer, skins and hides, building contractors,
engineer, those who assess and pass orders, revenue department,
surgeon, maternity, venereal expert, optician, agriculturist.
Whenever one runs Mars dasa Venus Bhukthi or Venus dasa
Mars Bhukthi, then the matters signified by these two planets will
materializes, when either of these planets transit-in this zone or in
Mrigasira first half or Chithrai second half or Venus star Mars sub
or Mars star Venus sub : Also when the luminaries Sun and Moon
transit in these areas, one can enjoy those results. Sun
will transit between 27Th April and lOTh May every year, and Moon
transits in Bharani constellation once in 27 days.
3. A. KARTHIGAI 1 ST QUARTER : 26°-40' Aries to 30° Aries
Sign owned by Mars and the star by Sun.
part of the body; Head, eyes, brain, vision.
Diseases : Sharp fever, malaria, filaria, plague, smallpox,
wounds, cerebral meningitis, brain fever, injury, cuts, accident,
explosions, carbuncle, fire accident.

Mental qualities: Normally robust health, good strength, great
enthusiasm, push-up, go ahead spirit, militant temperament, leading nature,
commanding appearance, competitive mind, argumentative ability etc. (will eat
much, will be drawn to other peoples' wives, will be ebullient in appearance
and famous).
Profession : Acquisition of lands, buildings or possession of
patrimony, bold punter, dauntless, escalator, military, police,
industry, medical, surgical, navy (Moon in this position or a planet in
this star and Moon Sub) Defence department, travels, resignation,
retirement, manufacturing chemicals, bombs, crackers, explosives,
match boxes, iron and steel utensils, war material (Saturn in this
area makes one listless and rapid. He will never amount to
anything. But Mars in this area promises that the person will not
hesitate to fight at the drop of his hat, especially, when Mars is in
between 28° - 26*40" and 29°-6'-40", i.e. Mars Sing, Sun Star and
Mars sub). (Brahmins and particularly those performing daily
Agnihotra, reciters of sacred hymns, white flowers, grammarians,
barbers, miners, priests, astrologers, potters and those who know
the sacrificial rules).
If one runs Sun Dasa Mars Bhukthi or Mars Dasa Sun Bhukthi,
what results these two planets indicate to that person, will be enjoyed when
either of them transit in Karthigai 1st quarter. Sun will be there between 10th
May and 13th May every year. It is most likely that this sub period which will
run only for 4 months and 6 days may be in the other months. In such cases
Sun will transit on the day of enjoying the result in Mars star Sun sub or Sun's
star Mars Sub. This is applicable to similar circumstances. If one expects a
promotion during Sun Dasa Mars Bhukthi or Mars Dasa Sun Bhukthi, though
the period runs for 126 days, one can pitch up the exact date as mentioned
above.
3. B. KARTHIGAI 2, 3 AND 4TH QUARTER : 0° to 10°
(Rishaba) Venus is the lord of the sign and Sun is the Lord of the star.
Part of the body : Face, neck, larynx, tonsils, lower jaw,
occipital region.

Disease : Pimples, cuts, reddish eye, eyesore, throat troubles,
tumours in the knees, quinsy, swelling above neck polypus of the
nose.
Mental qualities : Always fond of company, sociability,
hospitality, pleasure, comfort, luxury, generous, courteous
affectionate, cheerful and impressionable, creative mind, fruitful
action, best fitted for business, smooth profession, speculative
tendency, popular and prosperous.
Profession : Benefit through Government, Victory over
enemies, acquires costly jewels and dress, contacts with
foreigners, realization of even bad debts, pleasant functions, music,
dance, drama, opera, poet, artist, drawing master, draftsman,
sculpture, silk, photography, international trade, installation of
parks, decoration, industry, medical department, engineer, tax
collector, wool-dealer, export of hair, assessment, venereal expert.
If a person expects the date on which he can enjoy the
results of Sun Dasa, Venus Bhukthi or Venus Dasa Sun Bhukthi,
one has to select the time when the significators transit in that part
of the Zodiac, as below.
a. The Lord of the sign Venus and the zone star-ruled by
Sun i.e. Karthigai 2,3,4 padas.
b. The lord of the sign Sun and the zone-star-Poorva-palguni
(Leo 13 -20' to 26°-40') governed by Venus or
c. Venus star, Sun sub or
d. Sun star, Venus sub.
Important events indicated by these two planets cannot
happen on other dates. These will be explained in detail in the
book "Udu-Dasa".
4. ROHINI : 10° Taurus to 23°-20' Sign ruled by Venus star
governed by Moon.
Part of the body: Face, mouth, tongue, tonsils, palate,
neck, cerebellum, atlas, cervical vertebrate.

Diseases : Sore-throat, cold, Cough, pain in the legs and
apoplexy, irregular menses, sweating.
Mental qualities : Pleasant manners, good nature, enjoys nature,
taste in music, art, drama, literature, public function, maternal
affection, sympathetic, enjoys life in the company of other sex. (Will
be truthful, pure, sweet-tongued, with a settled mind and lovely
appearance).
Profession : Caters to the need of the public, hotels, restaurants,
lodging-houses, bakeries, boarding houses with comforts and
conveniences, bar attached, dealers in houses, lands, fruits,
automobile, petrol, oils, milk, dairy farm, ice cream, glass, plastic,
scents, perfumeries, soap, sandalwood, oil, paints, water, colour,
dyes, liquids, acids, marriage broker, dress and pearls dealer, navy,
shipping, clearing agent, judge, politician, tannery, yarn merchant,
sugar, sugarcane, sugarcoated tablets, etc. (King, Wealthy person,
observers of vows, merchandises, cartmen, cows, bulls, aquatic
animals, agriculturists, yogis, mountains and men in authority).
5. a. MRIGASIRA First Half: 23° -20' in Taurus to 30° Taurus
ruled by Venus. Star governed by Mars.
Part of the body.Face, chin, cheeks, larynx,
palate, carotid, arteries, jugular veins, inflamed tonsils.
Diseases : Pimples, cuts and injuries in those parts, pain in the
throat, adenoids, diphtheria, weak loins and king's evil, nose-bleed,
goitre, constipation, venereal distemper polypus.
Profession : Estate owners, land, building, instrumental music,
exhibition, display, eversilver, platinum, tailor, dressmaker, mobile
structurals, fertilizer, automobile engineering, income tax and sales
tax department, skins and hides, tobacco, snuff, confectionery,
marriage mandapam owners, veterinary doctors, animal husbandry,
lethal chamber, cart-men, rickshaw pullers, taxi drivers, fruit sellers
like apple, banana, etc., whereas Rohini shows oranges, grapes and
juicy ones, gains through business, textiles, cinema industry, sound
engineer, photography, diamonds, rubies,

corals, jewelery, vaseline, snow, face powder, sandal powder,
tooth paste, brush etc.
5. b. MRIGASIRA Second Half: 0° to 6°-40' Gemini sign
owned by Mercury and star governed by Mars.
Part of the body .Throat, vocal cord, arms, shoulders,
ears, thymus gland, upper ribs.
Diseases .Corrupted blood, itches, wounds, and fracture of
arms, collarbone, fractured femur, sciatica, surfeit, fever, pains
in the shoulders near collar bone, arms, disorders in secret parts,
inflammation of pericardium.
Mental qualities Gives mental energy, enthusiasms,
dexterity, quick-witted, sharp, fluent, alert, quick, magnetic,
impulsive, excitable, vitriolic in their wrath, tongues more
poisonous than rattlesnake, acme of selfishness. (Will be fickle,
sharp-witted, timid, eloquent, industrious, wealthy and indulging
in sexual pleasure).
Profession : Dealing in machineries, tools, instruments,
electrical goods, surgical instruments, telephones, telegraph
cables, wires, engineers, surgeons, soldiers, mathematicians,
ambassadors, astronomers, building contractors, highways,
bridge or dam-site constructors, textile engineers, tape-record,
gramophone, radio dealers, press, publication, computers,
calculators, salesman, representatives, agents, brokers, jobbers,
thieves, etc. (Aquatic products, fragrant things, flowers, fruits,
garments, gems, birds, beast, forests, drinkers of Soma juice,
letter-bearers, lovers and musicians).
6. ARUDHRA : 6°-40' in Gemini to 20°. Lord of the sign
Mercury. Lord of the star Rahu.
Part of the body : Throat, arms, shoulders.
Diseases : Septic throat, mumps, asthma,
eosinophilia, dry cough, diphtheria, ear trouble, pus in the
ear- Mental qualities : Active mind, initiative perception, ingenious
and critical, unsuccessful in literary pursuits, or a scholar

depending on Rahu in the individual's horoscope, good character
reader, resourceful mind. (Slayers, adulterers, chasers, thieves,
liars, cruel minded people, men versed in the art pertaining to
goblins, catchers, rogues, sowers of discord, charmers, sorcerers,
and husk-grain. Will be perfidious, haughty, ungrateful,
mischievous and sinful).
Profession : Salesman, bookseller, shopkeeper, Post &
Telegraphs Department, Communication, transport, atomic
energy, aerial, radio, advertising, publicity, writer, author, research
department, explorer, dealing in drugs, beverages, canned
goods, handwriting expert, finger print expert, public
appointments, finance broker. Any how this zone of 13°-20' is
barren. (Planets signifying birth of children, in this zone get
weakened and mostly become barren). This area is good for
statistics, physics, dynamics, gravitation.
7. a. PUNARVASU 1,2,3 PADAS : Gemini 20° to 30° sign
ruled by Mercury. Star by Jupiter.
Part of the body :Ear, throat, shoulder blades.
Diseases : Pleurisy, bronchitis, pneumonia, reins disorder,
pericardium inflamed, swelling and pain in the ear, goitre due to
iodine deficiency, infiltration in the upper lobe the lungs,
pulmonary apoplexy.
Mental qualities : Broad outlook, sharp intellect, good
memory, worldly wisdom, correct intuition, clear in sight, proper
judgment, practical adaptability, mental balance, desire to learn
more and more. (Pure, truthful, highborn, charitably disposed,
handsome, intelligent, renowned and rich men, servants, artisans,
merchants and valuable grain. Will be self-controlled, happy,
amiable, dull, afflicted with disease, thirsty and easily contented).
Profession : Success in journalism, editing, publishing
correcting, inspecting, story-writing, advertising, publicity, religion,
law, literature, poetry, insurance agency, finance broker,
accountants, auditors, civil judge, civil engineer, mayor,
counsellor, school master, preceptor, interpreter, secretary,

registrar, messenger, Tamil Pandit, astrologer, mathematician,
clerk, postman, clothes, woolen merchant, provision, dealer,
planets which signify pregnancy in one's chart gains beneficial
strength when they are in this zone.
7. b. PUNARVASU 4th Quarter : In the sign cancer between 0°
and 03°-20'. Lord of the sign is Moon. Lord of the Star Jupiter
(Brahaspathi).
Part of the body : Lungs, respiratory system, chest, stomach,
oesophagus, diaphragm, pancreas, niples, lacteals, upper lobes of
liver, thoracic.
Diseases : Dropsy, beriberi, stomach upset, irregular appetite,
corrupt blood, tuberculosis, pneumonia, bronchitis, liver
complaint, jaundice, gourmandize, dyspepsia.
Mental qualities : Fertile imagination, honest, true, sincere,
reliable, forgiving temperament, appreciates beauty, correct
judgement and effective argument, given good vitality, resourcefull
and fertility, just and benevolent, compassionate, sympathetic,
born rich, prince, politician.
Profession : Banker, physician, religious head, temples,
economics, statistics, advocate, judge, professor, principal,
merchant, sailor, traveller, manager of public conveyance, dealers in
fluids, salesman, nurse, midwife, water supplier, female officials.
8. PUSHYAM : Between 3°-20' and 16°-40' in Cancer. Sign
ruled by Moon and star governed by Saturn.
Pan of the Body : Lungs, stomach and ribs.
Diseases : Tuberculosis , ulcerations in the respiratory
system, gastric ulcer, gallstones, nausea, belching, obstruction,
bruises in the breast, scurvy, cancer, phtisis, jaundice, cough,
hiccough, eczema, pyorrhoea (periodontis), dyspepsia.
Mental qualities : Economical, prudent, frugal, conservative,
sober, contemplative, careful, attentive, self-reliant, has a
systematic and methodical action, patiently works with
perseverance, attains, position of trust (Minister, King, fisherman

and the like), persons engaged in big and small sacrifices, honest
folk, (forests, wheat, sugarcane, rice and barley). Will be
composed in mind, liked by all, learned, wealthy and inclined to
be virtuous.
Profession : Deals in mine products, kerosene, petrol,
petroleum products, coal, lands, produce, wells, excavations,
canals, trenches, deals in agricultural lands, holds position of trust,
plumber, sexton, jailer, grave-digger, engineer digging wells,
tanks, etc. and constructing bridges, darns, tunnels, those who
work at, night and underground, dealers in oils, working in
submarine.
9. ASHLESHA (9th Star) 16°-40' to 30° Cancer, Sign ruled by
Moon and Star by Mercury.
Part of the body -.Lungs, stomach, oesophagus, diaphragm,
pancreas, liver.
Diseases : Vitamin 'B' deficiency, cold stomach, windiness,
windpressing the diaphragm making it difficult to breathe,
distillation of the rheum, pain in knees and legs. Drunkenness,
jaundice, nervous, indigestion.
Mental quality : Quick wit. ingenious, reasonable, versatile,
fluent and copious in speech, good writer, acquires other
languages easily, can imitate others, mimicry, has the desire to
learn art, music and literature, fond of travels, (will not be sincere,
inclined to eat everything, sinful, ungrateful and deceitful.)
Profession : Sale man, agent, representative, business,
Commerce, international trade, clerk correspondent, author,
writer, manufacturer, water supply engineer, textile engineer,
dealer in yarn, paper, pen, ink, traveling agent, guide, hostess,
astrologer, mathematician, water diviner, midwife, nurse.
(Pulps, roots, fruits, reptile, poison, worms, counterfeits,
robbers, huskgrain and all classes of physicians.)
11. MAKAM (10th Star) 0° to 13° -20' in Leo-Simha, Sign
ruled by Sun, Star governed by Kethu.

Part of the body : Heart, back, spinal cord, spleen,
dorsal region of spine, aorta.
Diseases : Heart affected by sudden shock, grief or poison,
pains in the back, cholera, humorous, gravel in kidneys,
palpitation, regurgitation, faintings, signal meningitis.
Mental qualities : Outspoken , assertive, combative, defensive,
forceful, audacious, sensual, impulsive, proud short-tempered,
hasty, fiery temper, enthusiastic and energetic, eminently fitted to
occupy a position of trust both in public and private concern, good
sportsman, contact with people in very high position, good
appointment, undertake lofty plan, (Will be wealthy and have
many servants, will enjoy life, worship the Gods and the Manes
and be very industrious).
Profession Contracts big factories, chemical drug
manufacturer, criminal lawyers, defence department, surgeons,
medical department, Government service or security in service,
manufacturer of imitation jewellery, cheap ornaments,
electroplating, manufacturers of nickel and chromium plated
surgical instruments, weapons (depending on the planet in this
position or the sub in which it is or where the meridian falls select
that department in Government service. Just like Sun's rays
includes "VIBGYOR', so also government service includes from
menial to minister, peon to president.
(People rich in money and corn, men who are devoted to
their elders and manes, granaries mountaineers, heroes, women
haters, carnivorous beings).
12. POORVAPALGUNI : 1 1th Star. 13°-20' to 26°40' in Leo sign
ruled by Sun, star governed by Venus.
Part of the body: Heart, Spinal Cord.
Diseases : Due to disappointment in love, heart affected,
Loss of children affecting hearts, all due to shocks and irreparable
loss, Curvature of the spine, anaemia, hydremia, pain in legs,
swelling of ankle, blood pressure, aneurism, swelling of heart,
valves affected.

Mental qualities: Competence in music, art, Kavi-poet,
Generous, warmhearted, affectionate, fond of pleasure, luxury and
comfort, temptation to speculate, true, honest, cautious, able to fulfill
his desires, self-centered, desire to at least attend dramas or
dance, taste in drawing, sculpture and paintings, acquires fancy and
costly jewels, dress, photography as hobby (artists, actors, young
damsels, musicians, amiable persons, merchandise, cotton, salt,
honey, oil mandy boys. Will speak sweetly, will be liberal in gifts,
bright in appearance, fond of wandering, and loyal to his sovereign).
Profession: Government service, Transport, Radio, Music,
renovation of ancient paintings, preservation of monuments,
museums, sports, mobile, automobile, disinfectant for crops,
cinema theatre, studio, film section, photography, animal
husbandry, slaughter house, lethal chamber, veterinary surgeon,
leather, skin, hides, hotels, canteens, revenue department, housebuilding, maternity surgeon, venereal expert, educationalist, ViceChancellor, service in women's colleges or jails, optician, glass
dealers, cigarette manufacturers.
1 1 .a. UTHRAPALGUNI 1 st pada: 12th Star. 26°40' to 30° in
Leo. Sign ruled by Sun and the Star also governed by Sun.
Part of the body :Spinal Cord.
Diseases : Pains in the back and the head, spotted fever,
plague, hyperemia, fainting, blood pressure, becomes mad
temporarily due to clotting of blood in the capillaries in the brain,
palpitation, backache.
Mental qualities: May or may not be violent. It depends on the
planet in this area. Very violent if mars is in between 28°-26'-40", and
29°-3'-20" in Leo. Ambitious, authoritative, boastful and domineering,
energetic and enthusiastic, gaudy and generous, haughty and
hopeful, illustrious, joyful, kingly, loyal, magnanimous, optimistic,
proud, royal, stately and zealous (Charitable and learned persons,
mild, modest, pure, heretical, highly wealthy men, those intend on
their duties and kings, fine corn. Will be loved by all, earn money by
his own learning, will be voluptuous and happy).

PBofe ionP Any service under government. Medical, defence,
shipping, navy, industry, commerce, stock exchange-share
business, maternity home, heart specialist.
12b. UTHRAPALGUNI-2nd 3rd and 4th Padas: In Virgo 0°
to 10°-12th Star. Sign ruled by Mercury and star governed by
Part of the Body : Intestines, bowels, liver.
Diseases: Tumours in the bowels, obstructions,
stomach disorder, sore throat and swelling in neck.
Mental qualities: Good reasoning, intelligent, tactful, business
minded, studious, industrious, good in mathematics or
engineering, astronomy, astrology, book keeping, clever and
critical, dexterous and diplomatic, eloquent and educated (hygiene
and sanitary engineering), ingenious and intellectual, accounts,
business, acumen, advertising.
Profession: Amalgamating a few companies, astronomer,
astrologer, communication department, education department,
handwriting expert, governor, tourist department, engineering,
press, lecturer, correspondent, publication, public relation officer,
megaphone, loudspeaker, manufacturer, telephone, mine
engineering, State Trading Corporation, contractors, agents,
industry, chemical engineering, physician, public health
department, hospitals, Registrar of Newspaper, Registrar of birth
and death, ambassadors, postal department.
13. HASTHAM: In Virgo 10° to 23°-20'. 13th Star. Sign ruled I
Mercury and Star governed by Moon.
Part of the body: Bowels, intestines, secreting
glands, enzymes.
Diseases : Vitamin B deficiency, gas formation, flatulence,
loose bowels, pain and disorder of the bowels, obstructions, arms
and shoulders weak, short breath, worms mucus, cholera,
diarrhoea, typhoid, amoebic, and bacillary dysentery, neuralgia
(imagination), fear complex, hysteria.

Mental qualities: Man versed in the Vedas, merchandises,
traders and energetic men, Will be industrious, impudent, fond of
drinking, merciless and thievish, charioteers, elephant drivers,
robbers, elephants, artisans, husked-grain.
Profession : Salesman, commerce, overseas,
communication, mail order business, shipping, clearing agent, textile,
yarn, engineer, bridges, damsites, canals, tunnels, ink, press, ink
manufacturer, advocate, sanitary engineer, export, import, artist,
painter, politician, ambassador, embassy, messenger.
14. a. CHITHRAI-First Half: 14th Star. In Virgo
23°-20' to 30°. Sign Lord is Mercury. Star lord is Mars.
Part of the body .Belly, Lower part.
Diseases: Ulcers, sharp and acute pains, choleric humours,
worms, irritation and itching, legs paining, dry-gripping pain, wounds
from insects, reptiles and animals.
Mental qualities: Humorous, dexterous, practical, business like,
enthusiastic, bold, courageous, energetic, enterprising, active or
quick tempered, sarcastic, argumentative, impatient, resentful,
overworking and irritable, (will wear beautiful) garments and flowers
and will have beautiful eyes and limbs.
Profession: Mechanical Engineer, Press, Publication, Building
contractor or broker, Supplier to jail, criminal lawyer, tax department,
Sales Tax, Income-tax, revenue, finance department, factory,
industry, electricity, mine, tunnel, trenches, finger print expert. Police
of Law and order and traffic, defence department, military accounts,
cost accountant. Persons skilled in the art of ornamenting, painting,
jewellery, singing, writing, perfumery, as well as mathematicians,
weavers, physicians).
14. b. CHITHRAI 3rd and 4th Padas: In Libra 0° to
6°-40'. Sign ruled by Venus and the Star by Mars.
Part of the body: Kidney, loins, hernia,
Appendicitis, lumbar region of the spine, Vasomotor
system.

Diseases; Polyuria, inflammation of ureter connecting kidney
and bladder, Bright's diseases, lumbago, kidney trouble, excess of
urine, hemorrhage of the kidneys, renal stones, sunstroke,
brain fever, pains in head.
Mental qualities: Ambitious, aspiring, adventurous, amorous,
faculties of perception and observation, clear vision, refined tastes,
idealistic temperament, intuitive mind, loves, science and refined
occupations.
Profession: Lawyer, Surgeon, Philosopher, scientist, religious,
endowment board, business, military, defence department, industry,
partnership in business, building contractor, litho press, artistic
advertisement, decorators, scents, perfumeries, powders, marriage
broker, registrar of marriages, sports materials, music, telescope,
microscope, radio, television, tape-record dealers, lady doctors,
surgeons, tailors, cigarette and snuff merchants, petroleum products,
automobile spare parts, dress, jewels.
15. SWATHI: 6°40' to 20° Libra Sign ruled by Venus. Star
Rahu. by
Part of the body: Skin, kidneys, ureter, appendicitis,
hernia, bladder.
Diseases: Polyuria, urinary trouble, ureters ulcerated,
pus formation, Bright's disease, eczema, skin trouble, leprosy.
Mental qualities: Compassionate, honest, courteous, just, clear,
intellect, initiative, perceptive, ability, powers of comparison, upright,
sympathetic, flexible, sensitive, slow to lose temper, anger soon
pacified, sweet nature, humane, fond of company, partnership, slow
to grasp but remembers well. (Traders, feeble characters, ascetics
and connoisseurs of wars, fickle-minded friends). (Will be modest,
clever in trade, will be compassionate, sweet in speech and virtuous).
Profession: All imitations, mobile, automobile, transport, tourist,
music, opera, drama, art, paint, decoration, exhibition, tube light, fan,
fridge, hot water equipments, hot air blower,

X-ray instrument manufacturer, scientists, service in clinics,
judge, poet, toilet set manufacturer, confectionery, bakery,
women's apparel, fancy goods, perfumeries, readymade
dress, maid servant, plastic, mica, ground glass scents,
pasteurized milk, leather goods, Nadaswaram, bugles, cooks,
butters, silk-mercers, embroiderers, gloves, bonnets.
16. a. VISAKAM - 1,2, and 3 Padas: 20° to 30° Libra.
Sign ruled by Venus and Star governed by Jupiter.
Part of the body; Lower abdomen, part near
bladder, kidneys, and pancreatic gland.
Diseases; Deficiency of Adrenal secretion, renal abscess,
skin eruption, diabetes, kidney sluggish, insulin deficient,
congestion of brain, coma, vertigo.
Mental qualities: Pleasant manners, attractive appearance,
polite, faith in God, conventional, universal love, brotherhood,
generous, magnanimous, true, just, equanimous, broadminded, talented, cultured. (Will be envious, covetous, of
bright appearance, clever in talking and quarrelsome).
Profession: Business with partners, traveling agent, tourist
officer, shipping, air travel, dealings with foreigners, pawn -
broker, banker's speculator, race goer, works in building
construction, fruit gardens, Tax and revenue departments,
foreign trade, floats big companies, judge, auditor, professor,
principal, physician, manufacturers, coloured papers, cinema
publicity, advertisement through slides, actor, costly dress,
lace, jewelry, perfumeries, minting, etc.
(Green gram, sesamum, black gram, Bengal gram, tree
with red blossoms and fruits, cotton and men devoted to Indra
or Agni).
1 6.B. VISAKAM 4th QUARTER: In Scorpio 0° to 3°-20' Sign
ruled by Mars. Star governed by Jupiter,
Part of the body: Bladder, urethra, genital organs,
rectum, descending colon, prostate gland.

Diseases; Diseases of the womb, fibroid tumour, prostate gland
enlargement, urinary trouble, frequent micturition, abnormal bleeding
during menses, rupture, renal stones and gravel, uterine tumour,
urethral abscess, dropsy, hydraemia, urates in excess, strangury,
apoplexy, nosebleed.
Mental qualities: (Fr. Montesque has said "It is by adventure that
great actions are performed and not by the sovereigns of great
empires")
Somewhat conservative, dignified, enthusiastic, influential,
noble, sincere, honest, straightforward, free will, independent, candid,
convincing, reasoning, extravagant, generous, over liberal, an
extremist.
Profession: Bank Judge, Criminal Lawyer, Insurance Company,
chemical and drug manufacturer, land, estate owner, agriculturist,
share market operations, more by jobbing than by investing, racing,
cards, betting, dice, customs, industrial units, labour, port trust,
defence department, defence Minister , village Munsiff, Ayurveda
medicine.
17. ANURADHA: In Scorpio 3°-20' to 16°40', 17th Star, Sign
ruled by Mars, Star governed by Saturn.
Part of the body: Bladder, genital organs, rectum,
nasal bones, bones near genital organs.
Diseases:Suppression of menses poor bleeding and severe
pain, stricture, sterility, constipation, piles, painful and not bleeding,
nasal catarrh, phlegm, sore throat, fracture, hipbone.
Mental qualities: Determined, energetic, dominant, forceful or
selfish, violent, harsh, cruel, vindictive, untruthful, dishonest,
unscrupulous, enthusiastic and practical.
(Men of prowess, those dealing in assemblies, heads of
Corporations, travellers, hides, woolen articles, water diviner,
kerosene merchants, oiling in foreign countries, will be unable to
endure hunger.

Profession : Mines engineer, criminal lawyer, medicine,
surgeon, instrumental music, industries, mechanical engineer, lead
type foundry, actor, homeopathy, brothel, leather trade, skins
and hides, woolen articles, water diviner, kerosene merchant,
oil engine, oil crusher, amputating surgeon, Dentist, service
in jail, judge, watchman, undertaker, plumber, laborious work,
arduous nature, coal, mine ores dealers, linseed groundnut,
mustard, cotton seed.
18. JYESTA : In Scorpio 16°-40' to 30° Sign ruled by Mars.
Star governed by Mercury.
Parts of the body: Colon , anus, genital organs,
ovaries, womb.
Diseases: Leucorrhoea, bleeding piles, fistula, tumour,
distemper in secret parts, affliction of bowels, pains in arms and
shoulders.
Mental qualities: Studious, quick in action, ingenious good
humour, bold, blunt, never hesitate to fight at least by words,
resourceful, learned, indefatigable worker, practical persons,
inexhaustible, fond of wit, quick - tempered, exaggeration, poisonous
tongue. (Great marital heroes, those that are endowed with noble
family, wealth, and fame, monarchs, intent on consequent,
commandant and thieves. Will not have many friends, contented, will
be virtuous and exceedingly irritable).
Profession: Chemical Engineer, Press, publication, Ink,
typewriter, textile mill machinery, industry, domestic, canals, thermal
station, power house, impounded - reservoir, music instrument,
jalatharangam, Insurance Agent, surgeon, surgical instrument, tonics,
scrums manufacturer, Military. Navy accounts, advertisement,
publicity, boilers, pumpsets, sessions judge, gallows, jails,
postmortem, calculators, telegraph sets, cable and wire manufacturer,
boatman representatives.
19. MOOLAM : In Sagittarius 0°to 13°-20', 19th Star sign ruled
by Jupiter. Star governed by Kethu.

Part of the body: Hips, thighs, femur, ilium, sciatic nerves.
Diseases : Locomotor ataxia, rheumatism,
lumbago, hip diseases, pulmonary troubles.
Mental qualities.. Generous, honest, respectful, commanding
others esteem, cordial, genial, jovial, law-abiding, superstitious,
forgiving, philanthropic, benevolent, charitable, God-fearing, religious,
hopeful, buoyant, humane, always contemplative, social, (Will be
proud, wealthy, happy, firm minded but luxurious in living).
Profession: Religious endowment, advocate, judge, teacher
purohit, puranas, ambassador, Congressman, literate, cabinet official,
physician, ayurveda, social worker, councillor, provision dealers,
horse-racing, gain through big ventures, International trade. Assembly
Speaker, exchange, imports, (Medicines, Physician, Deacon of
Corporations, very rich man, persons dealing in flowers, roots and
fruits, seeds, and those that feed on fruits and roots).
20. POORVASHADA : 20th Star. In Sagittarius 13°-20 to 26°-
40' Sign lord Jupiter. Star Lord Venus.
Part of the body: Thighs, hips, the concygeal and sacral
regions of the spine, the iliac arteries and Veins.
Diseases; Sciatica, diabetes, rheumatism, respiratory diseases,
cancer in lungs, hipgout, surfeits cold, moist, human putrefaction of
blood, swellings above the knees.
Mental qualities: Magnanimous, over-liberal, broad-minded,
educated, pleasing manners, polite, honest, loves others, just
compassionate, moderate, optimistic, tolerant of others views, loves
expensive and ultra-comfortable things, refined mind, fond of drama
and art. (Tender-hearted men, fishermen, navigators, aquatic animals,
etc. those that live by water, those who are devoted to truth, purity
and wealth, constructors of bridges and aquatic, fruits and flowers.
Will have an amiable wife, will be proud and firm in friendship).

Profession ; Judge, advocate, banker cashier, accountant,
director, revenue and finance department, food, sugar, silk, cotton
rubber, railways, road, building, air travel, Goddess temple, social
studies welfare officer, animal husbandry, garden, nursery, transport,
music, film show, foreign trade, foreign exchange, stock exchange,
restaurants, hostels, business partner, ayurveda medicine, physician,
women and children hospital, Health centre.
21. a. UTHRASHADA 1st Quarter: In Sagittarius26°40' to 30°.
Sign ruled by Jupiter. Star governed by Sun.
Part of the body:Thighs, femur, arteries.
Diseases: Sciatica, paralysis of limbs, pulmonary diseases, eye
affected
Mental qualities: Lofty ideals, noble aspiring disposition,
benevolent, philanthropic, success in religion, law-abiding, expansive
mind disposition, funny and jovial, cheerful, hopeful, no mind to have
"tainted money". Pillars of good society, optimistic outlook, cheerful,
proficiency in some branch of learning.
(Mahouts, Wrestlers, horses, elephants, immovables, warriors,
devotees of Gods, persons enjoying pleasure and militant persons.
Will be well-behaved, righteous, will have many friends, will be
grateful and amiable).
Profession: Arbitrator, judge, politician, bank, finance
department, shipping, education, religion, international trade,
Embassy, Export promotion, Free Trade, Physician, Ayurveda
Medicine, port trust, Customs, Jail department. Refugee Camp,
Hospitals, Charitable Institutions.
21. b. UTHRASHADA 2, 3rd and 4th padas: In Capricorn 0°
to 10°. Sign ruled by Saturn and star by Sun.
Part of the body: Skins , Knees, Patella.
Diseases: Eczema, skin diseases, leprosy, crysipeas, digestive
trouble, uneasiness due to gas in the stomach, dull pain, rheumatism,
palpitation of heart, cardiac thrombosis.

Mental qualities: Methodical, organising with foresight, diplomatic
during execution, carrying out any work with moral stamina, sincere,
reliable, economical, prudent, indomitable will, calculative, best fitted
to reduce expenses and hold a position in retrenching department, or
such departments to say "No" to lengthen correspondence, to delay as
much as possible and at last sanction to the dissatisfaction of the
applicant.
Profession: Position of trust, estate, mine, coal, income-tax
officer attending to wealth duty, estate duty, scientific research,
finance department, curtailing expenses, control department,
archaeology, monuments, antiquities, wool, Homeopathy, Jail,
Engineer, ancient language, skins, hides..
21. SRAVANA: In Capricorn 10° to 23"-20'. Sign ruled by
Saturn and star by Moon.
Diseases; Filaria, eczema, skin diseases, leprosy, boils, pus
formation, rheumatism, tuberculosis, pleurisy and poor digestion.
Mental qualities: Sober, conservative, pessimistic, cautious,
economical, prudent, contemplative, careful, a little funky, lacks
courage, true, sincere, faithful, patient worker, perseverance,
attentive (Jugglers, ever-active, able, devotees of Vishnu , energetic
and righteous men and truthful persons. Will be learned, possess a
generously disposed wife, will be wealthy and famous).
Profession; Mine, mine products, liquids, oil, kerosene, petrol,
coal, wet lands, wells, trenches, excavation, tunnels, fisherman,
minister, king, agriculturist, plumber, mine, engineer, ice cream,
frigidaire, air cooler, those who serve at night and work underground,
driver, pearls, submarine.
23. a. DHANISHTA 1st half: In Capricorn 23"-20' to 30°. Sign
ruled by Saturn and star by Mars.
Part of the body ; Knee cap bones.
Diseases; Injury in the leg, boils, Eosinophilia (too
much white blood cells), dry cough, hiccough, flying gout,
lameness, amputation.

Mental qualities: Firm will, decisive, active, alert, careful and
forceful, cautious and courageous, selfish, vindictive and violent,
extravagant, occasionally ambitious, greedy, liberal, in gifts, fond of
music, men without arrogance or pride, eunuchs, rich people, trying to
maintain peace and avoiding disputes.
Profession: Mine and ground engineer, death duty, estate duty,
insurance, philosopher, Homeopathy, Ayurvedic, Jail department,
gallows, murderer, slaughter house, surgeon dealing with fractures,
amputation, labourer, labour department, welfare department,
refugee camp, rehabilitation, industry, tools, spare parts, etc.,
distilleries, zinc, cement, metallurgy, lead, quarry, jute, barley, potato.
23. b. DHANISHTA 2nd Half i.e. third and fourth padas: In
Aquarius 0° to 6°40'. Sign ruled by Saturn and Star by Mars.
Part of the body: Ankles, limbs, portion between knees
and ankles.
Diseases: Fracture of the leg, Varicose Veins, blood
poisoning, heart failure, cardiac thrombosis, high blood pressure,
overheated blood, palpitation, fainting.
Mental qualities: Quarrelsome , cantankerous, short tempered or
quick witted, scientific minded, research worker, sincere in religion,
faithful in affections, fond of society, will try to start many clubs and
organise, fickle friends, charitable, becomes rich.
Profession: Agriculture, tea, coal, steel plants, explorer, mine,
lead, ferruginous, control and ration office, reclamation of waste
lands, Retrenchment office, engineer, leather, skin, hides,
postmortem, slaughter house, police, military, communication, press,
foundry, rehabilitation of sufferers from floods, earthquake and war or
riots and revolts, monuments, archaeology, building contractor,
television, telegram, telephone, electricity, atomic energy, all
research stations, silk, hessain (Jute).
24. SATHABISHA: In Aquarius 6°-40' to 20° sign ruled by
Saturn and Star by Rahu.

Part of the body: Portion between knees
and ankles, calf muscle.
Diseases: Rheumatism, Rheumatic heart, eczema, leprosy,
palpitation, high blood pressure, fracture, amputation, lame,
guinea worm.
Mental qualities: Sincere, strong, forceful, independent,
original, patient, persevering, lethargic, lazy, fond of leisure and
holidays or fond of working separately.
Profession: Scientist, occult subject, gravitation, dynamics,
electricity, atomic theory, air travel, astronomer, astrologer,
amputator, stretcher-carrier, renovation of the ancient science,
history, Ration office, Census, Censor, Statistics, Stock exchange,
Technician, Jail department, translation, and transliterations of old
manuscripts, laboratories, factories, Tanneries, counterfeit.
25. a. POORVAPATHRAP ADA 1,2,3 Qrs. In Aquarius 20° to
30°. Sign ruled by Saturn. Star ruled by Jupiter.
Part of the body: Ankles.
Diseases:Apoplexy, irregularity of heart, dropsy, milk-leg,
swollen ankles, palpitation, dilated heart, low blood pressure.
Mental qualities: Humane, hopeful, philosophic, optimistic, fond
of friends, truth , honest, sincere, reliable, interest in science,
philosophy, astronomy, astrology, literature, criticism, systematic
action, yet lethargic, capable of extracting work from others,
liberal, helpful, unselfish, if a malefic is in this zone, in the
ascendant: robber, murderer, devoid of virtue, irreligious, ever
fighting, courtbird, hen pecked, miser, clever.
Profession: Teacher-Dynamics, Statistics, Astronomy,
Astrology, medicine, aeroplane, municipality, corporation, public
limited concerns, stock exchange, share broker, air travel, research
worker, planning commission, international trade, overseas bank,
foreign exchange, education,/ finance, revenue department,
insurance, temple, trustee, executive officer, mint, currency,
mining, Anti-corruption department, intelligence department (C.I.D.)

25. b. POORVAPATHRAPADA 4th Quarter: In Pisces 0° to
3°-20'. Sign ruled by Jupiter and star governed by Jupiter.
Hart of the body: Feet, toes.
Diseases: Swelling, perspiring feet, enlarged liver, abdominal
tumour, intestines affected, hernia, Jaundice, sprue, corns.
Mental qualities: Magnanimous, liberal minded, charitable,
veritable, angels of mercy, fond of music, art, philosophy, literature,
law-abiding, true, a little vacillating, pleasing disposition, polite
behaviour.
Profession: Politician, profession, minister, councillor, president,
legal education, religious and finance department, judge, criminal
lawyer, arbitrator, trustee, visitor of jails, hospitals, famine and refugee
camps, planning commission, decontrol, tourist, explorer, physician
and surgeon, bank, foreign exchange, prisoners of war, risky
investments, associations, public companies
26. UTHRAPATHRAPADA: In Pisces 3°-20' to 16"-40'. Sign
ruled by Jupiter and star governed by Saturn.
Part of the body: Feet.
Diseases: Rheumatic pains, drop foot, indigestion, constipation,
hernia, flatulence, fracture in the foot, cold foot, tuberculosis, dropsy.
Mental qualities: Strong character, benevolent disposition,
philosophical mind-likes seclusion-hates disturbance, found of society,
desire to help the poor and invalid, Visitor of jails, Sanatoriums,
independent, original (fraud if afflicted).
Profession: Home department, prisons, Asylum, Sanatorium,
Isolated hospitals, prisoner of war, civil jail, political jail, mines,
excavator, Engineer, export, import, harbour storekeeper- inheritance,
traditional business, gains through societies, clubs, companies, public
appointment, hospitals, religious and charitable institutions,
submarine, shipping, foundries, legal, insurance, intelligence
department, C.I.D., education, tourist

home, manufacturer of Rain coats, umbrella, sponger, boats, life
boats etc. oils, fishers, breweries, river and canal constructor, tunnel
construction, trench excavators.
27. REVATHI is Pisces 16°-40'to 30°. Sign ruled byJupiter
and star governed by Mercury.
Part of the body: Feet and toes.
Diseases : Abdominal disorders, troubles, deformities of the feet,
intestinal ulcers, mostly due to drinks and drugs, gout in the feet,
cramps, Nephritis, Lassitude, deafness, pus in the ear.
Mental qualities.. Vascillation, indecisive, flexible, and
impressionable mind, intuitive, human sympathetic, shrewd, clever,
religious and philosophical, ripe judgement, fruitful mind, honest and
honourable, studious, mental balance, sober, proficient and
competent, honest, caring more for integrity.
Profession: Publisher, editor, religious, legal, civil engineering
departments, Share broker, advertisement, publicity, propaganda,
communications, lawyer, judge, professor, politician,
ambassador, representative, telephone, typewriter, radio, taperecorder, currency notes, international trade, messengers, embassy,
accountant, auditor, trustee, governor, university, employment
exchange, newspapers, clerk, shipping, import, export, excise,
customs, harbour, port trust, religious head- purohits, preachers,
industry, finger print expert, successful diplomats, astrologer,
mathematician, broker, agent, bank, etc.

WHAT EACH STAR SIGNIFIES TO EACH LAGNA OR
RASI BORN
Normally when we judge a horoscope, we prefer to follow the
Vimshottari system and also include the Gochara (Transit). We judge
the lord of the dasa, and consider him to be either favourable or not,
a. by the house it occupies.
b. By its lordship,
c. By its nature and
d. By the planets conjoined with or aspecting the dasa lord.
Further to find out to which extend a planet is capable of
bringing out the result is estimated according to Sadbala or as per
Astagavargha. In practice, it is found that the dasa lord offers certain
nature of results in its period which is not indicated by its nature,
lordship or occupation in a sign or house. For example, a person born
in the Ascendant Libra- (Thulam) having Mars in the
constellation Jyesta in Scorpio in its own sign, a fixed one has
given an opportunity to leave his kith and kin, get separated from his
family, go overseas, learn how to manufacture press ink and return.
Mars, as lord of 2, in the 2nd house itself has to allow him being a
fixed sign, to stay in his own place. As it is neither in 9 nor in the
movable, watery sign, or in 12, normally one cannot expect overseas
Journey during Mars Dasa. But if one finds out in which constellation
Mars was and then read out the matters signified by the lord of the
constellation by its lordship, then the other results enjoyed by him, will
agree with the indication of the lord of the constellation to that particular
lagna born. Mercury is the lord of Jyesta; it owns the houses 9 and 12
indicating overseas. Mars in Mercury star shows press, writing, printing,
etc., and in a watery sign indicates ink and the results do agree in full.

In another horoscope a gentleman born in Aquarius having
exalted Saturn in the beginning of Libra (Vargothama) entered into
military service during Saturn dasa. Neither Saturn nor the lord of the
sign (Venus) in which Saturn was in rasi and Navamsa indicate
Defence department. But if we note in which constellation Saturn was,
we find that it was in Chitra ruled by Mars, which rules the 10th house
and also indicates military service. Thus in every horoscope, one can
understand that a planet offers the result of the lord of the
constellation more predominantly than those indicated by the sign or
house which it occupies. Therefore, constellation is the main and
important division of the Zodiac to read the results of a horoscope.
Therefore, what results normally one can expect from a planet, (a) by
its occupation, (b) ownership and (c) nature will be actually enjoyed
during the periods and sub-periods of the planet in its constellation,
during its own period and subperiod, the results of the lord of the
constellation will predominate in addition to what it has to offer by
occupation of house etc.
Hindus classify and call a planet to be good or bad according
to its lordship of a sign counted from the sign where lagna falls.
Westerners judge a planet whether it is favourable or
unfavourable according to the nature of the aspect the planet
receives and, according to its situation. But I do not attach
importance to the name of the planet or its position etc. I give
importance to the 27 zones in the zodiac and to the subdivisions, as
these are capable of thoroughly changing a benefic (according to
Hindus and Westerns) to a malefic (which is actually experienced
and confirmed by the native) or changing a malefic (according to
Hindus and Westerners) to a benefic (which agrees with the results
enjoyed).
A father is good to his son. He may occupy a good position, say
(exalted) judge; so a Sagittarius-born is confident that he will escape,
whatever crime he commits. During Venus dasa the son forges a
document.... The case is posted under his own father. He regrets
saying that his hands are tied up by the law and he

punishes his own son. Sun may be a benefic by owning 9th house. It
gets exalted and is in a kona. It has to do good. But during Sun dasa
Kethu Bhukthi Mars anthra, the native is punished as Sun was in
Aswini Star whereas Mars and Kethu were in 9. Kethu is to give the
results of Mars which owns 12th house imprisonment. Therefore the
sub divisions and the stars are to be classified as good or bad:
Planets cannot overrule the indications of the lord of the star and sub.
ARIES BORNS
Aswini, Makham, Mookam: stars are ruled by kethu. As Kethu does
not own any house, find out the planets with which it was in
conjunction or by which it is aspected or the sign and constellation in
which Kethu was at the time of birth. If it is not conjoined with or
aspected by any planet, the results of the lord of the constellation and
sign will be experienced if a planet was in any of these three stars at
the time of birth or during transit in one's life time.
Bharani , Pooram, Pooradam: Venus is the ruler of the three stars.
As Venus owns the second and seventh houses to Aries, the results
of these two houses, i.e. second and seventh are to be predicted if
any planet occupies these stars or transit in these. If Venus, at birth
occupied a sign favourable to both Tauras and Libra, both the houses
will be represented by Bharani trine. If Venus at birth occupied 6 or a
or 12th sign to either Taurus or Libra and ifVenus improves the
matters of either of the two houses and is weak to offer the results of
another house, planets occupying these stars or transiting in these
stars will give such results as is denoted by Venus.
Krithigai , Uthram, Uthradam : If a planet occupies these three
stars or while it moves on in these constellations, the results of the 5th
house is to be predicted to Aries boms, as these stars are governed by
Sun who owns Leo, the 5th house counted from the Ascendant of
Aries-borns.

Rohini, Hastham, Sravanam : As Moon rules the house for the
Aries-borns the results indicated by the 4th house Will operate while a
planet transits in these three starts or if any were to be therein at the
time of birth of the person. (Also 4th house matters will be offered by
the planets, occupying the constellation of the planets situated in the
4th house).
Mrigasirasha, Chithrai, Avittam: Mars is the owner of these stars.
Mars is the lord of 1 and 8 to Aries. So we have to presage the results
of the houses 1 and 8 during the period of the planet in any of these
three stars at birth or while in transit. These results will predominate.
(Planets in the constellation of the occupants of these houses are
very strong to give the matters of these houses).
Arudhra, Swathi, Sathabisha: Rahu is allotted these three stars
by our sages. As Rahu does not own any sign, find out with which
planet it is conjoined or aspected by and the sign and the
constellation where it was at birth. The results of Rahu will operate
when a planet was posited in these stars at birth, or when planets
transit in these stars. (Rahu or Kethu will give the results of the
planets with which it is conjoined then those of the planet which
aspects them. Lastly, those of the lord of the sign).
Punarspusam , Visakam, Poorattathi : These three stars are
governed by Jupiter who owns the 9th and 12th houses to Aries
boms. You have to offer the results of the 9th and 12th houses, if a
planet has occupied any of these three stars at birth whatever may be
the house. When a planet transits in these stars whatever may be the
nature, lordship or occupation of the transiting planet, the results
enjoyed, depend on the lord of the constellation whereas the
transiting planet indicates the source and explains how he gets such
results. Suppose lord of 5 transits. Daughter delivers a child. The
native spends money, How? 9th house is the 5th to the 5th. So,
daughter will have a child. 12th house is 8 to 5th. So, she has
temporary suffering. 12th house is expenses to the native. Therefore,
Sun transiting in any of these stars or sub will cause expenses. If
Moon transits, through mother expenses.

Pushy am, Anuradha, Uthrattathi : Saturn is allotted these three
stars. If a planet were to be in these at birth or when any planet transit
through these, you have to give the results of the 10th and 11th
houses, as Saturn rules these houses to Aries boms. Even though
Anuradha happens to be in the 8th sign, it is observed the Aries-borns
have substantial gains when slow moving planet transit in the star
Anuradha. Threatening Ashtama Sani gives pleasant shock and
surprisingly good fortune.
Ashlesha, Jyesta, Revathi; Mercury who is the lord of the 3rd and
6th houses to Aries rules over these stars. Foretell the results of the
3rd and houses when a planet is therein at birth or when a planet
transits in these stars, whenever a particular planet transits in a
particular sub in a star, the same nature of results will be experienced
through the same or similar sources, the extent depending on the
dasa then running.
TAURUS - BORNS
Aswini, Makam, Moolam, are ruled by the Kethu who does not
own any sign in the Zodiac. Find out with which planet Kethu is
conjoined or which planet aspects Kethu; also the sign and
constellation where Kethu was at the time of birth. You have to offer
the results according to the lord of the constellation and the sign
which Kethu occupied if it is not conjoined with or aspected by any, if
a planet were to occupy one of these three stars or transit in any of
these three stars to Taurus boms.
Bharani, Pooram, Pooradam: These stars are governed by Venus
which owns the 1st and 6th house to Taurus boms. When a planet
moves on in these three stars or occupy any of them at the time of
birth, we have to predict the matters signified by the houses 1 and 6.
For example lord of 10 in any of these three stars, gives ill health,
causes enmity, offers success in competition, etc. instead of giving
promotion and maintaining good relationship.

Krithigai, Uthram, Uthradam: Sun the major strong luminary
govern these stars and owns the 4th house to Taurus persons. If a
planet is in these stars during transit or is occupying any of the three
at birth, presage the 4th house matters to this native. Even when a
planet transits in the 8th or 9th house in Uthradam or occupies at
birth, the planet offers the results of the 4th house to the native.
Suppose Mars is in Sagittarius, in Uthrashada star. As Mars is lord of
12, one may invest on an industry or Factory and buy land, building
etc., If Venus is there, one may have a car on hire purchase as Venus
rules 6th house- debts.
Rohini, Hastham, Sravanam ; If a planet occupies any of these
stars at the time of birth or transit in any we have to predict 3rd house
matters to Taurus boms as Moon owns the 3rd house. Suppose Mars
transits in these stars, Mars indicates as lord of 7, wife and as lord of
12, expenses; but if a planet transits in Rohini in Lagna; the native
makes short travel. But when Mars transits in Hastham, Mars
indicates, expenses through wife and being the 11th to the 7th, it
indicates gains to her, or purchases for her. It is the general
predictions it does not happen. But the partner goes on a long journey;
has treatment for the disease and gets cured.
Mrigasirasha, Chithrai, (Avittam or) Dhanishta : Mars, lord
of 7 and 12 owns these three stars. The astrologer must give
the results, signified by the 7th and 12th house to Taurus boms if
a planet were to be in any of the above said three stars at birth
or during transit. If a Taurus-born has married a talkative
partner, then during the periods and sub-periods of the planet
occupying Mars star may cause even violence, and separation.
Rahu, who does not own any house rules over Arudhra, Swathi,
Sathabisha. Ascertain the combination of planets with Rahu, the sign
and star where it was at birth in the chart. Those results indicated by
lordship of the star and sign where Rahu was, will be experienced by
the persons born in Taurus, during the periods and sub-periods of the
planets in the constellation of Rahu

Jupiter, a natural benefic is the owner of the three stars
Punarvasu, Visaka, Poorattathi. As Jupiter is the lord of 8th and 11th
house, you have to read the results of the 8th and 1 1th house matters
if a planet was in these stars at birth or while a planet transits in any
of these stars.
Pushyam, Anuradha and Uthrattathi are governed by Saturn who
owns the 9th and 10th house to Taurus natives. If a planet were to be
in any of these stars at birth or if a planet transits in any of these three
stars, the native will have the results of the 9th and 10th houses:
Suppose, Jupiter was in Anuradha. It is in 7. 7th house does not show
overseas and higher education. But these are shown by lord of 9 and
10. Jupiter, instead of giving troubles as lord of 8, it causes the most
beneficial and agreeable results, and gives higher education and long
Journey.
Ashlesha , Jyesta and Revathi are ruled by Mercury owning
houses 2 and 5 to Taurus boms. The native will experience the
results signified by these houses, if a planet occupies any of these
stars at birth or When a planet moves on in these three stars.
Suppose Moon was is Jyeshta. Moon is lord of 3. It has nothing to do
with children. But it a person has a child in moon sub-period, in
Hastham Star, which are we to take: either the sign lord or the star
lord or the house it owns or occupies.
GEMINI BORNS
Kethu owns the stars Aswini, Makam, Moolam but it has not
been allotted any sign. Find out the star and house where Kethu was
at birth, the planets conjoined with it or the planets aspecting it. If a
planet occupies these stars at birth or transit, offer the predictions
signified by the lord of the constellation and the sign where Kethu
was.
Bharani , Pooram, Pooradam are ruled by Venus, who is lord of 5
and 12 to Gemini boms. If a planet occupies these stars at birth
or in transit, the results of the 5th and 12 houses are to be offered.
Even though, Bharani is in the 1 1th sign which is to give

pleasure, profit and only desirable beneficial results, yetthe matters
of 5th and 12th houses are experienced. Mostly Gemini boms go
overseas and enjoy life even during the periods of evil planets,
because they are in any of the 3 stars.
Krithigai, Uthram, Uthradam: Sun, lord of 3 owns these three stars.
If a planet was in any of these three stars at birth or during its transit,
the results of the 3rd house are offered to Gemini boms
Rohini, Hastham, Sravanam: Moon a weak luminary, owns the 2nd
house and also these stars. Even though Rohini is in the 12th sign,
Sravanam, in the 8th sign to Gemini yet the results signified by the
2nd house are experienced if a planet is in these stars at birth or
when it transit in any of them.
Mrigasirasha, Chithrai, Avittam:These stars are ruled by Mars
who owns the 6th and 11th houses. If a planet where to occupy these
stars at birth or passes in these stars, the results indicated by these
houses 6 and 1 1 are offered to Gemini-borns.
Arudhra, Swathi, Sathayam: Rahu the Ascending Node owns
these three stars. So find out where Rahu was at birth, i.e. the sign
and constellation it occupied. Offerthe results of the lord of the sign
and constellation where Rahu was, if you find any planet is in these
stars at birth or during transit and provided the node is not conjoined
with or aspected by any planet.
Punarpusam , Visakam, Poorettathi; The benevolent Jupiter who
is the lord of these 3 stars owns the 7th and 10th houses to
Gemini -boms. If a planet occupies any of these stars at birth and
passes these stars in transit, it offers the results signified by the 7th
and 10th house results. It will prove to be a strong maraka. To
Gemini-borns, Jupiter is the Bhadhakasthana adhipathi. Ifthere is no
planet in Sagittarius, at the time of birth, then Rahu in the
constellation of Jupiter is the strongest evil to affect one's longevity
though it is very beneficial for marriage and business.
Pushyam , Anusham, Uthrattathi: Saturn, the slow-moving planet
owns these stars and also the 8th and 9th houses to Gemini boms. If
a planet occupies any star at birth or transits these stars the results of
the 8th a 9th house are to be presaged.

Ashlesha, Jyesta, Revathi: Mercury lord of 1 and 4 rules over
these three stars. The native will enjoy the results signified by these
houses if a planet occupies or transits these stars.
CANCER BORNS
Kethu or Dragon's tail govern the stars Aswini, Makam, Moolam,
Ascertain which sign and constellation Kethu occupies or transits in
the horoscope. The results will be indicated by the lord of the
constellation and sign. These will be experienced by Cancer boms if
a planet occupies or transits these, stars.
Venus owns the stars Bharani, Pooram, Pooradam and also the
houses 4 and 11 to Cancer-boms. If a planet occupies any of these
stars at birth or in transit, the results signified by the lordship of 4th
and 11th house is to be predicted. A person, has Moon in Pooradam,
born in Cancer Lagna, acquires land in Moon dasa. Neither as lord of
1 nor as the planet in 6, it has anything to do with property. But, if one
studies the lord of the constellation, he gets the scientific explanation.
Krithigai, Uthram, Uthradam are allotted to Sun. Sun owns the
2nd house. Any planet in these stars at birth or while in transit, the
native will enjoy the results of the 2nd house.
Rohini; Hastham , Sravanam: Lord of lagna governs these three
stars. When a planet was in any of these three stars at birth or while
in transit, offer the results signified by the first house to the native.
Mrigasirisha, Chithrai, Avittam: Ruled by Mars, ford of 5 and 10,
to Cancer-boms. The astrologer has to predict the results signified by
the 5th and 10th houses to the native if he finds any planet in these
stars in the horoscope or when it transits, in any of these three stars.
Mercury, lord of 3 and 12, was in Mrigasira in Gemini. The native has
gained money during Mercury sub period in speculation.

Arudhra, Swathi, Sathabisha: Rahu, the node, has been allotted
these three stars.. Find out with which planets it was conjoined or
aspected by and the sign and constellation in which it was posited at
birth. The results indicated by the lord of the constellation where Rahu
was, will operate when a planet is in any of these stars. Suppose,
Rahu is in the 10th house. A planet in the 12th house in Arudhra
gives increase in income during this planet's sub-period, instead of
loss indicated by 12th house.
Punarpusam, Visakam, Poorattathi are governed by the
benevolent planet Jupiter who also owns the houses 6 and 9. If a
planet occupies any of these stars at birth and transit in any of these,
the results signified by the 6th and 9th houses are offered to the
native.
Pushyam, Anuradha, Uthrattathi: Saturn the delaying planet
owns the houses 7th and 8th and also these three stars. Even
though these stars are in the houses 1,5,9, which are said to be
Kona houses which will indicate only good results, yet the persons
born in Cancer will have the results signified by the 7th and 8th
houses alone, during the periods and sub-periods of planets in
these constellations, even though they may own good houses. A
person having Venus in Pushyam, had untold miseries and worries
during Venus sub-period; as lord of 11, Venus caused worry through
fourth son. Source is shown by the planet. Worry is indicated by the
lord of the constellation.
Ashlesha , Jyesta, Revathi ; Mercury is the ruler of these stars. It also
owns the 3rd and 12th houses to Cancer boms. If a planet passes in
these stars, the results indicated by the houses 3 and 12 will be
enjoyed. For instance, Revathi is in the 9th sign. But if a planet
occupies this star at birth or transits, the native will enjoy the results
of the 3rd and 12th houses and not the results indicated by the 9th
house. (That is why people born in Karkata lagna do not enjoy
favourable results during the period of the planets in 5 or 9 as the
lord of the constellation in these signs are ruled by either lord of 6 or
8 or 12. But they are fortunate during the period of the planets in the
constellation of Mars even though the houses may be 3 or 8 or 12).

LEO - BORNS
Makam, Moolam stars are ruled by Kethu, the Moon's
node. As it does not own any sign, note the planets which are
conjoined with it or aspect it and also the lord of the constellation in
which it is. The results signified by the planet with which it is conjoined
or by which it is aspected or lord of the constellation will be
experienced by the native if a planet transits through these stars.
Bharani, Pooram, Pooradam are governed by Venus which
owns the 3 and 10th houses to Leo-borns. If a planet occupies any of
these stars at birth or transit through these, the results signified by
the houses 3 and 10 will be enjoined.
Krithigai, Uthram, Uthradam The lord of lagna Sun is the ruler of
these Stars. So, when a planet is noticed in any of these stars, you
can offer the results of the 1st house and not the results of the sign in
which it transits. It promises success and speedy recovery from
disease.
Rohini, Hastham , Sravanam: The luminary owns these three
stars who also owns the 12th sign to Leo-borns. So the results
indicated by the 12th house alone will be enjoyed by the native if a
planet occupies these stars. For instance, Hastham, is in the second
sign to Leo. Instead of enjoying the results indicated by the second
house (i.e. increase in income and improvement in status) the querist
will experience only the result of 12th house (i.e. loss of money and
position. Transfer and changes during the period of the planet in
Rohini).
Mrigasirisha, Chithrai, Avittam are allotted to Mars who owns the
4th and 9th house to Simha lagna -boms. The astrologer has to offer
the matters signified by the houses 9 and 4 to the native when he
notice any planet in any of these stars at birth or while in transit.
Arudhra, Swathi, Sathabisha ; Our sages mentioned that Rahu
is the owner of these stars which has not been given any sign.

Find out in which rasi and constellation Rahu was at birth. The results
signified by Rahu will be enjoyed or experienced by the native.
Punarpusam , Visakam, Poorattathi: Even though the beneficial
planet Guru is the ruler of these stars, yet the native cannot enjoy any
other result when a planet passes on in these three stars except the
results indicated by the 5th and 8th houses as Guru is the lord of the
5th and 8th to Leo-borns.
Push yam, An u rad ha, Uthrattathi: Saturn lord of 6th and 7th is
the owner of these three stars. If you note any planet in these stars,
the results indicated by thee 6 and 7 will be experienced by the
native.
Ashlesha, Jyesta, Revathi Mercury, lord of 2 and 11, owns these
three constellations. So the results signified by the houses 2 and 11
will be enjoyed by the native when a planet transits in any of these
stars. For instance, Revathi is in the 8th sign. Normally, planet in the
8th sign will not produce desirable results to the native. Yet, as
Revathi is ruled by Mercury, the native receives even the bad debts,
becomes popular in his society and realises his ambitions during the
sub-period of the planet in Revathi stars, as Budha owns the houses
VIRGO-BORNS
Aswini, Makam, Moolam: Find out where Kethu was at birth, i.e.
the constellation, and sign it occupied as it does not own any sign.
The results signified by that constellation and sign will be enjoyed by
the native when a planet transits in any of these three stars.
Bharani, Pooram, Pooradam: Venus, the lord of 2nd and 9th
houses, owns these stars. So, when you find a planet in any of these
stars, offer the results of the 2nd and 9th houses and not the result of
the sign where it is. For instance, Bharani star is in the 8th sign.

Normally one will offer the result of the 8th house, when a planet
transits Bharani. It goes wrong, as the native will go on long journey,
appear for interview, will be selected and have monetary gains, as
Venus the governor of Bharani is the lord of 2 and 9, promises
desirable results.
Krithigai, Uthram, Uthradam: Sun, the strong luminary rules over
these three stars and also the 12th house. If a planet occupies any of
these stars in whichever house it may be, yet the results indicated by
the 12th house alone will be enjoyed by the native and not the results
of the sign where the planet transits.
Rohini, Hastham , Sravanam: These stars are ruled by Lunar
(Diana, i.e. Moon). Moon rules the 11th sign to Virgo-borns. If we
notice any planet in any of these stars at birth or during transit, the
native will realise his/her ambition, he popular, have substantial gains,
etc., as the planet is in the constellation of lord of 1 1 .
Mrigasirsha, Chithrai, Avittam: Mars, lord of 3 and 8 to Virgo, is
the owner of these three stars, If a planet be posited in any of these
stars in the horoscope or move through these stars, it offers the
results signified by the houses 3 and 8. It will be adverse.
Arudhra, Swathi, Sathayam: Caput otherwise called Rahu is the
governor of these stars. Find out the planets conjoined with Rahu,
planets aspecting the sign and stars where Rahu is in the chart at
birth. The results denoted by the lordship of the star and sign Rahu
occupied will be experienced by the native.
Punarpusam , Visakam, Pooorattathi: Guru is the chief governor of
these stars. It also rules over the 4th and 7th houses to Virgo-borns. If
a planet is noticed in any of these stars at birth or while transit, the
native will enjoy the results of the 4th and 7th houses. Example:
Visakam star is in the 2nd house. If a planet goes through it, the native
can enjoy the result signified by the 4th and 7th house only and much
less the results of the 2nd house.
Pushyam , Anuradha, Uthrattathi Saturn rules over these three
stars who also happens to be lord of 5 and 6. If you find

any planet either at birth or during transit, in any of these stars,
predict the results signified by the 5th and 6 houses.
Ashlesha, Jyesta, Revathi: Lord of 1 and 10 Mercury is the
owner of these stars, planets in any of these three stars in whichever
sign it may be, will offer the results indicated by the 1st and 10th
houses to the native. It is very good.
LIBRA- BORNS
Aswini, Makam, Moolam which are governed by Cauda
otherwise known as Kethu does not own any sign in the Zodiac.
Ascertain in which constellation and sign Kethu is in the chart. The
results indicated by the lord of the constellation where Kethu was, will
be experienced by the native.
Bharani, Pooram, Pooradam: Venus lord of 1 and 8 rules over
these stars. Ifyou find any planet in any of these stars, you have to
predict the results indicated by the 1st and 8th houses only. For
instance, Pooram is in the 11th sign to Libra. If a planet transits in
that star, general principle of saying a planet in 11 will do only good
will not operate, but the native will enjoy the results of the 1st and 8th
houses only. He will fall ill, face danger and fail.
Krithigai, Uthradam, Uthram : Sun is the owner of these stars
which also owns the 1 1th sign. Any planet in any of these three stars
in the horoscope will produce the result of the 11th house, i.e. profit,
pleasure, realization of ambition, etc., even though the stars fall in
any sign. For example, Krithigai in the 8th sign, Uthram in the 12th
house does not offer the result of that sign but assures the results of
the 1 1th house only.
Rohini, Hastham , Sravanam: Moon, the other luminary, is
allotted these stars which owns the 10th house to Libra. Any planet in
these stars produce the result of the 10th house and not the sign
where it is at birth or while in transit.
Mrgasirisha, Chitrai, Avittam: Mars is lord of 2 and 7 and
also the owner of these stars. A planet in these stars in the chart

given by the native will bring out the results indicated by the houses 2
and 7 and does not produce the results of the sign in which it is or it
transits.
Ascending Node (Rahu) rules over the three stars Arudhra,
Swathi, Sathayam. As our sages have not offered any sign to Rahu,
find out in which sign and constellation Rahu was at birth. The results
signified by these constellations and sign will be offered to the native if
any planet passes through these stars.
Punarpusam, Visakam, Poorattathi: Stars are ruled by Guru who
owns houses 3 and 6 to Libra -horns. If a planet is in any of these
stars at birth or transit through stars you have to predict the results
indicated by the 3rd and 6th houses only.
Pushyam, Anuradha, Uthrattathi: Stars are allotted to Saturn
the only benefic to Libra-boms as it rules over the 4th and 5th
houses. Planets in the stars ruled by Saturn will, offer the results
signified by the 4th and 5th houses and not the results of the sign
where it transits.
Ashlesha , Jyesta, Revathi: Budha, the wavering planet governs
over these three stars and also the houses 9 and 12 to Libra-boms.
You will find that these stars falls in the 2nd 6th and 10th signs, but
the native will experience the results of the 9th and 12th houses only.
SCORPIO - BORN
Makam, Moolam : As the descending node (Kethu) does
not own any sign but rules only these stars in the Zodiac, find out the
planets that are conjoined with Kethu, aspecting Kethu and
constellation and sign where it was at birth. The results signified by
the lord of the constellation and sign will be enjoyed by the native, in
whichever sign the stars may be.
Bharani , Pooram, Pooradam: These are governed by Venus who
owns the Tut and 12th to Scorpio-borns. If a planet is noticed in any of
these stars at birth or during transit, it will offer the

results of 7th & 12th houses. For instance, Pooradam is in the 2nd
sign to Scorpio. Generally, while a planet moves on in his star you will
predict the results indicated by the 2nd house only, i.e. , free flow of
cash, increase in the members of the family, peaceful atmosphere at
home, but the native will have secret inimical activities, ill-health to
partner in life or business, as Venus happens to be lord of 7 and 12 to
the native and lord of 1 and 6 to the 7th house which indicated wife or
partner in business also death in a foreign place. 7th house shows
death to the native, 12th house indicates far off place, separation from
family members.
Krithigai, Uthram, Uthradam are allotted to Sun, the strongest
planet which rules the 10th house also to Vrishchika-borns. Any planet
in the star ruled by Sun at birth or during transit will produce the results
of the 10th house.
Rohini, Hastham, Sravanam are governed by Moon the Queen
of Night. It rules the house 9 to this rasi-born. The astrologer has to
offer the results which will be produced by the 9th house to the native
and not the sign in which the stars are posited.
Mrigasirisha, Chithrai, Avittam are ruled by the lord of 1 and 6,
Mars. Planets in these stars produce the results of the houses 1 and
Arudhra, Swathi, Sathayam: Our sages did not allot any sign to
Rahu. But it governs these stars. Rahu produces the results indicated
by the lordship of the constellation and sign where it is at birth or
during transit. Planets in these stars give the results indicated by
Rahu.
Punarpusam, Visakam, Poorattathi are ruled by Jupiter who
owns the 2nd and 5th houses to Scorpio. Even though Punarpusam
and Visakam are in the 8th and 12th Signs, yet the results enjoyed by
the native will be the results allotted to the 2th and 5h houses by
ancient astrologers, when a planet passes through these stars.
Pushyam, Anuradha, Uthrattathi are governed by Saturn.
Houses 3 and 4 also are governed by the same planet, Saturn.

So when a planet occupies the star ruled by Saturn either at birth Or
during transit, it will produce the results of the 3rd and 4th houses.
Ashlesha, Jyesta, Revathi: Mercury is the ruler of these three
stars and owns the 8th and 11th houses to Scorpio-borns. If you find
a planet in the stars ruled by Mercury, you have to portend the results
indicated by the 8th and 1 1th house to the native forgetting the sign in
which it is. it is very bad in the ascendant.
SAGITTARIUS - BORN
Aswini, Makam, Moolam were given to Dragon's Tail (Kethu) by
our ancients but they did not allot any sign to it then. Find out sign and
constellation where Kethu was at the time of birth or during transit.
The results of the lordship of the star and sign where Kethu was will
operate if a planet is in Aswini, Makam, Moolam.
Bharani, Pooram, Pooradam: These stars are ruled by Venus
which rules the 6th and 11th houses to Dhanur-borns. If a planet
occupies any of these three stars at birth or transit through these then
the results indicated by the 6th and 11th houses will be enjoyed by the
native.
Krithigai, Uthram, Uthradam are governed by Sun the ruler of the
9th house to Sagittarius. Results produced by the 9th house will be
enjoyed by the native, if a planet is in any of the stars.
Rohini, Hastham, Sravanam are allotted to Moon who is the
owner of the 8th house. Planets in these stars at birth or while in
transit will produce the results indicated by the 8th house and not the
sign where planet is. For example, Sravanam is in the 2nd house.
When a planet moves on in it, the result of the 2nd house will not be
experienced but the result of the 8th house alone will operate.
Hastham brings ill repute.
Mrigasirsha, Chithrai, Avittam are allotted to Mars. Mars rules
over the 5th and 12th houses to this rasi-born. In whichever sign
these stars may be , yet the result of the 5th and 12th houses

alone will be enjoyed. For instance Chithrai in the 11th sign will make
the native spend for his children, invest money, and to have worry
due to inimical activities but the 11th sign shows all-round success
and popularity, peace of mind. Hence the lordship of the constellation
alone should be taken into consideration while predicting.
Arudhra, Swathi, Sathabisha: The results signified by the
constellation and sign lords where Rahu was at birth or is during
transit will be enjoyed by the native, if a planet transits through the
stars ruled by Rahu.
Punarpushyam, Visakam, uthrattathi: Stars are governed by the
benefic Jupiter who happens to be the lord of lagna and also lord of 4.
The results allotted to the houses 1 and 4 will be experienced by the
native if a planet transits or occupies these three stars.
Push yam, Anuradha, Uthrattathi Saturn rules these three stars.
Saturn owns the 2nd and 3d houses to Sagittarius boms. So, the
results of the 2nd and 3rd houses will be enjoyed by the querist during
the period when a planet moves on in the stars governed by Saturn.
Ashlesha, Jyesta, Revathi are governed by Mercury who owns the
houses 7 and 10 to Dhanur rasi boms results indicated by the 7 th and
10th houses will be enjoyed by the person if a planet occupies these
stars at birth or during transit and not the results indicated by the sign it
occupies where these stars are posited. Planets in Jyesta, gives
promotion, transfer, and position. It also indicates, severing connection
with one institution and accepting a better job in another institution.
CAPRICORN - BORN
Aswini, Makam, Moolam are governed by the descending node
Kethu. Find out the lord of the constellation and sign which kethu
occupies. What Kethu promises to do, will be done by the

planet which occupied its star or which transits in any of the three
stars.
Bharani, Pooram, Pooradam stars are ruled by Venus which
owns the 5th and 10th houses also. If a planet occupies any of these
stars at birth or transit through these stars, results indicated by the 5th
and 10th houses will operate. For example, Pooram falls in the 8th
sign to Makaram. When Moon transits in that star (Chandraastama
day) the native will receive money and be happy. But, general
prediction of the astrologers that the native cannot have any beneficial
results and cannot have peace of mind during Chandraastama days
will fail.
Krithigai, Uthram, Uthradam stars are governed by Sun who is
the lord of the 8th House. So, when a planet occupies any of these
stars the native cannot have desirable results but unnecessary
impediment and worries in his attempts may be experienced.
Rohini, Hastham, Sravanam stars are ruled by the lord of 7,
Moon. If a planet occupies any of these stars at birth the native
should be offered the results of the 7th house and not the matters
signified by the house or sign.
Mrigasirisha, Chithrai, Avittam : Mars governs over these three
stars. It also owns the houses 4 and 1 1 to Makara boms. If you find
any planet occupying any of these stars, then the native will have the
results signified by the lordship of the 4th and 1 1th houses.
Arudhra, Swathi, Sathayam : Ascertain the strength of Rahu by
noting the constellation and sign which it occupied. The results
indicated by the lord of the constellation will operate whenever a
planet moves on, in the stars ruled by Rahu, the Dragons's head.
Punarpusam , Visakam, Poorattathi Jupiter rules the houses 3
and 12 and also these three stars. Whenever a planet occupies any
of these stars or transit through these, then the native will have
results of the 3rd and 12th houses.

Pushyam, Anuradha, Uthrattathi stars governed by Saturn also
rules the 1st and 2nd houses to Makaram boms. If the astrologer find
planets in these stars, he has to offer the results indicated to the
lordship of the 1st and 2nd houses to the native.
Ashesha, Jyesta, Revathi : Mercury is given these stars and also
houses 6 and 9. Planets in the stars of Mercury give the results of the
6th and 9th houses. For example, Jyesta is in the 11th Sign. If a
planet moves on in this star instead of enjoying the results indicated
by the 11th house, the native will have the results of the 6th and 9th
more prominently.
AQUARIUS BORNS
Ashwini, Makam, Moolam stars are governed by Kethu who
does not own any sign in the Zodiac. Find out in which constellation
and sign Kethu is Judge what Kethu can do. That will be given by the
planet in any of the three stars.
Bharani, Pooram, Pooradam : Venus governs over these stars,
which also rules over the 4th and 9th houses. When a planet
occupies any of these stars at birth or during the transit, the native
should be offered the results indicated by the 4th and 9th houses
only.
Krithigai, Uthram, Uthradam stars are allotted to Sun. Ph house
results will be experienced by the native if a planet move on the
constellations ruled by Sun, as Sun, happens to be the lord of 7.
Uthram in the 8th sign, Uthradam in the 12th sign do not offer the
results of the 8th or 12th house but gives only the 7th house results.
Rohini; Hastham , Sravanam : Moon the other luminary governs
over these stars which owns only the 6th sign to Kumbha- boms.
Hence, the results signified by the 6th house has to be predicted to the
native if a planet moves on through these three stars.

Mrigasirisha, Chithrai, Avittam : Mars the governor of these stars
rules the 3rd and 10th houses to the Aquarius-borns. So, when a
planet is seen in any of these stars, you portend the results allotted to
the 3rd and 10th houses to the native.
Arudhra, Swathi, Sathabisha : Rahu, The Moon's North Node rule
over these asterisms. Find out the strength of Rahu by its occupation
of the star and Rasi where it was at birth. The results due to lordship
of the constellation and sign where Rahu was, will operate when a
planet transits in Arudhra, Swathi, Sathabisha.
Punarpusam, Visaka, Poorattathi are ruled by the benevolent
planet Jupiter who also owns the 2nd and 11th houses. So, the
results indicated by the 2nd and 11th houses will be enjoyed by the
person if a planet moves on in the stars of Guru, in whatever sign it
may be.
Pushyam , Anuradha, Uthrattathi : Saturn lord of 1 and 12 happen
to own these stars. Results denoted by the 1st and 12th house will
operate if a planet occupies at birth or transits in the three stars
governed by Saturn.
Ashlesha , Jyesta, Revathi : Mercury lord of 5 and 8 rules over
these stars. Results of the 5th and 8th houses also should be
predicted to the native if a planet passes through them. For example,
Revathi is in the 2nd house. General prediction of the results if a
planet transits in the 2nd house will do good to native does not
operate but the results of 5 and 8, i.e. mixed ones will be
experienced, when a planet moves on in Revathi.
PISCES - BORN
Aswini, Makam, Moolam ; ruled by the descending Node. Kethu,
who does not own any house in the Zodiac. We have to ascertain the
strength of Kethu by its occupation in the constellation. The results
denoted by the lord of constellation and sign where Kethu was at the
time of birth, will predominate.

Bharani, Pooram, Pooradam ruled by Venus who also happens
to be the owner of the 3rd and 8th houses to Pisces - boms. Results
signified by the houses 3 and 8 will operate if a planet occupies the
constellation of Venus when we consider, the horoscope.
Krithigai, Uthram, Uthradam are governed by the lord of 6. Sun
the strong luminary. The astrologer has to offer the results of the 6th
house while predicting if he finds any planet in the stars owned by
Sun, at birth or while it transits.
Rohini, Hastham, Sravanam : Moon, the night queen owns these
three stars. It also governs the 5th sign. So portend the results
allotted to the 5th house when a planet passes through the
constellation of Moon. For instance, Rohini is in the 3rd sign to
Pisces. When practically seen during the period of the planet in
Rohini, the native enjoys the results of the 5th house and not the
results indicated by the 3rd house.
Mrigasirisha, Chithrai, Avittam are governed by Mars, lord of 2
and 9 to this rasi-borns. Matters signified by the 2nd and 9th houses
alone will be enjoyed by the querist while a planet moves on in the
stars owned by Mars, in whichever sign it may
Arudhra, Swathi, Sathabisha : Rahu who does not own any sign
governs these stars. Ascertain in which constellation and sign Rahu
is. The results indicated by the constellation and sign where Rahu is,
will operate if a planet would have occupied that star during its period.
Punarpusam , Visakam, Poorattathi : Lord of 1 and 10 rules over
these stars also. The results indicated by the houses 1 and 10 will
operate during the period of the planets that has occupied the stars
governed by Jupiter either at birth or when in transit. For example,
Visaka is in the 8th sign and Poorattathi is in the 12 sign. If you notice
any planet in these stars, general prediction of the 8th and 12th ouses
where the planet, will fail but the results of 1 and 10 will operate.

Pushyam, Anuradha , Uthrattathi : Our sages allotted these three
stars to Saturn, who also was given the 11th and 12th houses to
Pisces. If a planet were to occupy any of these stars, either at birth or
during transit, it will produce the results of the 11th and 12th houses
only and not the results of the houses in which it is.
Ashlesha, Jyesta, Revathi are governed by Mercury. Mercury
owns the 4th and 7th houses to Pisces. Hence, results of the 4th and
7th houses alone should be declared when you find a planet in the
constellation of Ashlesha, Jyesta and Revathi either in the horoscope
made for the time of birth or during transit.
Always judge, who is the Lord of the constellation: Note to the
native, what it can offer. Those results indicated by lord of
constellation will be enjoyed during the period of the planet in that
constellation and whenever a planet transits in that star, through the
source indicated by the planet in the star.
ROLE OF SUB
Sign : A sign is one of the 12 equal divisions of the zodiac. Each
sign has its own characteristics and, the planets occupying such signs
offer results modified by the characteristics of that sign. The strength
of planets is judged by noting the sign occupied by it - whether it gets
exalted or debilitated; whether it is Swakshethra or vargothamamsa or
in friendly quarters or enemy's camp, etc. The planet in a sign is the
source of the result which it bestows according to the lord of the
constellation in which the planet was tenanted. The nature of the
results which the planet gives includes whether the planet is in a
positive or negative sign; in a fiery or earthy or airy or watery sign; in a
movable or fixed or common sign, in a fruitful or a barren sign; in mute
or voice sign; in violent or human sign; in a bestial or dual sign etc. All
these must be taken into consideration before judging what a planet
can do. The Rasi occupied by a planet indicates the strength of the
planet.

Star: In every sign, even though there are only 2-1/4
constellation, yet the lords will be three in number. A planet in any of
the constellations will be under the sway of the lord of the
constellation. Therefore, a sign is divided into 3 major divisions. If a
sign were to indicate many results it is classified into 3 groups by the
3 constellations. For example, Taurus is ruled by Venus and all the
results indicated by Venus coupled with an earthy, fixed and negative
sign are attributed to Taurus. But in the same sign, there are 3
constellations called karthik, Rohini and Mrigasira. Kartik is ruled by
Sun, Rohini by Moon and Mrigasira by Mars. Therefore the result
indicated by Taurus are classified into 3 groups; a part of it is
governed by Venus and Sun (Karthik Star; if a planet were to be
between 0° and 10° of Taurus at the time of the birth or at the time of
the query or when a planet transits between 0° and 10° of Taurus, its
results are modified by Venus and Sun). The second part is under the
influence of both Venus and Moon. (Rohini Star 10° Taurus to 23° 20
Taurus). The results indicated by the planets in this area are under
the influence of Venus and Moon. And the third part is governed by
Venus and Mars; those matters signified by both of them are grouped
together and the planets occupying 23° -20' to 30°. Taurus will be
influenced by Venus and Mars. The matters signified jointly by them
will be offered by the planet occupying the star or transiting in this
area. Therefore, instead of giving many probabilities according to the
sign, the three constellations divide them into three groups.
Sub : As regards the sub, it is the 9 divisions of each
constellation in the proportion in which they are allotted total number
of years in Vimshottari dasa. What results the lord of the sign and the
lord of the constellation jointly indicate are again divided into 9
groups. Therefore the sign Lord, the star Lord and the Sub Lord
reduce the number of probabilities to be chosen for prediction. Such
subdivision is found necessary not only to differentiate the results
indicated by two planets but also the cusps in the same constellation.
For example, twins are born; one having its meridian in Venus sign
Taurus in Moon Star-Rohini and in the

sub of Saturn. This person deals in Petrol. But, the next born will
have his Meridian in Venus sign Taurus in Moon star-rohini and in
the sub of Mercury. This brother deals in Cotton and Silk products.
Let us take another example. One of the twins born with Meridian
in 21° Leo is an educationist and an advocate. Because the
Meridian has fallen in Leo ruled by Sun in Poorvapalguni Star
governed by Venus and in the sub of Jupiter who indicates Law
and Education. But the other twin whose Meridian was in 27° is a
Medical gentleman because this point in the zodiac in Leo is
owned by Sun, in Uttrapalguni Star governed by Sun and also in
the sub of Sun. Thus twins born at an interval of a few minutes
having the lagna in the same sign at different degrees, the position
of the planets in the same degree, experience different results.
While joining the College, one gets admission in the Law college
whereas the other studies in Medical College and later their
profession also is entirely different. Third example: Twins were
born, one in 7° 4T in Moon sign cancer, Saturn Star Pushya and
in the sub of Kethu, the other twin was born in 12°-20' in Moon
sign Cancer, Saturn Star Pushya and in the sub of Mars. The
earlier born in Kethu sub died immediately after birth whereas the
2nd born lived long. No doubt, the second born had a fragile
constitution in youth and later he picked up. Therefore, even
though a constellation may indicate many results, it is the sub
which decides which of them applies to an individual. A
constellation extends to 13°-20' whereas a sub extends between
0°-40' to 2° 13'-20". Therefore the broad prediction indicated by a
constellation is specifically defined by the sub. A person may have
his Meridian in 23°. if we take only the sign for the prediction for
their processing we consider the sign Aries and its Lord Mars, the
navamsa lord, etc. But if we include the constellation, then we take
into our judgement both the planets Mars and the Lord of the
Constellation Venus who rules between 13°-20' and 26°-10' Aries.
But if one uses this sub, then one finds, that a person ties his
Meridian in Mars sign, Venus Star and Jupiter sub whereas the
other person has meridian in mars, sign, Venus Star, Saturn sub.
Both are Sanitary Inspectors. One works in Animal Husbandry
Department who has his meridian in Mars sign, Venus

Star, Jupiter Sub, as Jupiter is the chief governor for production and
progeny whereas the other is working in the slaughter house where
animals are killed, as Saturn the sub-lord is the Karaka for "Death".
So, a person causes production of animals whereas the other causes
destruction of them. Hence health, disease, longevity, education,
profession etc., can be clearly and correctly predicted only when the
sub is included.
If it is not taken into consideration, an astrologer is to predict that
a person may deal with quadrupeds. He cannot say as to whom of
the two is in animal husbandry and who in the slaughter house. A
third person having his Meridian in 5°-50' of Aries thus having it in
Mars sign, Venus star, sun sub works as Veterinary Surgeon. To
clearly indicate the profession, one can find that the sub serves
useful purpose and gives correct and clear prediction. This alone is
needed.
Suppose planets A, B, C and D are in Sagittarius (Dhanus)
Dhanus is ruled by Jupiter.
Longitude 26°-40' to 30° is governed by Sun. The star is
Uthrashada.
Both rasi and Navamsa are Dhanus.
The modification to the planet A, B, C and D is the same
according to our ancient science. But according to Krishnamurti
Padhdhati Planet A' which is between 26°40' and 27°-20' gains
strength or gets weakened according to the sign. Dhanus ruled by
Jupiter, the planet A' instead of giving results according to its nature
and lordship, offers the results indicated by the lord of the
constellation Sun. The lord of the constellation may indicate many
matters. But the lord of the sub, eliminates many of them and
specifies a particular matter. Planet 'B' in between 27°-20' and
28°-26'-40" is in Jupiter's sign, Sun's star Uthrashada and sub of
Moon.

Planet "C" in between 28°-26-40" and 29°-13-20" is under
the sway of Jupiter-lord of the Sign, Sun, lord of the star and
Mars lord of the sub.
Planet "D" in between 29°13'-20" and the end of the sign
is in Rahu sub, the sign lord and star being Jupiter and Sun
respectively.
FOR SAGITTARIUS, the following profession is mentioned.

Advocate
Banker-Finance Department
Mines-Mine ores
Death duty
Auditor
Inspector in a Bank
Civil Engineer
Income Tax
Reserve Bank, Physician
Education, College
Politician
Mayor, Minister
Orator
Civilian in Military
Foreign Embassy
Judge
Jail Department
(Let us take Character:
Magnanimous, True Jupiter Sun Sun
Submissive to women Jupiter Sun Moon
Does subversive activities
Bold-fond of bad deeds Jupiter Sun Mars
Therefore one can note that hundreds of professions are
indicated by the sign-Sagittarius-Dhanus. But if we take
constellations, each represents a few dozens of them. Sub exactly
fixes the profession.

Therefore, he who has the planets, A, B, C and D and if he runs
'A' dasa, he will then be magnanimous, reliable, honest, serve in
Education Department or bank or be a physician,
But when he runs the period of the planet 'B' he may be a
politician or benefited by a politician then, if it is a benefit.
When he runs the period of the planet 'C' he may be a civilian
in Military, Defence Department, or an orator or a mayor or a minister.
Planet 'D' may authorize him as one of the visitors of jails.
Thus the planet within these 3°-20' has to indicate many varieties.
When the sub is applied, one can eliminate most of them and pinpoint
on very few items which alone is helpful to the querist.
If one gives a list of appointments assigned to a sign just like the
server presents a large number of items in a 'Menu' card in a hotel,
what a task it is to make further selection. Specific ones are needed in
those days, just like one wants to know the special dish of the day.
Suppose there is a planet in a sign. Then, the planet is the
source of light. It indicates the source of a result -which a native
enjoys by its nature, ownership etc.
If the planet is significator of 1, he gains by his own efforts and
influence. If it is significator of 3, through brother or publication, he
gains or loses, depending on the sub. If it is significator of 4, through
mother or the matters signified by the 4th house, he has that result. If
it is significator of 5, through speculation, music or children he enjoys
the result. Thus the planet who transits or the planet whose period is
running, shows how one gets the result, how a result is brought
about, etc.
The sign indicates the extent to which one can enjoy as it shows
whether the planet is strong or weak in that Sign,
The lord of the constellation is that which shows the nature
of the RESULT , i.e. in which house, the lord of the constellation is

deposited and the house or houses it owns. Then the matters signified
by those houses will manifest.
Suppose the lord of the constellation owns the houses 3 and 10,
i.e. Mars to Aquarius-burns or Venus to Leo-horns and they are
occupying 3rd house from Aquarius or Leo respectively, then the
planet in Mars constellation to Aquarius-borns or that in Venus
constellation for Leo-borns shows that one corresponds, interviews or
makes a short journey for a job. Then the favourable or unfavourable
sub denotes whether he is successful or not. When? it will be during
the conjoined period of the planet, star lord and sub-lord.
Suppose a planet transits in a sign, e.g. take Jupiter.
According to the principles available one cannot definitely state
when one can have its beneficial results and also what result one can
expect at a particular time. But by studying this book one can give
correct prediction,
Suppose in a small post office, one posts, say, 44 letters, All the
44 are put in one bag. So the contents indicate 44 places. If these are
distributed into 3 bags, one may contain 19, the other 19 and the third
6. If there are 22 bags each for different places, these 44 will be
distributed to the 22 bags on an average at two per bag. If one bag is
missing, only now, it is easy for one to mention from the missing bag,
to which places the letters belong. If all are thrown in one bag, one
can say, that two of the 44 are missing and it is not possible to
specify. If they are distributed in 3 bags, even then, it cannot be
specified. But if it is distributed to 22 bags, (22 subs in one sign) it is
easy to pitch up.
Further, a planet in the sub of an evil planet, indicates loss,
difficulty or failure whereas the same planet, in the same star, but in
the sub of a benefic, promises success, gain and pleasure. The lord
of the constellation may indicate the matters of the 7th house. The
planet in the sub of a malefic causes enmity whereas that in the sub
of a benefic brings in harmony and happiness. Also, the planet in the
sub of an evil one threatens loss in litigation whereas that in the sub
of a benefic indicates victory even though

the constellation lord denotes litigation. If a planet indicates business,
the stars governed by this planet show business and the planet in
beneficial sub promises profit whereas that in the sub of an evil one
threatens loss. The lord of the constellation may show any one walk of
life to the native, it is the sub which decides whether that area is
advantageous or not and thereby indicates whether the planet
occupying or transiting therein will offer desirable results or adverse
ones.
SIGNIFICATION OF EACH SUB
The Zodiac is divided into 27 constellations and each
constellation is subdivided into 9 parts. This subdivision is called
"SUB". In this Textbook wherever SUB is used, it means one of the 9
divisions of the star.
Each star indicates many matters and when a prediction is to be
offered, taking into consideration a planet and its situation in a
constellation, one has to give many alternatives and hence the
prediction will not be of much use to the querist. But if the sub is also
included then, one can eliminate many of them and select a very few,
out of the many indicated by the constellation.
What each sub indicates is given below
ARIES
1. Mars, Kethu, Kethu: (O-OO-OO)-(0. 46-40). Always injury
Scar in the head, congestion in the brains, epilepsy, Coma, worries
about enmity, jealousy, abortion, Military, machinery.
2. Mars, Kethu, Venus: (0-46-40)-(3-00-00). Service,
headache, trance, eye trouble, eruptive fever, worried about
ladies, not his own, Venereal affection, Railways, Industry,
Slaughter house, Butcher, Horse rider, jockey.
3. Mars, Kethu, Sun: (3-00-00)-(3-40-00). Paintings
Cerebral anaemia, Reddish sore eyes, Severe headache on one
side, Thrombosis, Veterinary surgeon, Criminal, Court, Jail,
copper, Barren, Effeminate.

4. Mars, Kethu, Moon: (3-40-00)-(4-46-40). Congestion in
the brains, boils, dispute in the family, Hysteria, Neuralgia, boilers,
Steam boiler, Railways, Cerebal Haemorrhage, Insomnia, Worried
about landed property and cultivation-poor yield.
5. Mars, Kethu, Mars: (4-46-40)-(5-33-20). Accident, Scar
in the head-Haemorrhage, epilepsy, dispute, violence, Military,
Police, Industry, Independent, Managing Director.
6. Mars, Kethu, Rahu: (5-33-20)-(7-33-20). Note what Rahu
denotes to a person. Irritable, quarrelsome, diseased-Military Jail,
Criminal Jail, Police Department, dog-bite, Rabies, fear of black
magic, litigation and landed property.
Congestion in the brains, malaria, meningitis, manager of factory,
bank agent, religious endowment, executive officer, Criminal
Session Judge.
head, Small pox, boils, injury, Cerebral operation, coma, Insomnia,
Filarial fever, Severe headache, Section Officer, foreman (maistry),
Iron, Steel Factory, Mine or land owner-Barren, abortion, false pains,
irregular monthly periodicity.
9. Mars, Kethu, Mercury: (1 1-26-40)-(1 3-2000). Epilepsy,
Violence, Spasm, paralytic Stroke, quarrelsome, Petition writer,
Typist, Mechanical Engineer, Land, Building Broker-Barren, no child.
10. Mars, Venus, Venus: (1 3-20-00)-(1 5-3320). Amorous
always fond of pleasure, chain smoker, injury above the eye,
sportsman, deals in musical instrument, exhibition, maternity.
out his affairs to the end. Magnanimous, Catarrh, injury around
the eyes, dissipating habits, visual publicity, advertisement,
railway, industry, Veterinary doctor, Criminal Lawyer and judge,
Surgeon.

hot drinks, avaricious, wanting in character, clever, silk,
cotton, Fertilizer, Tea, Coffee, Hotel, Agriculturist, Shipyard.
13. Mars, Venus, Mars: (17-20-00)-(1 8-6-40). Ever active
very healthy, fond of pleasure, Venereal distemper, Syphilis,
barber, Sportsman, dealer in silver vessels and eversilver vessels,
Cinema theatre, Studio, Mansion for marriage, Venereal experts.
14. Mars, Venus, Rahu: (18-6-40)-(20-6-40). Aspiring,
lowborn person, Leucoderma, Leprosy, Automobile Industry,
Slaughter house.
15. Mars, Venus, Jupiter: (20-6-40)-(21-53-20). Indulges
in pleasure, clever and happy, escapes from accidents, has higher
studies, sits for competitive examination, Successful sportsman,
Goldsmith, owner of theaters, animal husbandry judge,
Income- tax Officer, Estate owner, Farms.
16. Mars, Venus, Saturn: (21-53-20)-(24-00-00). Lowborn,
Mean minded, fond of other ladies, meeting with accident, ill
repute, Veneral distemper, Catarrh in the head, Mucus, Noise to
humour, lean due to gratifying one's taste, Fertilizer, wrestler,
Slaughter house, Mine products, Transport for mine, ores,
Venereal expert, Agriculturist.
Wavering, author of books on Surgery, Maternity, and Sexual
side, Engineering Contractor, Export import, Caterer.
18. Mars, Venus, Kethu: 25-53-20-26-40-00. Jealous,
Diseased, Leucoderma , Syphilis, Poor vision, Catarrh, Veterinary
Surgeon, Skins and hides, dealer in roots and pulps.
dauntless, speculator, Plague, brain fever, Military, Police, surgical,
defence department.
body, Carbuncle, poxes, competitive mind, famous, pushful,
acquires land, Navy, Travels, manufactures, Chemicals, Tonics.

21. Mars, Sun, Mars: (28-26-40)-(29-13-20). Robust health,
Militant temperament, commanding appearance, argumentative
ability, sharp fever, Malaria, eruptive fever, Cerebral Meningitis,
injury, cut, accident, explosion, Match box, iron and steel vessels,
war materials.
temperament, eats much, attracted by others, wives, Plague,
Filaria, Fire accident, burns in the body, Chemical Industry, Police,
jail department.
TAURUS
23. Venus, Sun, Rahu: (0-00-00)-( 1-1 3-20). Speculative
tendency, selfish, --eye-soar, Reddish eye, Photographer, wool
dealer, works in leper clinics.
24. Venus, Sun, Jupiter: (1-1 3-20)-(3-00-00). Social
generous, cheerful, Swelling above neck, victory over enemies,
costly jewels and dress, international trade, music, artist,
decoration, tax collector.
25. Venus, Sun, Saturn: (3-00-00)-(5-6-40). Selfish,
dishonest, pimples, throat troubles, poor voice, loss by bad debts,
drawing master, draftsman, sculpture, industry, wool dealer, hair
dressers or export of hair.
26. Venus, Sun, Mercury: (5-6-40)-(7-00-00). Intelligent,
cheerful, best fitted for business, creative mind, tumor in the knee,
polypus of the nose, broker, representative of drugs and
pharmaceutical, bill collector, engineer, Valuation officer, assessor.
27. Venus, Sun, Kethu: (7-00-00)-(7-46-40). Discourteous,
ill repute, inimical, jealousy, cataract, nose trouble,
photography, venereal expert, Executive Officer, Religious
Endowment.
28. Venus, Sun, Venus: (7-46-40)-(1 0-00-00). Speculative,
mind, popular, prosperous, fruitful action, fond of company,
benefit through Government, Realises bad debts, acquires jewels
and dress, decoration, Poet, artist, silk, decoration, maternity,
dance music.

29. Venus, Moon, Moon: (10-00-00)-(1 1-53-20). Pleasant
manners, Sweet tongued, lovely appearance, dairy farm Milk,
Scented Oil, Shipping, Sugarcane.
instrumental music, arranges public functions, pleasant life in the
company of other sex, Caters to the needs of the Public, hotel,
lodging house, bar attached, Sandal wood, Navy, Cows, Dealer of
pearls, or acids.
note down the position of Rahu in the horoscope and judge which
planet is represented by Rahu. Then the results or the sub of planet
is to be taken for the sub of Rahu. But generally one is to take that
Venus Moon Rahu shows no settled minds, Lacking in manners,
lives on others, deals in plastic, dyes, tannery, fishermen.
32. Venus, Moon, Jupiter : (13-53-20)-(1 5-40-00). Apoplexy
(brain stroke), Swellings, Maternal affection, sympathetic, steady
person, lovely appearance, Bakeries, shipping, Judge, Politician,
Sugar and sugarcoated tablets. Very good for higher education, and
high position politics.
funky, mischievous, stealthy action, cough, cold, irregular menses,
pains in the legs, Hotels with bar and all attached, petrol, oil, icecream, paint, submarine, tannery.
34. Venus, Moon, Mercury : (17-46-40)-(1 9-40-00). Tonsils,
Cerebellum, tongue, goitre, sore-throat, can argue both the sides,
enjoys nature, addresses public functions, at least vote of thanks:
Broker, Engineer shipping, nurse, yarn merchant, pearls dealer,
broker, contractor, clearing agent, waterworks engineer.
Ouinsy, tumour, defective voice or mute, unsettled mind, always
worried, fear complex, dealer in fruits, tannery, skins, hides,
observer of vows, yogins, service in petrol products.

beautiful, attractive, sweet tongued, humorous, fertile imagination,
pain in the breast, swellings, cold, glass, plastic, dairy farm, petrol,
oils, paints, shipping, aquatic animals, fishermen, wealthy person.
irregular menses, scanty bleeding, enjoys life in the presence of other
women, reads light literature, bakeries, perfumeries, synthetic ones,
acids, shipping department, Sugar industry, agriculturist.
38. Venus, Mars, Mars : (23-20-00)-(24-6-40). Inflammation
of pericardium, inflamed tonsils, dexterity, excitable, industrious,
indulges in sexual pleasure even against the will of the partner,
selfish, deals in machines, automobiles, tailors, corals.
cheeks, Jugular veins, dirty pimples, King's evil, tobacco, snuff,
taxi driver, hire purchase, cinema, sound engineer, photography.
40. Venus, Mars, Jupiter : (26-6-40)-(27-53-20). Beautiful
cheek, Less of hair growth, carotid arteries, adenoid, goitre, estate
owner, exhibition, platinum, animal husbandry, apple and bananas
income tax and sales tax department.
41. Venus, Mars, Saturn : (27-53-20)-(30-00-00). Injury in
the cheek and chin, pain in the throat, weak loins, constipation,
venereal distemper, polypus, Deals in lands and buildings, ever silver,
dressmaker, estate duty, death duty, rickshaw puller, taxi driver,
sandal powder, face powder, lethal chamber, slaughter house.
(GEMINI)
42. Mercury, Mars, Mercury: (0-00-00)-(1-53-20). Injury in
the shoulder and defective vocal cord. Surfeit, most energetic, alert,
dealing in tool, electrical goods, telephone, telegraph, building
contractor, Radio, computers.
43. Mercury, Mars, Kethu : (1-53-20)-(2-40-00). Thymus
gland, corrupted blood, fever, collar bone, Excitable Vitriolic in

their wrath, Tongues more poisonous than Rattle snakes, deals in
surgical instruments, mechanical engineering, telegraph, dam site
construction, thieves.
44. Mercury, Mars, Venus: (2-40-00)-(4-53-20). Vocal cord,
throat, ears, itches, disorders in secret parts, inflammation of
pericardium, fractured femur, sciatica, quick, imaginative enthusiastic,
sharp witted, wealthy, indulges in sexual pleasure, Ambassadors,
Astronomers, Textile Engineer, Tape record, electronics, beasts,
foresters, fruits, flowers, fetter bearers, cables.
45. Mercury, Mars, Sun : (4-53-20)-(5-33-20). Shoulders
Upper ribs, arms, excitable, fluent, eloquent, dexterity telephone,
telegraph, electricity, surgeon, soldier, press publication, All India
radio, surgical instruments.
46. Mercury, Mars, Moon : (5-33-20)-(6-40-00). Throat
thymus gland, mental energy, impulsive, mischievous, disorder in
secret parts, inflammation, boils, ambassadors, mathematician, bridge
construction, salesman, broker, bus.
47. Mercury, Rahu, Rahu : (6-40-00)-(8-40-00). Septic throat,
Eosinophilia, unsuccessful in literary pursuits, liar, ungrateful,
sinful, atomic energy, research department.
48. Mercury, Rahu, Jupiter : (8-40-00)-(1 0-28-40). Septic
throat, ear trouble, mums, ingenious, scholar, good character,
reader, stock keeper, writer, explorer, finance broker, statistician.
49. Mercury, Rahu, Saturn : (10-26-40)-(1 2-33-20). Asthma,
puss in the ear education poor, hand writing expert, or committing
forgery, finger print expert, physics.
Hiccough (hiccup), ear trouble, active mind, critical scholar, salesman,
communication department, transport, aerial, atomic energy, writer,
author, dynamics.
throat, diphtheria, jealousy, adulterer, thief, cruel minded,
pseudonymous, petition writer, ungrateful, no child birth, research
department, deals in poisonous drugs, canned goods, gravitation.

throat, dry cough, eartrouble, ingenious, humorous, artist, sales
man, post and telegraph department, transport, radio, bus.
Eosinophilia, pain in the shoulder, cruel minded, man versed in the
art pertaining to boggling-amazements, holy, perfidious, atomic
energy, research department, public appointment.
trouble, puss in the ear, asthma, intuitive, thief, boatman, deals
in drugs, explorer, nurse, engineer.
55. Mercury, Rahu, Mars : (19-13-20)-(20-00-00). Septic
throat, injury in the shoulder, critic, murderer, robber, rogue,
mischievous, mechanical engineer, handwriting expert, finger print
expert, police department.
56. Mercury, Jupiter, Jupiter (20-00-00)-(21 -46-40).
Swelling in the ear, pulmonary apoplexy, broad outlook, proper
judgment, true, rich, merchant, journalism, story writing, advertising,
religious, finance broker, mayor, astrologer.
57. Mercury, Jupiter, Saturn : (21-46-40)-(23-53-20). Injury
in the shoulder blade, inflammation, pain the ear, iodine deficiency,
infiltration in the upper lob of the lungs, worldly wisdom, sincere,
servant, insurance agent, messengers, postman, woolen merchants,
provision dealers.
58. Mercury, Jupiter, Mercury : (23-53-20)-(25-46-40).
Hiccough, asthma, active mind, ingenious, scholar, salesman, book
seller, high official, competitive examiner, auto, research • scholar,
public appointment, service in the head of the department registrar,
astrologer.
Pleurisy, Pneumonia, Pulmonary apoplexy, poor judgement,
abortive tendency, no peace of mind, worried, religious, interpreter,
secretary, astrologer.

60. Mercury, Jupiter, Venus (26-33-20)-(26-46-40).
Bronchitis, Arms disorder, good memory, proper judgment, well
disposed, intelligent, rich, easily contented, inspector, poet, auditor,
civil judge, civil engineer, Tamil pandit, clothier.
61. Mercury, Jupiter, Sun : (28-46-40)-(29-26-40). Throat
affected, pain in the ear, broad outlook, clear in sight bronchitis,
eosinophilia, advertising, visual publicity, judge, Income-tax inspector,
auditor, registrar, deputy secretary.
62. Mercury, Jupiter, Moon : (29-26-40)-(30-00-00). Pleurisy,
Pneumonia, good memory, correct intuition, merchant, estate broker,
finance broker, politician, mayor, councillor, schoolmaster, interpreter.
(CANCER)
breast, Lacteels, dropsy, beriberi, corrupt blood, jaundice, Fertile
imagination, honest, true, forgiving temperament, resourceful,
sympathetic, banker, advocate, judge, traveller, sailor, dealer in
fluid, nurse, midwife, watersupply, Tuberculosis.
64. Moon, Jupiter, Mars: (00-33-20)-(01 -20-00). Pancreatic
gland, Mammae, diaphragm, Beriberi, irregular appetite, corrupt
blood, liver complaint, gourmandize, appreciates beauty, effective
argument, good vitality and fertility, politician, born a prince,
banker, physician, religious head, statistics, judge, professor,
Manager of Public conveyance.
65. Moon, Jupiter, Rahu: (01-20-00)-(03-20-00). Stomach,
oesophagus, Thoracic, stomach upset, TB., dyspepsia, reliable,
resourceful, compassionate, politician, economics, Principal, Sailor,
dealer in fluid, Salesman, female official, Jail for women.
66. Moon, Saturn, Saturn: (03-20-00)-(05-26-40). Lungs
ribs, TB. obstructions, cancer, eczema, pyorrhea, economical,
contemplative, patient, persevering, deals in kerosene, canals, Jailer,
tunnels, works in submarine, driver.

67. Moon, Saturn, Mercury: (05-26-40)-(07-20-00). Both
l-nK3 affected, Nausea, Phthisis, dyspepsia, Self-reliance, systematic
and intelligent action, position of trust, barely, Canals, water works
engineer, Pumping set dealer, constructing bridges, kerosene agent.
68. Moon, Saturn, Kethu: (07-20-00)-(08-06-40). Gallaping,
tuberculosis, Belching, scurvy, Jaundice, pyorrhea, fisherman, deals
in mine products or agricultural lands, plumber, grave digger.
69. Moon. Saturn, Venus: (08-6-40)-(1 0-20-00). Bruises in
the breasts, cough, eczema, prudent, careful, liked by all, wealthy,
petrol, petroleum products, trenches, Engineers and draftsman,
constructing dams.
70. Moon, Saturn, Sun: (10-20-00)-(1 1-00-00). Ulceration
in the respiratory-system gallstone, methodical action, attains position
of trust, learner, mine ores, copper, Sexton, those who work
underground.
Tuberculosis Nausea, obstructions, attentive, Contemplative,
fisherman, kerosene, agricultural, digging wells, constructing
tanks and impounded reservoirs, those working in the night.
72. Moon, Saturn, Mars: (12-06-40)-(1 2-53-20). Ulceration
in the respiratory system, injury in ribs, gastric ulcer, bruises in the
breast, Petroleum products, coal, lands excavations, Canals,
trenches, tunnels.
73. Moon, Saturn, Rahu: (12-53-20)-(1 4-53-20). Gallstone,
tuberculosis, hiccough, agriculturist, Jailer, grave digger, dealer
in oil.
74. Moon, Saturn, Jupiter: (14-53-20)-(1 6-40-00). Gastric
trouble, Ulcer on the breasts, Jaundice, economical, conservative,
liked by all, learned, wealthy, virtuous, agriculturist, hold position of
trust, works in the head of the department, deals in mines.

75. Moon, Mercury, Mercury: (16-40-00)-(1 8-33-20). Both
the lungs and the stomach will be defective. Gas forming in the
stomach will push the diaphragm up and breathing will be difficult,
Vitamin B deficient, hysteria, quick wit, versatile, mimicry, clown, fond
of travels, hypocrite, agent, commerce correspondent, dealer in yarn,
ink, water diviner.
76. Moon, Mercury, Kethu: (18-33-20)-(1 9-20-00). Hysteria,
fear complex, dull liver, acquires other languages easily, failure,
ungrateful, sinful, guide, hostess, midwife, nurse, plurality in everything.
Windiness, drunkenness, hypochondria, dropsy, imitates other, good
in music, art, insincere, fond of honeymoon, picnic, other's company,
international trade, paints, ambassador, traveling, agent, midwife,
hostess, nurse, very good painter.
78. Moon, Mercury, Sun: (21-33-20)-(22-13-20). Dull liver,
poor digestion, constipation, jaundice, Textile Department, Nurse,
Mental Hospital.
drunkenness, hysteria, dropsy, imitates others, mimicry, salesman,
ink, artist, water supply engineer, textile engineer, midwife, versatile.
Flatulence, Nephritis, pain in the stomach, ulcer,
correspondent, manufacturer of ink, textile, traveling agent.
81. Moon, Mercury, Rahu: (24-06-40)-(26-06-40). Typhoid
Vitamin 'B' deficiency, jaundice, phaent?, copious in speech, fond of
travel, insincere, sinful, ungrateful, good businessman, depending on
the position of Rahu predict the profession.
Diaphragm, pancreas, liver, wind pressing the diaphragm, makes it
difficult to breathe, dropsy, beriberi, good writer, learns art and
literature, always travels, grateful, author of books, writer,
international trade, commerce, banking, accounts, ambassador.

83. Moon, Mercury, Saturn: (27-53-20)-(30-00-00). Lungs,
stomach, Vitamin 'B' deficiency, Pains in knees and legs, phlegm,
deceitful, underhand dealings, water diviner, manufacture of ink,
service in textile department, hostess, nurse.
LEO
84. Sun, Kethu, Kethu: (0-00-00)-(0-46-40). Disease in the
heart, Palpitation, Giddiness, Congestion, chemical, Medical,
Government, Security in service, Physician.
Meningitis, Syncope, Epilepsy, Swelling, Optician, Skin expert,
Leucoderma, Leprosy, Transport, Automobile, Women & Children
Hospital. Chemical.
86. Sun, Kethu, Sun: (3-00-00)-(3-40-00). Thrombosis,
Sunstroke, Unconscious, Eye trouble, Medical, Hospital, Service,
Permanency.
Thrombosis, Headache, Trouble in Aorta, Vena Cavae, Neuralgia,
Shipping, Navy, Boilers, Regurgitation in the heart, confusion.
88. Sun, Kethu, Mars: (4-46-40)-(5-53-20). Epilepsy, Heart
Disease, Locomotor Ataxia, interspinal muscles, Spinal marrow,
Dispute, litigation, Defence, Police, industry.
89. Sun, Kethu, Rahu: (5-33-20)-(7-33-20). Note what Rahu
indicates to that native. Disease, Blood Poisoning, Wrong Medicine,
Black-magic, Meningitis, Dorsal Vertebra, Jail Department, Lethal
Chamber, Fear, Depression, Disharmony.
90. Sun, Kethu, Jupiter: (7-33-20)-(9-20-00). Philosophical
Religious, Cancer, Congestion, Enlargement, Regurgitation, Bank
Administrator, Advocate, judge, Religious Endowment.
91. Sun, Kethu, Saturn : (9-20-00)-(1 1-26-40). Rheumatic fever,
Rheurriatic heart, Affection of bony system, Chronic ailment, High
fever, smallpox, position of trust, head of the department, factory,
copper, steel, mine, real estate, abortive, denial of children, irregular
monthly periodicity, defect in generative system, homeopathy.

92. Sun, Kethu, Mercury : (1 1-26-40)-(1 3-20-00). Nervous
trouble, Palpitation of the heart, Meningitis, Giddiness, Pestilence,
Ingenia ?, Auditor, petition, writer, typist, journalist, advertising - no
issue, barren.
complexion, beautiful, fondness for company, pleasure, generous,
eye defect, mother or wife falls ill, gains money through business,
speculation, social affairs, music, fine arts and chemistry.
generous, amiable, affectionate, eye-defect, palpitation of the heart,
bright disease, service in Hospital, Chemistry department, music,
radio, women and children hospital, government service, stock
exchange.
sociability, comfort, impressionable, warm attraction, love affairs,
disease of ovaries, enlarged tonsils, mucous diseases, service in
cosmetics, navy, shipping, petrol refineries.
pleasure, adventure, amorous, sports, music, instrumental, artistic,
extravagant, wastes money, venereal diseases, cataract, good for
advertisements, display, automobile, independent, chemical
engineering industry, transport, surgical instruments, petroleum
products, medicinal soaps.
97. Sun, Venus, Rahu : (18-6-40)-(20-6-40). Find out the
position of Rahu. One is to find out the health and the profession. If
Rahu were to be in Moon star Mercury sub one will suffer from brain
disorder. So it is necessary for us to note down what Rahu can do
and the result must be modified.
98. Sun, Venus, Jupiter : (20-6-40)-(21 -53-20). Indicates that
the native will have much bloods, obstructions, corrupt blood, fever,
boils, tumours inflammations judge, income tax department, ladies
college, women and children hospital, administrator in transport,
animal husbandry.

99. Sun, Venus, Saturn : (21-53-20)-(24-00-00). Much afflicted by
bad things or poison, weakness, pains in the duct, leather, skin,
hides, physician for skin diseases , lethal, chamber, slaughter house,
canning the non vegetarian food.
100. Sun, Venus, Mercury : (24-00-00)-(25-23-20). Tremblings,
palpitation of the heart, pains in the back, nervous debility, sanitary
engineer, chemical engineer, salesman for drugs.
According to the position of Kethu, one is to give the results.
102. Sun, Sun, Sun : (26-40-00)-(27-20-00). Generally healthy
constitution, rapid recovery when ill, seat of affection, heart, spinal
column, thereby causing palpitation, heart disease, spinal meningitis,
sunstroke, disease of eye, brain fever, typhoid, etc.
Permanent position in life, seeks highest position in commerce or
Government, Managing Director, Chief Administrator, ruler, dictator,
gets cooperation from subordinates, dauntless speculator, earnest
lover, passionate, jeweller, precious metals, physician, medical
department, police, cinema and games etc.
pressure, dropsy, eruption on face, poxes, pus, dysentery,
boils, pustules, cyst, abscess, blister.
- Service in shipping, navy commander, ship master, deals in
liquids, tonics, marine engineer, mechanical engineer.
good appearance, fair complexion, potty disposition, energetic, very
violent, over optimistic, bold, unfit for subordinate jobs, always
tendency to boss over others, wealthy, stock-exchange, loss in
lottery, war material.
Military or police, defence department, military high command,
successful surgeon, pain in back, venereal distemper, gives landed
property, higher education, frequent long journey.

Cardinal thrombosis or surgical aid, pain in the head, epilepsy,
meningitis, injury in the head and chest, fits.
105. Sun, Sun, Rahu : (29-13-20)-(30-00-00). Leading tendency,
disposed towards other's wife, plague, jail department, heart disease,
giddiness, high fever, unpleasant domestic environments, palpitation,
regurgitation.
VIRGO
106. Mercury, Sun, Rahu : (0)-(1 -13-20). Careless about diet,
abdominal diseases intestinal trouble, typhoid, cough due to gas, a
little nervous debility, accountant in jail or in such department
indicated by Rahu according to its position in horoscope, medical
department, nervous system, designer, engineer, consultant,
contractor for supplies to the above departments.
107. Mercury, Sun, Jupiter : (1-13-20)-(3-00-00). Flatulence,
never careful about diet, overeating, defect in assimilation on
digestive system, schoolmaster, interpreter, registrar, journalist,
inspector of schools, banks, income tax office, revenue department,
preacher of religion.
108. Mercury, Sun, Saturn : (3-00-00)-(5-6-40). Reckless about
diet, eats anything and everything, tapeworm (it is only in those who
take mutton) mines engineer, coal dealers, watchmen night workers.
In press, they deal with lead, that is linotypist. composer, handwriting
expert, forgery.
109. Mercury, Sun, Mercury : (5-6-40)-(7-00-00). Nervous
breakdown, ulcer in mouth due to ulcer in stomach, irregular intake of
food at short intervals, writer, literature, literary people, interpreter,
messenger, postman.
110. Mercury, Sun, Kethu : (7-00-00)-(7-46-40). Food poisoning,
diarrhea, sprue. For profession see the position of Kethu in the
horoscope and then predict.
very active, good health, vitamin 'B' deficiency and gas formation.
Dance, artist, worker, sweet-maker, confectionery.

112. Mercury, Moon, Moon : (10-00-00)-(1 1-6-40). Trouble in the
intestine and also in the breast. Hypochondria (think while walking
and imagine being ever sick), Chyle defective, avoid worries and
discontentment, avoid alcohol, clearing agency (mostly shipping),
textile, engineer in waterworks.
113. Mercury, Moon, Mars : (1 1-6-40)-(1 1-53-20). Bleeding piles,
irritation, ulcer in intestines, dealers in fluids, boilers, mechanical
engineers, and marine engineers, those who manufacture printing ink
(press ink). Agent to supply fish, prefers very hot drink and food.
according to the position of Rahu in the horoscope.
Overeating, diarrhea, cancer in intestines, poor assimilation, (without
Jupiter cancer cannot appear. Jupiter also always covers digestive
system and gives excess, expansion fat etc.) Those who print for
others, publisher, and gives royalty. Navy accountant, connected with
port-trust and also manage in textile mill, cloth merchant or agent.
116. Mercury, Moon, Saturn : (15-40-00)-(1 7-46-40). Causes
constipation, completely driesup, flatulence, pain , chronic
disease, gas formation. Diggers (of wells, canals). Excavators,
geologists, mine engineers. Those who are agents to supply liquid fuel
to railways, kerosene, diesel oil. Advisers to give courage to commit
forgery.
117. Mercury, Moon, Mercury (17-46-40)-(1 9-40-00). Nervous
breakdown, very poor digestion, very poor memory, feeling uneasy
and restless, irregular timing for diet, disorder of bowels. Personal
assistant, personal clerk, camp clerk, messenger, engaged orator
(who are paid money for speeches), Engineer, salesman, midwife
(moon for nurse and mercury for assistance).
118. Mercury, Moon, Kethu : (19-40-00)-(20-26-40). Predict
after finding out the position of Kethu in the horoscope.

119. Mercury, Moon, Venus : (20-26-40)-(22-40-00). Excessive
intake of greens, sweets, drinks, Round worms. Due to drinks upset of
bowels, sugarcane juice rather all sweet juices, shipping, marine,
textile engineers, manufacturers of glass or spectacles. Artificial
textiles like silk (soft, bright, beautiful), painting on cloth.
Mechanical engineer, marine engineer, nurse in medical department,
agent to supply goods to Government, Nervous department in a
Hospital.
intestinal part, surgical aid needed, mostly duodenal ulcer, takes care
of diet, typing, printing press, military accounts, mechanical or military
engineer, mind to save money by black market, attaches more value
to money, finds fault with others.
122. Mercury, Mars, Rahu : (24-6-40)-(26-6-40). Note which
planet is represented by Rahu and then whatever that planet and
Mars and Mercury combination indicate is the result. Suppose the
sublord is Venus, this combination is in GEMINI so the result will be
given accordingly. Suppose sublord is Saturn then this combination is
in VIRGO and result is given accordingly. This is the way how you
should proceed in the case when node is a sublord of any
combination in any sign of the Zodiac.
123. Mercury, Mars, Jupiter : (26-6-40)-(27-53-20). Mentally very
quick, commercial instinct (Mercury-instinct, lord of 1 and 10), Jupiter
(Bank Administration and lord of 4 and 7 and Mars industry) Good
health, if Jupiter, the sublord is also a significator of 6th house, then
only Cancer in old age .Profitable investment, automatic accumulation
of money. Has own ideals in selecting a partner in business or wife/
husband. Publisher, accountant in a bank, vice principal, professor,
administrative department in engineering, accounts or defence
department. A perSon who goes round and round and preaches
religion.
selfish, commits forgery, theft, black market, Health not good,

worms in intestines constipation, works very hard, miserly, feels shy in
a crowd, avoids or shuns society. Good in mathematics, statistics,
physics, dynamics, mines engineering, Hookworm, chronic disease,
(finger print office, CID, CBI (for government service SUN should also
be connected) If ascendant falls at this point he himself is a thief,
forger and if 6th or 1 0th houses are connected then in CID / CBI
department.
LIBRA
125. Venus, Mars, Mercury : (00-00-00)-(1 -53-20). Care more for
peace and pleasure and harmony. (Libra being for balance) mental
equilibrium, Compares and contrasts, correct intuition. Brilliant, good
health. Boring people by giving meticulous details. Very good to write
and publish books. (Mercury to write and paper, Mars and Mercury to
print), Hernia. Being 7th sign of the Zodiac, business with partners as
sublord mercury is for plurality, advises and assists hence a good
adviser. Story writer, Venus for love and beauty and passion and the
7th sign hence good in love affairs. Mercury being wavering and lord
of 12th to this sign, he never gives his opinion, keeps it secret and
never makes selection. Uterus removal why, because this sign shows
the part and sub lord Mercury being lord of 12 is for loss and Mars is
to cut, hence removal.
whomsoever KETHU represents in the horoscope that planet along
Mars and Venus should indicate the result. Spines would be affected.
127. Venus, Mars, Venus : (2-40-00)-(4-53-20). Level headed,
dispassionate personal comforts, helps others, pleasant nature, fond
of opposite sex, (Mars & Venus indicate greens) Venus shows
eatables hence appendicitis due to eating of green vegetables etc.,
spendthrift, able salesman, popular. Business with partners. Why?
Because Venus is lord of 1 and 8 (partner's money and Mars lord of 2
and 7, your money and 1 and 6 show self and partner. Dealer in 2nd
hand goods (vehicles Venus and mars for 2nd hand goods and

their repairs). Venus being indicator of pleasantness and Mars lord of
2 and 7 (2nd is for speech) so when both speak it is conversation
hence pleasant conversationalist. Sincere, Enjoys in full.
128. Venus, Mars, Sun : (4-53-20)-(5-33-20). Ulcer in the urinary
tract, lower abdominal region, Transport department (Sun for
Government office, Venus for vehicle and Mars for authority,
administration). Loco-shed, military truck / van, magnanimous and
sincere. Mars is for muscles and Sun for energy hence very good
health. Such people should not employ opposite sex as their private
secretary because they have no control. Here if the sublord Sun is
deposited in the constellation of a planet in fixed sign then locoshed
service as fixed is for service which gives fixed income. If it is
deposited in the constellation of a common sign they fly, goes and
comes back, if it is in movable sign then he leaves and takes thatjob.
Movable sign shows business.
129. Venus, Mars, Moon : (5-33-20)-(6-40-00). Helps others,
politician, fertile imagination, gentile, susceptible to all disease as
there is no resistance, If moon is a significator of 6th house then
difficulty in monthly period for Ladies. Satisfies the partner. Most
lovable. If Moon is the sublord of 5 h cusp, then sincere in love affairs.
130. Venus, Rahu, Rahu : (6-40-00)-(8-40-00). Whatever planet
is represented by Rahu, that planet and the combination of Venus
should offer the result, Venus and Rahu go in for not productive and
barren hence birth control. Jupiter & Rahu is for birth control and if
Rahu is connected with mars then they will have surgical aid to see
that no more child is produced. Similarly see what other planets are
connected with Rahu and predict accordingly.
131 to 138: As it is done for Arudra, you can predict for
each sub in Rahu star (Swathi) from 8-40-00 to 20-00-00.
139 Venus, Jupiter, Jupiter : (20-00-00)-(21 -46-40). Health very
good, spend thrift, beautiful and a charming figure, very generous and
noble, always for plenty, ifJupiter is significator of

6th house then the diseases it gives is Cancer. Hernia, enlargement of
glands in lower abdominal region. Judge, income tax / hire purchase,
broker, money lender, professor in ladies college, cashier in ladies
club. True and honest people, marries one who may love
140. Venus, Jupiter, Saturn : (21-46-40)-(23-53-20). If Saturn is
significator of 2, 7 and badakasthana then infantile mortality
otherwise very good life with all comforts. Chronic (SAT) disease,
kidney, loins trouble, internal part damaged hence uterus removed.
Insincere, unreliable, Most diplomatic, hypocrite, Never an extreme,
Selfish, self centered. Any subordinate in revenue department, bank,
court, law, transport departments as Saturn is for servant, Jupiter for
administration, Skin / hides merchant as Venus is for skin, Saturn for
death, Jupiter for trade / shop. If Jupiter is significator of 2nd house,
he deals with money purse, 3rd with gloves. 12th shoes and 7th
belts. Hence supplier / manufacturer / shopkeeper dealing with these
items.
141. Venus, Jupiter, Mercury : (23-53-20)-(25-46-40). Supremely
intelligent. Very noble master for his servants, always- touring, pleasant
conversationalist, enjoys life in full. Most lovable. Very good adviser -
legal or Income-tax. Takes enough precaution (mercury) hence avoids
diseases, especially epidemic. Able salesman, comedy/novel writer.
Propaganda, publicity. If mercury is the sublord of 5th house then many
children, or love affairs with many, Wealthy, Income-tax, high-court,
AGCR, audit / accounts departments, twin birth, plastic, glass, mirror,
engineers.
142. Venus, Jupiter, Kethu : (25-46-40)-(26-33-20). Kethu is for
abortion, Faces difficulties, blackmailing, secret enemies, signs papers
which he should not have signed and gets into trouble.
143. Venus, Jupiter, Venus : (26-33-20)-(28-46-40). Ever trying
for peace, never quarreling, proper judgement, correct action, good
judge, assessment in Income-tax office. Transport or Loan
department in a bank. Air travel / Airport as Jupiter is for Air, Ether,
Akasa. Very good health, normally does not suffer from disease,
everything takes easy and everything is prearranged

for him, has all comforts, becomes very rich. Neither with brother nor
with neighbours he will have peaceful life.
144. Venus, Jupiter, Sun : (28-46-40)-(29-26-40). Robust health.
Very beautiful to look at, generous and magnanimous, chemical /
drugs / pharmaceutical dealer, income tax, salestax, revenue
department, court, religious endowment, hospitals, (nurse-sun and
moon for common cusps for this), Marries one whom he loves, Jupiter
for development, sun and Venus a combination for social gathering.
Security in service because of Sun (Steady, Stability).
midwife, Navy/shipping as moon is for liquid, water, politician because
Jupiter and Venus are called celestial ministers, kidney trouble,
bladder trouble, puss in urine if Saturn aspects; clubs, society, crowds
etc. Administrative officer in petrol, liquids, refined oils. Moon, Sun
and Venus being luminaries hence for vision, manufacturers of
glasses, spectacles, mirrors etc. Moon is for business hence
successful businessman.
(SCORPIO)
146. Mars, Jupiter, Moon : (00-00-00)-(00-33-20). Plumpy (Jup.
is for fat) tall in figure. Very clever as Jupiter is for worldly wisdom,
God's grace, Moon for mind and Mars for quickness, always
optimistic, likes and dislikes strong. Disease in the bladder. For ladies,
profuse bleeding during monthly period. Complex mood in love affairs,
politics, banker, judge, vice principal as moon is for advice, Jupiter for
education and Mars for authority, as also it is the 8th sign of the
zodiac which shows him to be a family member of the institute / office
he is employed in (7th)
147. Mars, Jupiter, Mars : (0-33-20)-(1 -20-00). Commanding
(mars) appearance, sharp and curly hair. Muscular body (Mars) never
mindful of obstacles because mars is for rash, dash and crash.
Overcritical, self assertion, impulsive action. Get excited, quick
recovery from disease as mars is for quickness as well as resistance
and Jupiter is god's grace. Venereal distemper. Prostrate glands.

Makes large money, No mind to save, fortune favours. Expects
appreciation from lover. Keeps the partner in good cheer, Energetic.
148. Mars, Jupiter, Rahu : (1-20-00)-(3-20-00). According
to the planet which Rahu represents in his horoscope, prediction
should be made.
149. Mars, Saturn, Saturn : (3-20-00)-(5-26-40). Lean (Sat
for emaciations) tall, appear older than age (sat for old, chronic,
labour, idle etc) hence hardworking, gossip, funky (sat for no
courage), never interfering with others. (Scorpio being the sign
of sexual organ and watery also) hence piles and ovary diseases,
scanty flow of monthly to ladies. Very stingy (scorpion), Miserly
(Saturn), Mine and its products (Sat. for underground), metals.
As Saturn is for underground material and Scorpio is a Mars
sign for lands and estate so also Saturn therefore, deals with
agricultural estate and specifically for under ground bulbs like
potatoes, onions, carrots, turnips, groundnut etc., lacks sympathy
from lover.
150. Mars, Saturn, Mercury : (5-26-40)-(7-20-00). Long nose
(mercury), lean (Sat) thin chin (Sat lord of 3rd cusp for this lagna),
ever wavering because of Mercury. Never idle because of Mars
and Saturn, and Mercury lord of 8th and 11th, and 8th is for
labour. Resourceful (Mars for authority, power, Saturn for
confidence, trust and mercury for talk, contact) successful bargain.
Mars and Mercury for forgery in talk and documents and Saturn
knows no law. Service in fingerprint bureau, CBI, CID if meridian
falls at this degree but if ascendant falls at this point then he
himself a fifth columnist, spy, Saturn is always for stone and bone
hence diseases he would have are gravel, stone in bladder,
adenoids, (Mercury for paper) , inspection , accounts, plurity ? and
being lord of 8 and 11, Mars lord of 6th house keeps more than
one account to hide black money from government / partner in
business etc. Gives expression to his attachment to the lover but
wavering (Mercury), fluctuating bank position that is when 2nd
cusp falls at this position in Scorpio then mercury is lord of 12th
which shows expenses etc..

151. Mars, Saturn, Kethu : (7-20-00)-(8-6-40). Predict
according to the planet which is represented by Kethu in his
horoscope.
152. Mars, Saturn, Venus: (8-6-40)-(1 0-20-00). Good health,
robust, venereal distemper as Scorpio denotes sexual organ and
Saturn a chronic, Mars for boils and Venus kama hence ever
dreaming other sex. Impulsive due to Mars, appears to be plain due
to Venus but Saturn who knows no law and Mars is force, therefore
actually he is not. Venus for Kama, Saturn for secrecy, Mars for force
and therefore very loose in character, pleasant (due to Venus lord of
12) expenses. Sympathetic. Enjoys all comforts. Drinks much
(Scorpio is a watery sign, Mars and Saturn for intoxication and Venus
also for liquid. Service in slaughter house as Scorpio is 8th sign, (sign
of death) and Saturn is also there to kill and Mars to use sharp
weapon and also lord of 6th for service. Venus for skin, Saturn shows
killed skin that is hide, Mars is for tanning hence tanning of leather/
skin/hides. Eversilver, meat shop again Mars to use weapon (sharp)
and SAT to kill and 8th sign is for death. Also grave digger Scorpio for
grave and Saturn is to dig and Mars for sharp metal, that is spade or
any other such type.
153. Mars, Saturn, Sun: (10-20-00)-(1 1-00-00). Healthy body,
steady due to SUN, gets irritated due to Mars and Sun. Interested in
psychic (8th sign) subjects. Never follows old custom, Deals in wool /
hair dealer as Mars is for trade and also to cut, Saturn for hair. 8th
sign being a generative organ hence only when SUN is significator of
6th house. Sun is for Govt.. Dept., Saturn for under ground metal
hence dealer in mines and metals. Mars for authority, Saturn for death
and Sun for Govt. Dept., hence Death Registrar. Saturn for Secrecy,
Mars for Police, Military and authority, power and Sun Govt, hence
CID, CBI departments of the Govt., Blackmailing.
personality, broad face, medication/ concentration as Moon is lord of
9th Interest in mysteries of nature when 12th cusp falls here.

Lazy due to lame Saturn and puts off things to the last moment.
Proper intuition, prompt action, Puss (Moon - liquid and Saturn -
Puss and Mars - boil/cut etc.,) Gnorrhea, chronic_ ailment. Renal
stone (Sat for stone) Miserly, Moon for liquid Saturn for under ground
and to pierce through it for boring/excavation etc., hence petrol, oil
tank or well excavator. A little reserved, funky, partner leaves when
Ascendant or lagna falls here. Steady in love affairs.
155. Mars, Saturn, Mars: (12-6-40)-(12-53-20). Independent
(Mars) Arrogant and revengeful (Mars) Intelligent, never mindful of
obstacles, muscular body (Mars), good personality. If sixth cusp falls
here then bleeding piles. (Mars for blood and boil and Saturn shows a
chronic disease and Scorpio sign shows the part of the body.) Saturn
for stone, bladder shown by the sign hence stone in bladder. Saturn is
Yama, to cause death and level by piercing through the ground, Mars
is for land and machinery hence bulldozer/tractor to plough and also
level the ground/fields, Also all implements used to pierce the land
like spade etc., Saturn also shows filth hence to lay pipes for drain
and sewage underground. Saturn is through the ground and hidden
and Mars is also for roads and building hence a hidden road is a
tunnel. Proves to satisfy the partner. Deep meditation, working in
cremation / burial ground. Scorpio is 8th sign (for death,) grave
digger; Saturn is through the ground, to dig and also to do labour or
service. Officials in Secret Police because Mars is for police, SAT for
secrecy. Gallows, Jail, Causality ward, Scorpio 8th sign to show
danger and injury by Mars. Bone fracture because Saturn is for bone.
Remember 6th and 8th show disease and danger 6 and 10 for the
doctor who cures that disease.
indicates so shall be the prediction.
built body, clever, good imagination. Manager / administrator, owner
of mines. Philosopher (SAT). Interest in Psychic subjects / Will not
accept any theory. Non-interfering Analytic, thoughtful

and resourceful. Steady in love affairs and never a cheat JUPITER
when sublord and a significator of 6th cusp, it gives CANCER.
Incurable disease in the sexual organ denoted by Scorpio.
158. Mars, Mercury, Mercury: (16-40-00)-(1 8-33-20). Long
nose, clever, over critical, sharp in intelligence, quick grasp,
versatile, good lawyer / actor / salesman / Representative / liaison
officer. Revengeful due to Mars. Typist, Proof Reader, Press (as
Mercury is for paper, Type, print, publish and Mars is for
machinery.)
per KETHU you may offer the prediction.
160. Mars, Mercury, Venus: (19-20-00)-(21 -33-20). Beautiful,
muscular body, marine engineer, good personality, intuitive, frank and
plain. Fistula, complicated disease, venereal distemper, makes large
money and spends much also. Fortunate, sympathetic, expects
appreciation from partner. Most comfortable life, smooth life. Works in
Power Flouse, Sanitary Engineer, Bridge construction. Lays bricks for
lakes. Railway bridge construction. Tailor, ready-made cloth,
Goldsmith.
161. Mars, Mercury, Sun: (21-33-20)-(22-13-20). Military
Engineer, Mechanical engineer, Adviser, Healthy, round face,
intelligent, steady [Methodical, rational, practical. Quick recovery.
Steady income and Steady expenses. No fluctuations, steadiness in
love affairs. Govt. Press, Mint. Reserve Bank / incinerator to destroy
currency notes. Mercury is for paper and print and currency and Mars
a fiery planet to set fire to it. Sun and Mercury indicate notes and 8th
sign is for death. Epileptic (MARS and MERCURY for fits), violent
hysteria as MARS is for violence.
162. Mars, Mercury, Moon: (22-13-20)-(23-20-00). Very healthy
body, changeability due to Moon. Crossing floor. Fistula, bleeding
piles. Fisher in rectum. Moon & Mercury for textile, electric
engineering, powerhouse engineering, boiler and its inspector. Ink,
(Mercury to write, Moon the liquid and Mars for ribbon) dye, bridge /
construction contractor.

163. Mars, Mercury, Mars: (23-20-00)-(24-6-40). Well built body,
short and curly hair, intense feeling, emotion, self-assertion, impulsive
action, surgeon, stone, in bladder, kidney, Surgical aid for the womb/
ovaries. Extravagant, ever borrowing, purchases doubly (in
multiplicity, each item in plural numbers). Mechanical engineer. Press
technology, Iron Bridge construction using girders. Swinging bridge,
suspension bridge etc., Cost accountant, Inspector.
164. Mars, Mercury, Rahu: (24-6-40)-(26-6-40). Typhoid, warden/
superintendent in Jail. Apart form this any other result given by that
planet which Rahu represents.
165. Mars, Mercury, Jupiter: (26-6-40)-(27-53-20). strong and
healthy, stalwart. Talkative, versatile. Meditation (preacher and not
practising philosophy as JUPITER is to preach and SATURN to
practise it). Income-tax officer, auditor, chartered accountant, Press
Manager, Administration Department of engineering. Head in postal
department. Tele, cable and all forms of communication. Incurable
disease-complicated disease.
166. Mars, Mercury, Saturn: (27-53-20)-(30-00-00). Eyes deep
set, long nose, no cheek at all. Mercury is for both sides, Saturn is for
emaciation. Injury in hip bone. Chronic piles. Stone in bladder. No
comfort of bedding. No good furniture. Great interest in mysteries of
nature. Philosophical. Can meditate, concentrate, pray and also
hypnotise others. Forgery master. Handwriting experts. Service in
press. Mines engineer., Metal dealer. Stenographer MARS &
MERCURY for typing and SATURN to shorten. Deals in lead
(SATURN), drainage, sewerage. SATURN for cold, ice and watery
sign also hence frigidaire. MARS and MERCURY for mechanical
engineering.
SAGITTARIUS
167. Jupiter, Kethu, Kethu: (00-00-00)-(00-46-40). High
eyebrows and bushy hair. KETHU is for hair and abortion and this
sign being dual in nature it may be two abortions and also it may be
still born child and only delayed menses and no child, at

all. Bold, greedy, God fearing, Karma yoga, lung trouble, hiccough,
asthma, physician, speculation, spends much, cares more for society
than for family life. Allows much freedom to wife.
168. Jupiter, Kethu, Venus: (00-46-40)-(3-00-00). Well
proportional body, beautiful, enthusiastic and energetic, sincere, true,
honest, diabetes, earns by fair means, no black money, cares equally
for society and for wife.
169. Jupiter, Kethu, Sun: (3-00-00)-(3-40-00). Well developed
body, broad eyes, aspiring, ambitious, honest good vitality, good
health, quick recovery, bank, education, revenue, religious
Departments, steady in love affairs.
170. Jupiter, Kethu, Moon: (3-40-00)-(4-46-40). Timid, lack of
confidence, plumpy body yet charming appearance, flickering, lacks
decision, changeability, leading toT.B. Politics, bank-export, long
journey, change of residence, lacking morality, cannot be relied
upon in love affairs.
171. Jupiter, Kethu, Mars: (4-46-40)-(5-33-20). Well proportioned
body, muscular, optimistic, bold, dauntless, over confident, invalid
children, eosinophilia. Blood poisoning, surgeon, makes plenty of
money and equally spending it. Speculation fails. Abortion, anemic/
weak wife, impulsive. Neither integrity nor morality. Manager /
Director / traveller makes fortune in a foreign place.
172. Jupiter, Kethu, Rahu: (5-33-20)-(7-33-20). Find out
significators of Rahu and Kethu and offer the prediction accordingly.
173. Jupiter, Kethu, Jupiter: (7-33-20)-(9-20-00). Well built body,
commanding appearance, ambitious, confident, enthusiastic, never
gets disheartened, lumbago, trouble in lungs, CANCER, earns by fair
means, false prestige, donates much, revenue, religion, college,
physician.
174. Jupiter, Kethu, Saturn: (9-20-00)-(1 1-26-40). High
and bushy eyebrows, lean, beautiful, poor vitality, lazy, lethargic,

failures, obstacles, fracture in hip, rheumatic pain, asthma
philosopher, black money, speculation failure, miserly, beneficial
friends, very jealous of others, keeps accounts of other's money,
suspicious about wife / partner in business activities / character.
175. Jupiter, kethu, Mercury: (1 1 -26-40)-(1 3-20-00). Graceful
look, beautiful, lacking decision, versatile, crossing of floor, affection
of lungs, asthma, earns by all means. Many accounts to hide black
money. Successful speculation, gains through partner in business,
interest in games. Gives freedom to his wife. Accountant, author,
revenue/bank, teacher, journalist, astrologer.
handsome, well proportioned body, charming appearance, graceful
look, victory over enemies, becoming more and more confident,
sincere, not wavering, diabetes, gains in speculation, lottery, Midwife,
good in business, profitable, true to wife.
broad eyes, good complexion, energetic, good vitality magnanimous,
hiccough, long journey, higher studies, success in competitive
examinations, steady income, profitable speculation, true to wife,
integrity and morale.
178. Jupiter, Venus, Moon: (1 6-1 3-20)-(1 7-20-00). Plumpy body,
ear trouble, puss in ear, little, timid, fears unnecessarily, diabetes,
TB., slow recovery, unreliable, many love affairs, makes money by all
means. Satisfactory income, speculation, failure, false prestige. Petrol
pump, deals in rubber and milk.
179. Jupiter, Venus, Mars: (1 7-20-00)-(1 8-6-40). Well developed
body, graceful look, commanding appearance, most enthusiastic,
greedy, courageous, stealthy mind, quick recovery from disease.
Vomiting blood, loss by speculation earns by all means, most
extravagant, temper flares up. Both husband and wife very free. Most
social, person of non-integrity and no morals, Automobile, transport,
auditor, income tax officer, agent of bank, principal of a college,
religious head.

180. Jupiter, Venus, Rahu: (18-6-40)-(20-6-40). Predict
according to the planet RAHU signifies.
181. Jupiter, Venus, Jupiter (20-6-40)-(21 -53-20). Frumpy body,
charming appearance, tail, gigantic figure, very fair complexion, bold,
pushful, overconfident, GODDESS, fearing, most religious, traditional,
conventional, law abiding, true, sincere, most enthusiastic and
optimistic, quick recovery , CANCER in lungs, earns by fair means,
possesses estates but broker in estates if 7th cusp falls here. Man of
sterling character. Most harmonious wedded life, affectionate, Judge,
assessment officer, estimate officer, architect, designer, good in art,
music drawing, Animal Husbandry, breeding and expanding,
Manager, choultry to feed others, minister, popular, successful
politician.
182. Jupiter, Venus, Saturn:(21-53-20)-(24-00-00). Very fair but
lean, Asthma, fracture of hips of bones. A man who has no sperms;
zoospermia, hence barren and cannot produce children. Also cannot
satisfy the partner in life. Stealthy connections slaughter house,
abortions, mine and its products, transport, draftsman (SAT and
VENUS for drawing), statistics, intelligence department in the
Revenue department, enforcement staff in foreign exchange (Mars
also must be connected). Very mean in love affairs. Blackmailing,
Writing anonymous letter.
183. Jupiter, Venus, Mercury: (24-00-00)-(25-53-20). Long nose,
impressive eyes, charming appearance, changing ideas, very bad
subordinates as PA/PS/peon if the ascendant falls in this position.
Railway eng., accountant, auditor, income tax, vice principal, vice
chancellor, All India Radio (propagating and giving information etc.).
JUPITER & MERCURY for journalist, Mercury for music. Engineering,
transport, income tax and Revenue departments, Assistant, deputy,
joint, additional secretary or secretary himself, mint, currency, asst,
editor,
184. Jupiter, Venus, Kethu: (25-53-20)-(26-40-00). Find out
what KETHU signifies and predict accordingly.
185. Jupiter, Sun, Sun: (26-40-00)-(27-20-00), Plumpy body,
round face, commanding appearance, physician, medical

department, highly qualified, foreign qualification, quick recovery from
disease, much of vitality. In Reserve Bank, Government Colleges,
nationalised banks, ever progressing, prosperous, no invalid child
whereas in JUPITER, KETHU, MARS combination invalid child only
when MARS is sublord of 5th cusp and lord of 5 and 12. That is, for
SAGITTARIUS Lagnas, MARS is lord of 5 and 12.
186. Jupiter, Sun, Moon: (27-20-00)-(28-26-40). Graceful look,
fair complexion, changeability, never steady, never friendly with
parents, hates relatives, slow recovery from disease, lung trouble,
unsteady in love affairs, politician, minister, export/import, foreign
trade, foreign assignment higher education, sudden death, interest in
games and society.
proportioned body, Commanding appearance, fair complexion, over
optimistic, avaricious, energetic, injuries, venereal distemper, high
fever, fracture of arms, officer of Govt, service, success in competitive
examinations. Speculation failure, lawyer, judge, agent, love affairs
with high-class people.
Waste of money, overseas, fortune in a foreign place, divorce,
cheat, industrialist, principal, chief judge, manager of a bank, Animal
Husbandry.
188. Jupiter, Sun, Rahu: (29-13-20)-(30-00-00). You have to see
the planet connected with RAHU. And then offer the prediction.
CAPRICORN
189. Saturn, Sun, Rahu: (OO-OO-OO)-(OI -13-20). Predict
according to the planet represented by RAHU. Rahu represents jails
and this being a 10th sign, his profession may be connected with
jails,
190. Saturn, Sun, Jupiter: (1-1 3-20)-(3-00-00). If ascendant falls
here then the fellow should be magnanimous, materialistic, true,
honest and sincere. Not thin and lean but fatty as JUPITER is for
fatty bulky. Religious minded as SUN denotes uplift of soul,

Saturn for concentration and JUPITER for religion. In Education
Department, a philosopher, SUN for medical, JUPITER for progeny,
SAT for science, hence biology department also. Religious preacher,
fond of change. JUPITER being lord of 3 and 12 for this lagna Agent/
representative, touring job. when 2nd cusp falls here then Jupiter is
lord of 1 and 4, receipt of money through agriculture and teaching ,
professions. When 4th cusp falls here JUPITER is lord of 6 and 3 and
SUN lord of 11th house, gains through agency. Not good relations
with his neighbours. When the 5th cusp falls here, then JUP is lord of
4 and 7, SUN lord of 12 and SATURN lord of 5 and 6th, hence
children birth in, hospital under doctor's care. Speculative gains
through estate broker ship. When 6th cusp falls here, it is definitely
service in a bank (Nationalised or Reserve/State). As it is the movable
sign and for 10th also, In a reputed bank with name, fame and
reputation. Famous politician, economist, educationist, religious head
or its cap, JUPITER lord of 5 and 8 Cancer in the knee and bone
emaciation of fat at that part. Chronic gout, if 8th cusp fails here, then
JUP is lord of 7 and 10 shows business in partnership. Ever changing
place because it is a movable sign and JUPITER is lord of 3 and 12.
SUN being lord of 8th , would meet with obstacles, 1,2, 3, 8 and 12
being the houses conjointly denoted by this combination, issue of
cheque to the neighbour younger/brother/ sister is indicated. As far as
name, fame and reputation shown by 10th sign of the zodiac are
concerned, because of 8 and 12, loss of all this. No honour, no award.
SATURN gives position of trust, Sun for Govt, Jupiter for religion,
Education, Revenue, Law etc. also administrator, therefore, MLA,
MLC, MP etc. but not a minister as Mars being absent he can't have
any authority, Service in high-court, judge, education or revenue
depts. Or religious endowment boards. Honest, municipality, health/
sanitary inspector, councillor. If JUPITER is significator of 6th cusp
then CANCER in breast/lower part of lung or dislocation of knee cap
etc., Timid partner promised with gains.
191. Saturn, Sun, Saturn: (3-00-00)-(5-6-40). This combination
denotes 1, 2, 8. Ever in danger, SATURN, a death

inflicting cold, chronic planet, chronic disease, structure of bold
bones. Bushy eyebrows and profuse hair growth. Dealer in hair,
cement, metals, geologist. Archives, monuments antiques etc. CID,
CBI. Thin and lean, dishonest, cheat. Sun for meditation and Saturn
for concentration, therefore concentrated meditation. Disease would
be chronic due to SATURN, only when the 6th cusp falls at this point.
It can be bone fracture at the knee joints etc. or fracture of ribs of
breast, collapse of heart or lung, eosinophilia, pneumonia.
192. Saturn, Sun, Mercury: (5-6-40)-(7-00-00). If Ascendant
falls here then MERCURY is lord of 6 and 9. Saturn is for unlawful,
science, geology, bones, stones, cement, chronic etc. and SUN,
lord of 8th. Tall, chronic sickness, fake currency, Gains from
foreigners/father, long journeys, CID, CBI Depts, P & T Dept,
Business in partnership. Nervous debility, speech affected, Talks
less, underground tunnel/communication. Liar, Astrologer. Export
of hairs, cough, chronic asthma, orator, Govt., secret propagandist,
Govt. Publications. Scientific adviser to the Govt, heart attack.
Inheritance of willed property of a stranger or father. Labour in IAC.
193. Saturn, Sun, Kethu: (7-00-00)-(7-46-40). See which
planet is represented by KETHU and then offer the result
according the combination thus formed in the zodiac, sign, star
and sub. Kethu is abortive and confusion creating planet. Infantile
death, congestion in the heart and its collapse or uncertain
heartbeat are the resultant effects.
Venus for Air India and Saturn for Labour hence labour in the Air
India. Chronic skin diseases, deep-set eyes. SUN & VENUS for
social, Saturn to hide hence wants loneliness and away from the
crowd. Unsocial, Saturn for secrecy, Venus for passion, so secret
passions, love affairs, Venus being lord of 5 and 10, gains from
speculation with other's money (8th), skin/hide dealer. Sweet in talk
but reserved, thin and lean but beautiful: Govt, transport dept.
Chronic disease of skins at breast/patella, kneecaps etc., eatables

which grow underground like potato, groundnut, turnip, etc. Very
popular.
195. Saturn, Moon, Moon: (10-00-00)-(1 1-6-40). Timid, ever
changing, wavering, short life if MOON is also connected with
Badhakashthana. Never successful in first attempt, disappointed
and trading mind, adaptable. Puss in the knee or congestion in
the knee gout or dislocation of the knee cap/joint. Water in the
lower part of the lung, pessimist, business with partner. Partner
also timid. Very thick and thin with each other. Bony structure,
thin and lean, Ice, Business in cement, hair. Sanitary/sewerage
dept.; or electricity dept, in a municipality/corporation etc.
Devastating storm, Disease in the chest/breast specifically puss in
any part of the breast. Broken rib, Electronic dept.
Susceptible to accidents/injuries when moving in a vehicle, Wool
dealer, emaciation of the muscles of the knee cap. Blood
poisoning/clotting in the heart etc. Agriculture, tea estates,
intoxicating liquids. Popular, Military/Police, dealer in second hand
goods, bicycles. Gains from lands and estates and also from
transport. Boring equipment. Agricultural implements. Deficiency
of red blood corpuscles. Success in litigation/examination. This
10th sign being movable popular, minister, building contractor,
railways, estate broker. This earthy sign makes the native move
only when that act would give him some benefit otherwise not.
Partner, may be working girl. Hire/purchase of furniture etc.
rule for nodes should apply here. Delayed ambition. Disappointed
mind and pessimist. Confused, Service in Jail dept.
and 12 are the houses shown by this combination. Repayment of
loan, dangerous life leading, loss to the native and gain to the
partner, Partner in danger and sick. Frequent tours/short journeys
or changing of the house, Loss of prestige. Pujari in a Mandir/
Mosque or Gurudwara/ Church Eminent judge, educationist,
propagandist, publicity officer. Religious head.

Revenue Department dealing with death/estate duty etc. if JUPITER
is the significator of 6th cusp, if 6th cusp falls here, then Cancer in the
lung.
199. Saturn, Moon, Saturn: (15-40-00)-(1 7-46-40). Deadly Saturn
and Moon combination, as MOON is lord of 7 and SATURN gives life
as well as is prepared to take it out also being lord of 1 and 2. Thin and
lean, a bony structure Secretive and depressed mind, timid and
distressed partner. Short life, Separation from the partner. Puss in the
lung, injuries to knee or breast, emaciation of liquid in bones. Profuse
hair growth on the head and breast.
Coarse varieties of cloth merchant, accountant in agricultural dept.
Sanitary engineer. Wavering mind, depressed mind. Tall gains from
foreigner, father, wive's younger brother. Writer of secret novels,
weak nervous system. Bookseller, talkative, collation of secret
information. Shuns crowd, Chronic mental case, only if MERCURY is
a significator of 6th cusp.
rule applicable to nodes. Infantile death.
Speculative mind, Exchange broker, Beautiful eyes deep-set,
profuse hair growth on eyes, head and breast, Petrol, oil,
excavation. Business in cement, metal dealer. Soap, skin, hide
dealer. Sexually loose. Happy, popular, musician, etc.
203. Saturn, Moon, Sun: (22-40-00)-(23-2000). Short life, heart
attack, eosinophilia, chronic headache, injury to knees and puss
formed therein. Ever with obstacles danger to life. Slow and
steady, Position of trust. Business in partnership.
204. Saturn, Mars, Mars: (23-20-00)-(24-6-40). Muscular body
but thin and lean. Thief if lagna falls here but Police to catch the thief
if SUN is also connected and the 6th / 10th cusp falls here. Repairer
of old/ancient goods. Gains from land property and machinery parts.
Death by attack from thief/dacoit etc. using sharp weapons etc.
Dealer/manufacturer of weapons. Agricultural

equipment implements. Geologist, farmer, owner of landed property.
Labour on the farm. Sanitary attachment to the house. Fertilizer,
success in agriculture acquisition of landed property, and gain there
form. Success in education, examinations also (4&11). Danger to
your vehicle. Tractor / leveller, injury to knee, deficiency of red blood
corpuscles.
205. Saturn, Mars, Rahu: (24-6-40)-(26-6-40). As per the rules of
nodes, jail department for thieves and dacoits and law breakers.
206. Saturn, Mars, Jupiter: (26-6-40)-(27-53-20). Ever changing
his permanent residence. Principal / Headmaster. Philosopher of
name, fame and reputation. Department of Finance. Head of Police/
Military/ Finance Department, Religious endowment. Education
Department Expenditure on younger brother. Acquisition of landed
property, house, old furniture etc. If 6th cusp falls here then
manufacturer/dealer in these goods. Old and repaired goods dealer.
207. Saturn, Mars, Saturn:(27-53-20)-(30-00-00). Weapons of
stone age. Ancient and old weapon. Arms/Ammunition dealer or
manufacturer. Liar, Thief/dacoit. Knows no law arid quarrelsome. Deals
in lands and estates. Old hand goods or machinery dealer, Thin and
lean but stout and muscular body Liar secretive will not give his
opinion. Successful in disputes
AQUARIUS
208. Saturn, Mars, Mercury: (00-00-00)-(1 -53-20). Running pains
in different part of the body, arthritis, rheumatism, disorder in the
bowels. Mechanical Engineer, Mines Engineer. Industrialist, Death
Registrar.
out the position of Kethu and Accordingly read.
210. Saturn, Mars, Venus: (2-40-00)-(4-53-20). Pains and
swellings in the legs, knees, heart also afflicted. Deals in skins and
hides, manufacturer of shoes. Dealer in Antiques, Archaeology.

211. Saturn, Mars, Sun: (4-53-20)-(5-33-20). Blood inflamed,
rains, disorder, Gravel, Stone, Strangury, Geology, Mine, Defence
Department, disposes the dead.
212. Saturn, Mars, Moon: (5-33-20)-(6-40-00). Hysteria, boils,
swellings, pain in the legs and also in secret parts. Excavation of
wells, tanks, tunnels, pumpsets, dealing liquids.
houses signified by Rahu and the planet with which it is connected.
Accordingly, you have to read the results for 6 degrees 40 minutes to
20 degrees, in Aquarius. Refer to Arudra star in Gemini and you can
predict like that for each sub in Rahu Star (Sathabisha in Aquarius).
222. Saturn, Jupiter, Jupiter: (20-00-00)-(21 -46-40). Much of
blood in the body and corrupt one, many diseases, Lumbago, hip
pains. Philosopher, religion, teacher, banker, advocate, postmortem,
Surgeon.
223. Saturn, Jupiter, Saturn: (21-46-40)-(23-53-20). Disorder in
the head and teeth, defect in the ear, pains in the joints, swelling in
the leg, bruises, sore-throat. Service, no independent business,
college, Law Court, Schools, night school.
224. Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury: (23-53-20)-(25-46-20). Windy,
pain In the body, daily changing from one place to the other,
imaginative pain, upset of the digestive system. Journalist, Novelist,
Editor and Publisher, Bank Agent, Estate Broker, Consultant.
225. Saturn, Jupiter, Kethu: (25-46-20)-(26-33-20). Note
down the position of Kethu and Accordingly predict.
226. Saturn, Jupiter, Venus: (26-33-20)-(28-26-40). Due to
excess, indigestion, pains, flatulence, appendicitis, also heart
afflicted. Legal Adviser, Judge, Girls School, Drama, Cinema, Music.
227. Saturn, Jupiter, Sun: (28-46-40)-(29-26-40). Enlarged
heart, palpitation, low blood pressure, gravel, physician,

Government Service, Inspector, Education Department, Legal,
Steady income.
228. Saturn, Jupiter, Moon: (29-26-40)-(30-00-00). Epilepsy
hysterical trouble, fits, lumbago, dull pain in the lower abdominal
region, irregular menstrual complain. Politics, service in Bank, Orator,
fond of travels, constant change, roaming about, love / romance.
PISCES
229. Jupiter, Jupiter, Moon: (0-00-00)-(0-33-20). Fair
complexion, courteous disposition, Ever changing habits, unsteady,
tries to lead a peaceful life, affable, hospitable, tries to avoid anxiety,
reliable people, medium stature, fleshy face, full eyes, hair dark
brown to black, passionate, mysterious in their way of doing things,
love music scenery, like occupation that bring some kind of change
or where attention to details and completeness is necessary, works
in gardens, clothing, deals in fish, milk, etc., marine navy, (if Mars
connected) liver trouble, tumor in abdomen, intestine overworks etc.
230. Jupiter, Jupiter, Mars: (0-33-20)-(1 -20-00). Bold, emotional,
good health, Independent, Married life may be short (if Venus and
Saturn are badly placed.) . Quick in understanding, inspirational,
Independent auditors, ministers, judges, advocates, administrators,
etc.
231. Jupiter, Jupiter, Rahu: (1-20-00)-(3-20-00). Predict as,
per the position of RAHU.
232. Jupiter, Saturn, Saturn: (3-20-00)-(5-26-40).
Imaginative, reserved nature, anxious, patient discontentment,
economical, deals in corns, rich person.
233. Jupiter, Saturn, Mercury : (5-26-40)-(7-20-00), Stature more
than average, medium complexion, imaginative, hospitable,
intelligent, studious, learns without any instructor, traveller,
mathematician, learn occult sciences, respects others, married life
unhappy, often marries twice as first marriage ends in divorce,

suffers from malaria, round worms, hook worms, works as
engineer, accountant in mines, statistics.
234. Jupiter, Saturn, Kethu : (7-20-00)-(8-06-40). Predict as
per the position of kethu.
Diplomatic, selfish, chronic sufferers, damage to internal parts, works
on administrative side in oil companies, petrol pump (if Mars is
connected), disinfectants, condensers (if Moon connected).
236. Jupiter, Saturn, Sun : (10-20-00)-(1 1-00-00). Liberal, proud
and generous, fond of jewels, works in government in any capacity
like magistrate, goldsmith, mint etc. Suffers from Sunstroke,
Rehabilitation.
237. Jupiter, Saturn, Moon : (H-OO-OO)-(1 2-6-40). Pale
complexion, reserved person, cool temper, wavery and vacillating,
obstruction of lymphatic circulation. (If Saturn and moon connected
unfavourably) intestinal defects and diseases, varicose veins,
constipation, complication due to excess of drinks, works as a
mechanical engineer in water works, sewerage, sanitary inspector,
deals in Kerosene, agriculturists, preacher of oil ideas, follower of
tradition, serves in museum, stadium.
complexion with a red shade, muscular, bold and courageous but not
rash, impulsive or aggressive, patient, endurance, healthy, suffer from
smallpox. (If mars/Saturn connected badly). One commits murder due
to some provocation, ulcers in the intestines, hernia, appendicitis,
mines, mine ores, leather, works as an engineer in Mines, mason,
engravers, surveyors.
239. Jupiter, Saturn, Rahu : (12-53-20)-(1 4-53-20). Predict as
per the placement to Rahu.
240. Jupiter, Saturn, Jupiter : (1 4. -53-20)-(1 6-40-00). Healthy
body, (if Saturn and Jupiter are afflicted) impotent, constipation,
nausea and cancer, physician, broker of landed property, service in
banks, scientific laboratories, political offices,

mines owners, societies, clubs, birth control appliances,
propagandists.
241. Jupiter, Mercury, Mercury : (16-40-00)-(1 8-33-20).
Optimistic, always in spirits, broad minded, versatile, slow in forming
an opinion, but the decision is in-controversial, law, literature, contract
with engineers, journalist, export, import, editing, civil engineer,
mathematician, accounts, auditing, banking, good astrologer, (bad
disposition of Mercury and Jupiter) brings out disputes, leading to
litigation and troubles; suffers from vitamin 'B' deficiency, lack of
enzymes, Dyspepsia.
Predict as per the position of Kethu.
243. Jupiter, Mercury, Venus : (19-20-00)-(21 -33-20). Cheerful,
beautiful, handsome, many partners in business, social prestige, ever
smiling, large hearted, will have many friends, liked by all, fond of fine
arts and refinements, transport, deals in scented articles, painting,
earns through music, radio, transistor, gramophone, jewellery, dress
making, deals in rubber, opticians, stands surety for any body and
never gets entangled. Affliction in the eyes, nervous disease,
Hysteria, injuries may be caused by any vehicle, animals or birds
governed by Venus. Cinema, Analytical chemist, Broadcasting.
Generous, courteous, cheerful in nature, social, feels
pleasure in easy life, fond of company of opposite sex, art,
music and poetry, if Sun and Venus in conjunction are placed in
5, 7 or 9th shows wife having some disease in generative
system, If Sun and Venus have adverse aspect unpleasant
domestic life is indicated (depends on other aspects) eye sight,
heart disease, low blood pressure if afflicted by Saturn and high
blood-pressure if afflicted by Jupiter, Cardiac thrombosis, sharp
fevers, typhoid, epilepsy, sunstroke, chief engineer, accountantgeneral, publicity officers, inclination, to study astrology, astronomy,
engineering, mathematics, ambitious, studious, capable and inspiring.

245. Jupiter, Mercury, Moon : (22-13-20)-(23-20-00). Average
height, stout body hands, long and slender, dark hair with expressive
eyes thin and shrill voice, often looks younger than one's age,
intelligent, fertile imagination, deep feelings, emotion (if moon and
mercury are having bad aspect) lack of mental balance, indecision,
spreads false rumors, suffers from over anxiety, frequently changes,
learns many languages, short journeys, pessimistic imagination and
intuition increases with the advancement of age, speculative, upset
due to troubles in nervous or digestive system, by entering into a
wrong contract public criticism etc. unhappy dealings with relatives.
Persons suffer from eye trouble, asthma, cold, cough, colic pains,
worms, typhoid, gastric, nervous debility.
Serves in shipping department, water analysis or water supply
department, deals in fish, perfumes, kerosene, milk, farmers,
vegetable and fruit growers, an engineer in water works, novel
writings, inspectors of accounts, internal auditors.
246. Jupiter, mercury, Mars : (23-20-00)-(24-6-40). Medium
stature, healthy body, round eyes, waist narrow, lover of work,
completes duties assigned quickly, never lazy or lethargic, has an
ability to organise, humorous, ingenious, constructive, practical and
business like, great mental activity and intellectual powers, impulsive
and rash, gets irritated and irritates others also, suffers from fits,
epilepsy, brain disorders, piles, fissure, disputer, litigation, risky
venture, hasty decision leading to public scandal and criticism (if
aspects are bad); serves in the accounts or audit department; military
or mechanical engineering if aspects are good, person makes fortune
by quick buying and selling, by becoming a broker, bad aspects make
him loose through speculation, fraud, cheating etc., adding machine.
If Mars or Mercury has any connection with significator or of marriage
or partner in life, disharmony and manhandling of each other are
indicated, Microscope, printer, post and telegraph.
247. Jupiter, Mercury, Rahu : (24-6-40)-(26-6-40). Predict
according to the position of Rahu and the planet indicated by it. Work
in jails as accountant.

248. Jupiter, Mercury, Jupiter : (26-6-40)-(27-53-20). Well built
persons, in youth good growth, tall, stout, look younger than the
actual age, clear thinking, forethought and good judgement, dealing in
accounts, accountant in bank, advertising agent, auctioneer, books,
calendars, salesman, stationary, god fearing, law abiding, honest,
religious minded, liberal, journalist, correspondent, good astrologer,
administrative department in engineering, treasury, literature,
commerce, suffer due to excesses, frequent heart trouble, liver
complaints, jaundice abscess, dermatitis, catarrh, cough and
carbuncles.
249. Jupiter, Mercury, Saturn : (27-53-20)-(30-00-00). Thin built,
pale complexion, person looks older than the age, eyes deep set, if
mercury afflicted by Saturn produces ear troubles, fear complex,
deafness (puss in the ear). If Moon also is afflicted then, defective
speech, paralysis etc. Works as engineer, Old purana writers, Censor
Department, short-hand writer (if Mars connected) stenographer,
intelligence department, tale carriers: (If Venus connected) wood
cutters, teachers, scientists, mines owner, landed properties, scientific
laboratories, clubs, societies.
SUB USEFUL FOR DETAILED READING
(a) What each constellation signifies and (b) to each rasi born
which constellation are beneficial and which are disadvantageous are
to be understood first.
(1) A planet offers the results indicated by the lord of the
constellation more predominantly than what it denotes by its
occupation, ownership and nature. It is true that the expectations
according to the occupation and ownership of a planet fail in many
cases whereas certain events not indicated as above, happen which
in full, agree with those foreshadowed by the lord of the constellation.
Whenever there are planets in the constellation of the occupant or the
owner, such planets deposited in the constellation offers the result.
Occupants or owners do not offer the results of the houses but they
offer the results of the lord of the Constellation in which they are
deposited.

(2) When one carries on research, one comes to know that the
constellation needs further subdivision. Such a subdivision is called
"Sub"
If the constellation is compared to the bed of the river
then the ups and downs in the bed of the river is similar to the
sub.
The Thirupaur Kadal, i.e. the milky ocean was not genuine and
unadulterated. It contained both the Nectar and the deadly poison.
Similarly there are some portions (sub) in a constellation which
are most beneficial to a person and certain areas in the same
constellation which are disadvantageous to the same individual.
This can be explained by taking an example. Suppose in one's
horoscope Mars and Venus are the two significators for one's
marriage. Mars governs the stars Mrigasira Chithrai and Dhanishta;
Venus rules the constellations Bharani, Poorvaphalguni and
Poorvashada. Marriage proposal, negotiation, arrangement
settlement, celebration, etc., can happen only when the significators
transit in these constellations. But the sub in these stars show
precisely which will be done during the period when the significator
transits in a sub.
Mars transits in Poorvaphalguni, Poorvaphalguni extends
between 13°-20' and 26°-40' in Leo. The first sub of 2°13'-20" is
allotted to Venus, Negotiation stars: Elders discuss, when mars
passes on to the next sub, governed by the life giving Sun's sub, they
decide to proceed and fix up the marriage. When the significator
moves to the next sub, allotted to Moon, the terms are further
finalised. During the occasion when it passes in Mars sub, the
marriage Panda] is erected; goldsmith is asked to prepare
Thirumangalyam; silver and eversilver vessels are purchased; music
is arranged. When Mars is in Rahu's sub, invitation is posted. A few
close relatives arrive. When it passes on in Jupiter's sub, Marriage is
celebrated. Mars, during its stay in Saturn sub shows separation from
close relatives, departure of guests, etc., The couple is left alone
without interference or disturbance. Mars

passes on the Mercury sub and the couple go on short journeys. It
may be said as 'Honey Moon'. Then followed the days when Mars in
Venus star Kethu sub and they visit Vallabha Ganapathi's temple.
Thus, one of the significators transiting in the constellation of another
significator indicates one particular affair. The sub in that
constellations shows how the above matter takes shape, its progress
etc., and how it materialises.
Suppose a person has litigation in the court of law. Litigation will
be indicated by a few plants in his horoscope. When a planet transits
in a constellation ruled by the significator, it shows the various stages
as it passes sub after sub.
Let Mercury be a significator denoting dispute. When a planet,
say the other significator Saturn, transits in Mercury sub, the person
gives lawyer notice. When Saturn transits in Kethu's sub the person
receives a rejoinder. When it passes in Venus sub, he tries for
compromise. When it further proceeds and is in Sun's sub, he files the
suit. During the time when it is in Moon's sub, summons are served.
During the period when it passes in Mars sub, the judge takes up the
case; both sides go on arguing till Rahu sub is over. When it moves in
Jupiter's sub the parties enter to a compromise. Thus, it will be seen
that Mercury which indicates litigation, shows that when a planet
transits in its constellation, it refers all about the litigation. But the sub
mentions specifically and precisely the minute details of the matter
and gives useful and correct picture.
Suppose in the natal chart, there are two planets in one
constellation, but one is in the sub of a beneficial planet and the other
planet, is in the sub of an evil one. Then during the period of the
planet, in the sub of a benefic, it gives success, whereas during the
period of the planet in the sub of a malefic, it does harm in the same
affair, if the lord of the constellation indicates married life, when a
planet transits in favourable sub, one enjoys pleasure; if the same
planet or any other planet transits in unfavourable sub, results in
displeasure though constellation remains the same.

Suppose one is born in Pisces with Rahu and Jupiter in the
constellation Hastham ruled by lord of 5, Moon. Suppose, Rahu is in
the sub of Moon itself and Jupiter is in the sub of Saturn in Hastham
star. Then the lady will have a child born during Rahu Bhukthi and
none in Jupiter's sub period. Generally one will expect abortion during
Rahu's period and birth of child in Jupiter's period, as Jupiter is the
chief governor for children.
Let one be born in Virgo with Jupiter in Poorvaphalguni star ruled
by ford of 2 and 9, Venus; the sub, is that of Sun who owns the 12th
house and Saturn is in the same star Poorvaphalguni but in the sub of
Moon. Then during Jupiter's sub period, the native goes on a long
journey as sub of sun shows separation and life in a foreign place.
That which is in the sub of Moon, lord of 1 1 , promises reunion. Hence
during Saturn's sub period he returns home. Both the planets are in
12. Both are in the same constellation. Because the sub is different,
the result is different.
A person born in Aquarius purchases a car during the period of
the planet occupying the constellation belonging to the lord of i.e. 4,
Venus (Poorvaphalguni) and the sub of Jupiter ruling 11th house, But,
he disposes the same car when he runs the period of a planet in the
same star but the sub of Mars which owns the 3rd house. The
constellation lord refers to an object. Acquiring it or disposing it
depends on the sub.
Thus if one verifies, one can understand that the lord of the star
shows a particular matter and the sub indicates the details about the
same i.e. the success or failure; progress or not; whether one's
application is shelved or whether it is moving; that too favourably or
unfavourably.
This is one of the important findings of Krishnamurthi system.
Suppose one is born in Virgo. Moon and Mars are in the
constellation of lord of 2, Venus. Moon is in Poorvashada star,
governed by Venus (lord of 2) but is in the sub of Saturn (lord of 6). As
6th house is Vraya, 12 to 7 (7 indicating marriage) Moon

cannot give marriage. Mars is in the constellation of Venus, in
Poorvaphalguni, in the sub of Jupiter. Mars is lord of 8, Yet it gives
marriage. Therefore, it is not the lordship of a planet which is final
decisive factor. The lord of the constellation shows which matter the
planet signifies; what ever be the planet in that constellation, the
matter signified will be the same. The sub lord shows whether the
planet can be helpful or harmful, can bring success or cause failure;
can delay or deny; cause union or separation etc. This method of
prediction is indeed, a discovery. This alone comes correct. Tradition is
no good: never useful; nor scientific. So tradition cannot be applied
universally.
BEHAVIOUR OF PLANETS
To make the book handy, this chapter is written in a concise form.
One can find that different results are offered by the same planet as it
occupies the constellation owned by those ruling different houses
(Bhavas) in the chart. There are 12 houses and 27 constellations.
These 27 constellations are governed by 9 planets. Therefore, a
planet offers results after the corresponding modification due to its
position in a particular constellation, which is ruled by planet
governing certain house or houses in the chart.
One should take the following delineations at the time of
judgement.
Whether the planet is strong or weak by noting the sign in
which it is.
Whether it is in a favourable and beneficial sub or in
unfavourable sub.
Whether it is conjoined with any other planet.
Then nature of the planet whether it is a benefit or a malefic.
Whether the sign occupied by the planet is fiery, earthy, airy or
watery; cardinal, fixed or common; fruitful or barren, masculine or
feminine; human or bestial; mute or voice; etc. and any house give
the results as is changed by the constellation lord. What results are
indicated by a planet in that star or while a planet

transits in that asterism. Suppose one is born in Taurus - Rishaba
Lagna, also suppose Sun is in Rohini, Venus in Mrigasira; Saturn in
Ashlesha, Then Sun gives the results of Moon governing Rohini,
owning 3rd house to Taurus. Sun gives such results given under
"Moon as the constellation lord of 3 Venus in Mrigasira governed by
Mars owning the 7th and 12th houses. Hence Venus will give both the
results given under "Mars as the constellation lord of 7 and Mars as
the constellation lord of 12th. Saturn in Ashlesha, for Taurus born, will
given the results given under "Mercury as the constellation lord of 2nd
and "Mercury as the constellation lord of 5th as Ashlesha is governed
by Mercury.
But, it is found, that the occupants are much stronger. So one is
to note down which houses are occupied by each planet. If Sun
occupies the 3rd house to say. Aquarius-born one is to read the
results given under Sun as the constellation lord of 7 and in 3; the
results indicated by Sun in 3 will be more predominant than Sun as
lord of 7. Both results will be enjoyed. Let us take another example,
Suppose one is born in Virgo; Sun owns the 12 house; suppose it is
occupying the 7th house. Then the results given under "Sun
constellation lord (of 7 or) in 7 will predominantly operate. Also results
given under Sun constellation lord of the 12th house to Virgo born will
be experienced Thus one is to consider in which house a planet is
posited.
Thus, one has to analyses, blend and modify the indications. The
following delineation is a general one.
In our experience after a long research, it is found that a
planet may occupy a house, for example,, the 11th house; but the
result offered by that planet during its dasa or bhukthi or anthra
and at the time when it receives aspects from other planets is
different, it causes loss and separation instead of profit and
pleasure. But the result that is experienced is not the same as the
house signifies. But one experiences predominantly the results of
the bhavas, signified by the lord of the constellation in which the
planet is posited in the horoscope. Therefore, the following results
without any other modification are given for each planet owning
different houses influencing the constellation lords

of the 12 houses. It will be helpful to the students to understand how a
planet offers results, completely changed by the lord of the
constellation and it is the lord of the sub which indicated whether the
matter signified by the planet is advantageous or disadvantageous. It
may be mentioned hereafter a planet as the constellation lord of 1 or 2
or 3 and so on. It means that the planet to that person, owns a
particular house, either Lagna or 2nd house or 3rd house and so on. It
governs three constellations. Any planet may occupy one of the 3
stars. So, this planet indicates the results of the lord of the
constellation who may own one house or two houses. Then give
importance to the house occupied by the planet. Read the results
given for that planet.
Let us take a third example. Suppose one is born in Capricorn,
Mars is occupying the 6th house. If a planet were to be situated in
one of the 3 stars governed by Mars Mrigasira, Chithrai Or Dhanishta,
then one is to read (a) Mars as constellation lord in 6 and (b) the
results given under Mars, constellation lord of 4 and constellation lord
of 11. Of these results the planets in the constellation of Mars will
predominantly give the results of the 6th house. It also includes the
other results given as the lord of 4 and 1 1 .
Rahu and Kethu will occupy a house. They govern the stars
Arudhra, Swathi, Sathabisha, Aswini, Maka and Moola. So planets
situated in these stars will offer the results as indicated by either Rahu
or Kethu according to the house occupied by them. Further one
should include the results of the lord of the constellation and then the
lord of the sign in which Rahu and Kethu is posited, it is explained in
the end of this chapter.
Summing up the explanation, let me put all these in a nutshell.
Note in which star a planet is; who is the lord of the constellation; in
which house this lord is posited and to which houses he is the
owner. Then read as follows; Lord of the constellation in
house (occupant). Lord of the constellation owing houses
(lordship). All the results indicated will be experienced during
the period of the planet situated in that constellation.

sun
Sun governs the stars Karthigai, Uthrapalguni and- Uthrashada
stars. Whatever be the planets and whichever house they own or
occupy, they will, when situated in SUN'S star, will predominantly offer
results of the house, portrayed by sun only. Suppose one is born in
Karkata Lagna and Sun is occupying Aries in the 10th house. A planet,
whatever it may be, will bestow - the results indicated by sun i.e. 10th
predominantly, than Sun as Lord of 2. Suppose Venus occupies
Karthikai star, then Venus gives the matters signified by 10th house
more predominantly than the matters indicated by 2nd house. Venus is
the source to fulfill such matters, according to its own ownership, nature
and occupation. By Sun in 1 or lord of 1 means if sun occupies the
Lagna Bhava or if Sun happens to be Lord of Lagna, the results given
under Sun in 1 or Lord of 1 are offered by a planet in Sun's stars to all
Lagna boms when, Sun is in 1 and to Leo boms when Sun is lord of 1.
Similarly a planet, in Uthrapalguni star will offer the results of the 5th
house matters, whatever be the Bhava it occupies, if Sun is in 5, to all
Lagna boms. Also the same results will be given if Sun is Lord of 5 i.e.,
for Aries lagna born alone.
Therefore, the results that are given below as Sun in 1 or lord of
1 means that these results will be given by any planet, situated in any
of the 3 stars of Sun viz. Karthikai, Uthraphalguni and Uthrashada
when its period or subperiod runs. If it is said merely 2 or 3 or 4 it
means a planet in the constellation Sun will give the results of the 2nd
house matters when Sun occupies or owns the 2nd house. By 3 it is
meant that a planet will give the matters of the 3rd house if it occupies
the constellation of Sun and when Sun either occupies or owns the
3rd house. Similarly for all planets one to read the results. Any planet
in Karthik or Uthraphalguni or Uthrashada Stars will offer the results
according the house occupied by Sun and also owned by Sun, as
below.
1. Sun in 1 or lord of 1, Generous, determined, frank, dignity,
independent, hopeful, good constitution, satisfactory immunity,

successful attempts, good relationship with officers, promotion,
smooth life, defective vision, boastful.
2. Inheritance, gain by one's Industry or through
Government or holding responsible position. Generous, social, fond
of sports and pleasure, if afflicted, loss of money, immoral life, nasty
talk, extravagant and impulsive expenses.
3. Commands respect, bold, courageous, gains through
relatives, good understanding with neighbours, success in agency,
good for business, creative, victory over enemies, good health,
reputation and honour. If afflicted, troubles, anxious, anonymous
petitions, false reports, difficulties.
4. Realise ambition, purchase of property, land or gain
through estate, inherits property. If afflicted, obstacles, troubles,
difficulty in old age, blood pressure, undomestic environments
and loss of property.
5. Gains through speculation, children, amusement, cinema
etc., During child birth difficulty. May go on journey to forest region,
intestinal disorders. If afflicted, loss, rivalry in courtship, difficulty
through love affairs and trouble with children.
6. Not good for health, weakness, gain through service,
promotion, chemistry, medicine, hospital, heart trouble, organic
trouble, intelligent, bold, victory over enemies, big family, selfesteem.
7. Success after marriage, magnanimous, determined,
permanent attachment, popular, litigation averted by arbitration,
compromise, gains through partners in business, if afflicted loose
morals, late marriage, henpecked, travels, both partners character
questionable; beneficial aspect shows virtues, two wives, illness to
partner, venereal disease, defective vision, displeasure from officials.
8. Better luck after marriage, gains by partnership. End by
self-sacrifice or any heroic action. Improves vitality, contributes
long life. Few children, if afflicted weak constitution, defective vision,

economical, violent end, in a female's chart the husband passes
away first, loss of wealth, immoral connection, litigation and poverty.
9. Religious, connection with colleges or legal department,
gains through travels, desire to carry out research, success in
overseas, sincere, constant in religious beliefs, self-reliance, increase
in popularity, does meritorious deeds, success in attempts, much selfacquired properties.
10. Increase in income, improvement in status, honour, and
authority. Independent, decent Inheritance, very steady improvement
in business, profession, promotion, good vitality, possesses jewels,
tactful, fond of music, arts, head of small society or village, success in
political life.
11. Ambitious, fulfills one's desire, respectful, loyal, honest
connection with people in power, hopeful, permanent friends, social
success, good business, many conveyance, unfriendly with
politicians, principled.
12. Success in medicine, chemistry, occult science.
Association with hospital, prison, sanatorium etc., Prefers to lead a
secluded life, self-sacrificing. If afflicted poverty, not straight forward,
likes widows, unscrupulous, dispute with parents, danger to children,
loss in foreign land.
Moon
The results of planets in Rohini or Hastham or Sravanam
governed by Moon, change according to Moon's occupation or
ownership.
1. Weak constitution, dyspepsia, disease in urinating,
defect in the ear, many brothers and sisters, worries, never steady,
ever changeful, fertile imagination, gains in business, happy
domestic life, good dreams. If afflicted, mental disease, danger
from water and liquids.
2. Increase in income, larger profits, happy sexual life,
versatile, handsome, intelligent, break in education, respected
by all, sweet speech, gains through ladies, mother etc.,

3. Popular, many sisters, good health. (If afflicted,
,53pep3i9) good education, bold, mind ever engaged and alert,
fond of journeys, changes, new surroundings, social life.
4. Gains through parents, happy domestic life, inherits,
popular, change of residence, over indulgence, gains from wet
land, possesses building, vehicle, etc., If afflicted, disappointment,
difficulties, theft, fraud, estrangement, loss of parents,
complications etc.,
5. Fond of pleasure, enjoys life in the society of children,
speculative mind, fond of music opera, swimming pool, handsome
wife, affects education, birth of many daughters, a good adviser, wise
decision, changeable affection, unsteady.
6. Weak health, susceptibility for infectious disease, lazy,
henpecked, suffers from dysentery, gas trouble, diarrhea, loss of
money, pressure from bank, misunderstanding with mother, loves
widows, pilfering habits, changes service, treachery, loss through pet
animals, poultry etc.,
7. The partner will be fond of change and travel. Unsettled
nature; engaged in public work; early marriage; fond of other ladies,
two wives, narrow outlook, jealousy; short journey and honeymoon.
8. Danger to mother, disharmony with maternal people, ill
health, lack of comforts, agony, loss through ladies, gains venereal
disease. Profitable transaction; receives the goods of the debt, lean
body, defective vision and short life.
9. Does meritorious deeds, success in attempts, becomes
popular, intelligent, builds temples and charitable institutions,
possesses lands, jewels, becomes wealthy, makes long voyages,
lives in foreign land, romantic and fanciful mind, good dreams,
psychic experiences.
10. Public life, changes business or profession, unstable,
becomes popular, increases inheritances, makes voyages,
charitable, loves widows, long life, respect for elders.

1 1 . Many friends, mostly reliable, only a few permanent ones,
gains through social life, politics, realises ambition, lucky children,
wide awake, well informed, gains by agriculture, principled.
12. Fond of occult subject, romance, indiscrete love affairs,
loss, gains through hospitals or isolated positions, makes voyages, illrepute, loss of money, mean behaviour, defective organ.
If a planet, say Mars, is in Hastham, and the Lagna of the person
is Scorpio and Moon occupies 11th house, Virgo, one has to consider
as follows:
Moon is lord of 9: Moon is in 11: The latter is more predominant.
So, the planet that is situated in Hastham (or Rohini or Sravanam)
offers the matters signified by 11th House bhava more predominantly
than the matters indicated by 9th house. These matters are fulfilled
through Mars, lord of 1 and 6. The source of fulfillment or
accomplishment is Mars, according to its nature, occupation and
ownership. The result is given by Moon when Moon's period or Sub
period runs.
MARS
Mrigasira, Chithrai and Danishta are governed by Mars. Planets
in these Stars will offer such results as given below depending on the
occupation or lordship of Mars.
1. Ambitious, aspiring, assertive, bold, rash, cruel, wicked,
burn or scar in the head, pilfering habits, commands respect,
danger to elders, wandering, both constructive and destructive.
2. Irritable, extravagant, increase in income, equal expenses,
education affected, mixes with wicked people, danger to partner,
gains through iron, steel, timber and chemicals, skill, promotion.
3. Very bold, danger to brother, wealth increases, success
in enterprise, victory over enemies, adulterous, fond of dancing
girls, danger during journey, if afflicted thoughts of suicide.
4. Loss of wealth, unhealthy to mother, chest pain, danger
during journey, Danger to parents, dispute in the family, brutal

and indecent in the treatment of ladies, loss by theft, fire, litigation
in property.
5. Surgical aid during delivery, good sportsman, muscular
exercise, rash, attraction to the opposite sex, over indulgence,
danger of injury to first child. Loss in speculation dispute with
children. Government displeasure, criminal activities, scandal.
6. Rich, plenty of lands, political life, success, victory over
enemies, unhealthy uncle, active, careless, inflammation, or injury,
loss through animals and poultry.
7. Unhealthy wife, piles, many brothers, intelligent, dispute
with ladies, evil friendship, long journey. If afflicted death of partner,
impetuous in love, loss through litigation, competition in business.
8. Defective vision, short life, loves dancing girls, loses
partner, danger to father, misery, unhappy, partner extravagant,
loss by fire and theft.
9. Loss in agriculture, short tempered father, sickly,
international trade, export, power and prestige-increases, danger of
violence, dreams distressful, a fanatic, skeptic, does not pay respects
to early religious teachings, enterprising, self-made.
10. Impulsive, intellectual, reasonable, independent,
courageous, gains through business, promotion, salesman, industrial
pursuit, head of a society, colony or town, makes money in
agriculture, owns estate.
11. Gains through agriculture, income increases, promotion,
prosperity, progress, popularity, well informed elder brothers, self
made, possesses property, a few reliable friends.
12. Danger, injury, scandal, treacherous, visits jails, liability
to imprisonment, cheat, loss of partner, sore eyes, difficulties.
MERCURY
If a planet is situate in any of the 3 stars Aslesha, Jyesta and
Revathi, governed by Mercury judge the result according to the
occupation and ownership of Mercury.

1. Good speech, learned, well informed, learns magic,
astronomy, astrology, mathematics, engineering etc., Studious
habits, changeable, Artist, adaptable, fertile imagination, journeys.
2. Gains by teaching, writing or by commission. Advertising,
stationery, books, press. Many children, acquires property,
stores, grain, happy.
3. Frequent short journeys, broad outlook, fond of reading,
teaching, anxious, mental development, many brothers, weak
body, deception.
4. Good in education, robust health; pleasant mother, new
friends, happy domestic life, but change of residence, no fixed,
abode, gains money through land, mine, estate, newspaper,
library, registrar office, etc., intelligent mother, ever changes the
car.
5. More of mental pleasure than of muscular one. Anyhow
worry, anxiety and obstacles. A Minister or an adviser, intelligent
children, success in attempts.
6. Petty quarrels, labour trouble, studies hygiene, chemistry,
medicine, active mind, overworks, nervous breakdown; suicidal
tendency, stomach trouble, dispute with maternal uncle; loss of
money through litigation; education affected, disease in the tips of
fingers.
7. Unsettled wedded life, partner more intelligent, shrewd,
partner younger, may be employed, marriage by advertisement,
litigation and legal dispute, If afflicted. Loss of vitality, showy, happy
mother, many vehicles, adulterous.
5. Troubles, difficulties, dispute, litigation with partners,
misunderstanding with neighbour; journey to attend funeral
ceremony, nervous breakdown; paralysis; long life, few children,
much wealth, popular, helps relatives.
9. Studious, higher education, success in long journeys;
life in foreign place; indecisive; high position; respected by public;
fortunate father; learns music.

10. Success in business; promotion; additional charge public
life; novelist; teacher; reporter, electrician-railway, antiquities,
research, promotion, possesses good house and vehicle, success in
education.
11. Owns much property, increases wealth, prosperous,
generous, charitable, respectful, many acquaintances, only a few
permanent friends, associates with youngsters; good in mathematics
and astrology.
12. Adulterous, danger to mother and uncle, poor number
of children, lazy, poverty, fond of occultism, secret arts,
unusual thoughts, petty quarrels, anxiety, scandal.
JUPITER
Punarvasu, Visaka and Poorvapathrapadha are governed by
Jupiter. If a planet is situated in any of the 3 stars one is to judge the
results according to the house occupied by Jupiter and also owned by
it.
1. Robust health, satisfactory financial position, providential
help, birth of children, reputation, advancement in career, good
education, grammar, politician, long life, stout body, optimistic, jovial,
honest, true, banker, physician, judge lawyer, teacher, theologian,
cashier, if afflicted suffers from cancer, impure blood, excessive
stoutness, plethora; (excessive in body).
2. Successful career, increase in income, prosperous, good
for business, gains influence, eloquent, liberal, charitable, gains
through banking, religion, education, insurance etc.
3. Philosophical, sympathetic, courteous, many brothers,
adopts all methods unscrupulously to gain one's object, addicted to
evil, likes the company of the other sex, gains through 3rd house
matters, advertising, publicity etc.
4. Happy domestic life, gains-through parents, successful
estates, possession of building, vehicle, cattle etc. Lucky mother,
success in education, happy end.

. 5. Good children, gains through love affairs, pleasant life, fond of
amusement, cinema, music etc., gains in speculation, wholesale
merchant, social success, political career, wise counsel.
6. Maintains health, if indisposed well attended, all comforts
given and gains during unhealthy period (One may ask how it is
possible to gain when one is ill. A friend of mine admitted himself in a
hospital during the period of the planet in the constellation of Jupiter,
occupying the 6th house in his horoscope. During the time, he made
friendship with a foreigner. On a later date the foreigner was
responsible to arrange foreign collaboration for his business. Thus
planets in the constellation of Jupiter when it is occupying the 6th
house good to the native.). Victory in election, adulterous, dyspeptic
trouble.
7. Partner well behaved and true, magnanimous, increase
in wealth, become very rich, reputation, success in agriculture,
gains through partners, good business, wins in litigation.
8. Loss of property, secret activities, narrow outlook, fond
of drinks, never afraid of misappropriation especially public
money, pretends to be honest and generous, prosperity after
marriage, gains by legacy, handle other's money freely.
9. Reputation, religious, lawful, correct intuition, clear thought,
philanthropic, good for travel, logical, optimistic, luck to father,
association with foreigners, a good adviser consultant, many children.
10. Noble birth, optimistic, influential, good business, political
life, sportsman, timely promotion, good relationship with higher
officials, social and financial success, does meritorious deeds,
possesses lands, vehicle, head of a village, command many servants.
1 1 . Good friends, well placed in life, gains through
Jupiterians, social success, popularity, realises ambition, birth of
children, learns music, masters it, possesses building, enjoys all
comforts.

12. Gains through law, medicine, occult subjects, service in
public institutions, visits hospitals and asylums. Connections with
foreigners, danger to children, or limited number of children,
enlargement of spleen, evil tendencies and scandal if afflicted.
Wanders, becomes a sanyasi, pious, in the end of life Moksha.
VENUS
Bharani, Poorvaphalguni and poorvashada are the 3 stars
governed by Venus. Planets occupying any of the 3 stars will give the
following results corresponding to the house which Venus has
occupied or owns.
1. Reliable, affectionate, emotional, social, fond of arts,
pleasure, music, fortune, fruitful,. Successful, mathematician, poet, if
afflicted defect in ovaries, kidneys, cheeks affected, diabetes,
accumulates wealth, purchases jewels, costly dress etc. Please the
partner in sex affairs.
2. Fortune, favour from ladies, higher officials, artists, etc.
Social success, marriage pleasant, purchases jewels, runs hotels,
found of adornment, luxuries, increase in wealth, happy married
life, charming wife, musician.
3. Brothers prosperous, liking for painting, cheerful,
optimistic, relatives and neighbours are favourable, saves money,
keeps health, if afflicted unhappy, poor, economical, unpopular,
dissatisfaction in married life.
4. Happy domestic life, prefers his own native place, easily
gets inheritance, possesses property, fortune, glutton, beautiful
mother, possesses cattle, plenty of milk and milky products, owns
estates, cars, service in transport, educational institution.
5. Birth of beautiful children especially daughters, talented
in music, gains through love affairs, speculation, investment, music,
summer resorts etc., A good administrator and adviser, danger to
mother.

6. Can maintain health, avoid excesses, no labour problem,
g9ins in maternity, nursing and maintaining pet animals, poultry etc.
Skin disease, kidney or ovary troubles, diabetes, wins in election,
victory over enemies, fond of ladies of all kinds.
7. Social and financial success, good partners, success in
business, public relation satisfactory, very clever in adultery, fond of
other women, over thinking of sexual pleasure, happy domestic life,
pleasantjourney. extravagant expenses.
8. Increase in income, ill-health to mother, successful
business, wealth through partner, God-fearing, profit by
legacy, insurance, fuel, forest, deals in wood, closet bathroom
fittings.
9. Sympathetic, obliging, higher education, successful,
good in music, arts, happy long journey, success in foreign land,
may marry out of caste or a foreigner, reputation, good fortune, head
of infantry, may fall in love with teacher's or purohit's daughter, high
position, honour.
10. Pleasing manners, popular, success with other sex,
permanent friends, never rubs on the wrong side, gain through
elders, and through music, happy domestic life, harmonies wedded
life, gain through jewelry, luxury, amusement, speculation,
decoration, possesses house, conveyance, some breaks in
education, few elder sisters, success in litigation.
11. Very rich, luxurious comforts, learned, possesses lands,
gains in agriculture, uses good conveyance, pleasant friend,
social success, prosperity after marriage.
12. Romantic life, investigates secret arts, gains through
charitable and public institution, enjoys peaceful life in seclusion,
happy and satisfactory sexual bliss, immoral tendencies in plenty,
does not reject women though low born, pleasant promises and
unworthy performance.
SATURN
Pushyam, Anuradha, and Uttarapathrapada (Uttrattathi) are
governed by Saturn. Saturn may occupy any house and own

tSo of the 12 bhavas. Whatever Saturn indicates by its occupation of
a particular bhave and the ownership of the two bhavas, will be
offered by the planets, in any of the 3 stars.
1 . Lazy, lethargic, abortive tendency, loss of children,
unscrupulous, adulterous, obstacles, wandering, poor, loss of wife if
afflicted, methodical, industrious, if ill-placed affection of the bone,
teeth, right ear, knees, spleen, constipation, rheumatism, stone in
gallbladder etc.
2. Maximum labour, minimum wages, uphill, struggle, lack
of money, success in estate, mine, investment, coal, lead
refrigeration etc. More than one wife. Break of education, fond of
drinking.
3. Increase in income, gains wealth, death of brother, victory
over enemies, success in litigation, diplomatic, mental control,
concentration very cautious, cares for truth.
4. Chronic disease to mother, loses ancestral property,
voyage to distant places, misfortune in his own land, scandal,
incomplete education, gains through oil seeds and black grains,
enmity with politician, seclusion at the end of life, if well posited and if
it receives good aspects from lords of 2, 7, 1 1 comes by treasure.
5. Abortive tendencies, still born child, may adopt,
disappointment in love affairs, likes only old people, in a female chart
it shows attraction to widowers, troubles through children, loss in
speculation, cinema, criminal prosecution, wandering often,
depressed, tale bearer.
6. Deaf, adamant, victory over enemies, court bird, increase
in income, popular, greater authority, chronic disease, loss
through animal and poultry, labour trouble.
7. Late marriage, sickly wife, fond of other's wives, pain in
the ear, prudent and faithful wife, steady in affection, poverty, misery,
loss by partnership, unsuited for business, always meets with
opposition, failure in litigation, miserable in election, scandal.

8. Loss of wealth, criminal activities, disputes, untold misery,
obstacles, disappointment, dejection, slow death, chronic disease,
distressing dreams, death of father, danger of drowning, unwieldy
sexual organ, adulterous, fond of drinks, leprosy, consumption,
asthma, danger to brother, dishonest, black marketer, secret activities.
9. Philosophical minded, detached attachment, scientific,
meditative, geology, mineralogy, occult subject, metaphysics,
renovates temple, irreligious, misfortune, unpleasant domestic life.
10. Speedy promotion to a high level, sudden reversal and
adversary, ambition for power and prestige. Industrious, yet financial
loss in business ultimately (in few cases it is found that Saturn in 10
for cinema actors and actresses, had given a very good lift and
income. But everything is lost and they lead a miserable life. So also
great politicians, and powerful people had Saturn in 10 , reached the
highest position and fell down to a depth much greater than the height
they climbed. It is similar, to a person climbing up a tree on the shore
of the sea, walk along the branch and fall into the sea, the depth of
which is much greater than the height that he climbed.). Chances to
visit holy places, enjoys life in foreign land, becomes the head of
religious institutions and ultimately becomes a sanyasi as he does not
own anything.
1 1 . Select friends, mostly elders, hopes fulfilled, becomes
rich, owns lands, political power, obstacles in education, danger to
elder brother, enjoys conveyance, vehicle, commands authority,
success in enterprises, promotion, influence, increase in income.
12. Life in a secluded place, danger of imprisonment, secret
inimical activities, downfall, loss, accidents, injury, secret sorrows,
disappointment in love affairs, dissatisfaction in sexual life, wasting
money for nasty purposes, vision defective, ill-health to children, weak
constitution, misery.

RAHU & KETU
As regards Rahu and Kethu, they indicate the results of the
planet with which they are conjoined. If no planet is in conjunction with
them they bestow the results of the planets aspecting them.
If Rahu or Kethu is neither conjoined with, nor aspected by any
planet, it offers the results of the lord of the constellation in which it
is deposited, and lastly the results of the sign. So one is to include
the results of Rahu or Kethu in a particular house along with those
of the lords of the constellation.
If the lord of the constellation is a benefic, one can expect
advantageous result. If the lord of the constellation or the planet
conjoined with or aspecting be a malefic, only undesirable results will
be experienced.
Rahu or Kethu gives the results to a much greater extent than
what the lord of the constellation can offer. Therefore imagine as
though the lord of the constellation is posited in that house in which
Rahu or Kethu was tenanted. Also imagine that the lord of the
constellation is posited in that bhava. And it gives the results to a
greater extent. Suppose one is born in Kumba lagna, Rahu is
posited in the 10th house in Anuradha constellation. And suppose
there is no planet in conjunction with nor any planet aspecting it;
then Rahu will produce the results of Saturn owning the 1st and 12th
houses and the results of the matters signified by the house
occupied by Saturn. When one has to give the results of Rahu one
has to imagine as though Rahu which is in Anuradha star will act as
an agent of Saturn or as though Saturn itself is in Anuradha. But it
Rahu were to be in Jyesta, then it has to represent Mercury. So,
imagine as though Mercury is in Jyesta and include the matters
signified by lord of 5 and 8: give more importance to the matters
indicated by that bhava occupied by Mercury. Thus one has to blend
the results andjudge properly before venturing a prediction.

HOW TO JUDGE WHETHER A PLANET IS
A BENEFIC OR A MALEFIC
Hindus are of opinion that Jupiter is the greatest benevolent
fortunate planet, Venus comes next. Unaffiliated Mercury and waxing
Moon are weak benefics. Hindus consider Sun and the other planets
Mars, Saturn, Rahu, and Kethu as malefics. Further according to
lordship, in Jathaka Chandrika the author claims that the lords of the
houses, 3, 6, 8 and 11 are malefics. By that he means, according to
me, that these are evil only for one's health and longevity and not for
other aspects in one's life. The same author says that the lords of the
houses 1, 5, 9 and 10 will produce advantageous results to a native
and classifies them as benefics.
Westerners do not agree with Hindus in considering Sun as a
malefic. They have classified Sun, Jupiter, Venus, Waxing, Moon and
Mercury as benefics and the other planets excluding Rahu and Kethu
(the Nodes) including Uranus and Neptune as malefics. They do not
attach importance to the houses which they own excepting that the
planet which forms an evil aspect is adverse and they judge a planet as
a benefic or malefic only from the aspects which they receive. They
claim that a planet even though by nature a malefic and by lordship
also owning the houses signifying undesirable matters, becomes a
benefic if it receives beneficial aspects and it is devoid of adverse ones
But according to krishnamurti system the differentiation and the
proper judgement to classify whether a planet is a benefic or a malefic
is as follows:
(1) A planet may be a benefic to the native but at the same time it
will cause evil results to his own near relative and thereby be a malefic
to such a relative. Food for one man is poison to the other. Similarly
benefic to a person does not mean that it can give good results to him,
to all his relatives and friends. For example, lord of 2 can give
promotion and also increase the

income whereas the same planet may cause death to his wife. Are we
to call this planet as a benefic or a malefic? A person may mint money
by releasing a book at a time when the significator of the 3rd house
operates. But it may cause separation from mother or bereavement In
some cases where lord of 3 is a ruling planet to father, father passes
away. Can we call the planet ruling the 3rd house or signifying the
matters of 3rd house as a benefic to him when he loses one of his
parents? Again the significator of the 4th house may operate. The
native may construct a house and occupy. On the day he occupies
the house, his son by mistake touches a live wire and passes away.
Both events happen on the same day. Can we call the lord of 4th as a
benefic or a malefic? Acquisition of a house is really pleasant but
losing a son on the same day appears to be not only an ill-omen but it
is actually an irreparable loss.
A person goes on a pilgrimage, with his two sons and has a dip in
the river Ganges, as lords of 9, 10 and 12 jointly operate. At the same
time, both the children are washed away in the speedy current of the
Ganges. No doubt till he had the dip in the Ganges, it was a pleasant
journey to him but the loss of the children due to the lordship of 6th
and 8th houses counted from the 5th house denoting health and
longevity of children is worse than the pleasure he had.
Thus it can be said that a benefic to the person may
be a malefic to one of his near relatives forming a member of the
family.
(2) If a person wants to find out which planet is a benefic and
which one a malefic to him without taking into consideration what it
does for others, then first of all we have to note down which he
considers as desirable results, agreeable to him. Every one, however
old he may be, would like to live for some more years. So, all would
wish to have a longer span of life to enjoy all the fruits of life. When
one is 60 years old, he would like to see that his responsibilities are
over by celebrating the marriage of his youngest daughter. He does it
and lives for some more years. Then he has the desire to celebrate
the marriage of the great

granddaughter and so on. Thus there is no end for one's
ambition and one never feels contented.
One may be wealthy, he may possess some crores of rupees. Even
then, he has got the ambition to multiply it. How does he think? When my
father left me 'X' crores of rupees and 1 have got 6 children, then is it not
my duty to make it '6X' crores of rupees and give each child, 'X' crore
rupees; then alone I will be doing my duty just like my father did. Look at
his ambition. He wants to multiply his wealth by six times.
When one tries to select a girl for marriage, what series of
qualifications he prescribes. No doubt ultimately he may marry one whom
others will avoid even to look at. Here also he wants to find out whether
the planets will please him by giving one Urvasi for him to marry.
When children are born he wishes that every child must come out
successful in competitive examination, hold high position etc. Thus, in
every walk of life and to every relative of his, he expects most brilliant
results. Therefore, one is to judge which planet signifies the various
matters and also the different relatives.
To ascertain, first of all, one is to take each planet and consider in
which constellation it is, the lord of the constellation and note in which
houses the lord of the constellation is, ownership and find out the matters
signified by the lord of the constellation according to its ownership of the
Bhava (never take into judgement where it is posited, its nature, etc.)
suppose you find that Sun rules the 8th house then the stars governed by
Sun are Karthigai, Uthiram and Uthrashada. Hence, any planet occupying
any of these 3 stars will be under the sway of Sun. Similarly, Mars to that
native will rule the 4th and the 1 1 th houses. It is said that planets owning
or occupying the 1 1th house will satisfy the native by offering such results
he expects. Therefore, planets under the sway of Mars by occupying one
of these stars of Mars i.e, Mrigasira, Chitra or Dhanishta will offer brilliant
results.
Now if a planet were to be in Chithrai and according
to Krishnarnurti svstem is in the sub of Saturn then the native will

surely gain and be happy because there will be neither delay nor
disappointment. But if .he same person has got another planet in the
same star just prior to it in the sub of Jupiter, this planet even though it
is under the sway of Mars and indicates the matters signified by the
houses 4 and 1 1, yet it brings loss, failure in attempts,
disappointment in life, partition, separation from partner, etc. as the
sub lord is Jupiter, i.e, the sub is governed by the planet indicating the
matters of the 12th house. Therefore, it is necessary to note whether
a planet is in the sub of a planet which promises agreeable results to
him or disadvantageous.
The planet must be considered as the source by which one's
desire may be fulfilled or may be disappointed. The planet is the
source of that event.
The lord of the constellation, i.e., the matters signified by the
houses governed by the lord of the constellation, will indicate the
matters. The lord of the constellation clearly shows what results one is
going to enjoy or experience. Therefore, the nature of the result is
indicated by the lord of the constellation.
The nature of the result may be viewed by the person as
desirable or undesirable. It the sublord is a benefic, then when the
matter indicated by the lord of the constellation if agreeable, the
person will enjoy in full. But it the lord of the constellation indicates
beneficial results and the sub lord shows adverse ones, then the star
of lords of 6 or 8 or 1 2 are evil.
If the planet is in a constellation denoting evil results but the sub
lord is a benefic, then even though lye may suffer yet temporarily,
during the period of the sub lord he has a little relief from the adverse
results. Suppose a camp clerk is serving under a hard task master
who uses to be harsh and short-tempered; then this poor man curses
his fate and years pass on. When the sub period of a planet
occupying the beneficial sub operates, during that time, the officer
goes on leave and he has temporarily no worry or he himself may
proceed on leave and forget the office for some time. Similarly a
temporary relief will be given if a

planet were to occupy a beneficial sub in that of the constellation
governed by the planet owning undesirable houses to a person.
Now one may ask which are the undesirable houses to a person ?
(a) As regards health, the significator of the ascendant should not
be the significator of the houses 6 or 8 or 12. Significators of
beneficial houses in the ascendant in good sub contribute to maintain
good health and allow him to livelong.
(b) Lord of second house will prove to be a benefic to the matter
signified by the second house, if it does not occupy the constellation
and sub of the significator of the houses 6, 8 and 12 counted from
lagna. Similarly, for each house we have to note whetherthe
significator of the house, is posited in the constellation and sub of the
significator of the houses 6, 8 and 12 counted from that particular
sign. If any planet is so posited or if it is conjoined with the lords of
such houses, the planet oilers adverse results signified by it by
lordship. The above is the general principle.
But according to Krishnamurti system the planet which is
considered to be a benefic by lordship offers the results signified by it,
through the planet deposited in its constellation. Beneficial planets
offer their results through the depositors in their constellation, only
when the sub is also governed by a benefic. If the sub is ruled by a
malefic the depositors cannot bring out favourable results. For
example, to a Scorpio-born. Jupiter is the lord of 2 and 5. Jupiter is not
only the chief governor for children but also by owning the houses 2
and 5 it signifies the birth of children to that person. Jupiter rules the
stars Punarvasu, Visaka and Poorvabadhrapada. If a planet occupy
any one of these stars then that planet has to offer the results
indicated by Jupiter. If the sub is governed by lord of 11 then the
person gets a child. But if the sub is ruled by lord of 12, no child will be
born during the period of the planet in the sub governed by lord of 12.
Therefore, a planet occupying Punarvasu Nakshathra and Mercury
sub will give a child. So one is to understand that the planet which
either

occupies a constellation or transits in a constellation, is the source by
which one has his desire fulfilled. The lord of the constellation
indicates the nature of the result, the sub shows whether it is
desirable or undesirable.
Hence Planet is the source, constellation indicates nature of the
result and the SUB is a deciding factor whether the matter is
favourable or not.
Unless the matter is favourable, we do not call it benefic.
Therefore, benefics are those which allow a native to enjoy and
occupy the constellation of the lords of those houses through which
he expects a result. A person who wants to publish books would like
to see that the third house is well fortified. Therefore, he considered
third house as a beneficial one for him. A press owner, an agent, a
representative, a secretary, a broker, a contractor all these people
should have a beneficial 3rd house. Therefore, Planets occupying the
constellation of those signifying 3rd house matters will be his benefics.
If we dispassionately observe, we find that certain
beneficial results to us are disadvantageous to our
relatives, etc.
Each house has to contribute certain aspects in one's life and so
every house is important. Therefore, the planet signifying the matters
of each house has to be well posited so that through such matters he
can have pleasure. If a house is afflicted, through that source, he will
have worry. If the 5th house Is spoiled, then the general principle that
lord of 5 will do good cannot be correct. Lord of 5 may be a benefic;
He can be by nature also a benefic, yet it need not necessarily offer
beneficial results to him as the lord of the constellation in which it is
posited will be detrimental to the child thereby causing anxiety to the
native. Hence no planet is wholly a benefic nor in full a malefic. It is
similar to the rose with thorns, A planet is said to be a malefic when
thorns are many A planet is a benefic when the thorns have fallen
down and the rose alone looks bright, without any bee, which may
perchance sting.

CUSPS AND SUBS - HOW TO JUDGE
If that point which rises in the east, which is called ascendant
happens to fall.
(1 ) In that sub, Lord of which is the significator of the ascendant
itself, it indicates whether one can maintain good health or not; One
can resist against infectious disease or not; One can come out
successful in his efforts or not; whether one's younger brother will
gain; mother can command the esteem of others, Children will have
higher studies or go overseas; or make long journey; wife or
competitors or partner will meet with any adverse results -any danger
to their lives, etc.
(2) If the sub lord of the Ascendant is the significator of the
ascendant and second house, one gains money; enters into service
or increases his bank position. Benefit accrues through industrious
activity.
(3) If the sub lord of the ascendant is the significator of the
ascendant and 3rd house, one has good mental development; gains
more knowledge by making frequent short journeys; attached to
brothers, neighbours, etc. relatives are also useful and helpful.
(4) If the sub lord of the Ascendant is the significator of houses
1 and 4, one has good education, studious, gains through estates,
mines, etc. will be benefited by ancestral property ; may entertain
occult investigations.
(5) If the sub lord of the ascendant is the significator of houses 1
and 5, one has much delight in sports, speculation and pleasurable
pursuit. One will be much attached to children.
(6) It the sub lord of the Ascendant is not only the significator of
lagna but also that of 6th house, one will have sickness; susceptible
to infection; Resistance very poor, recuperation takes times; Will not
attend to laws of hygiene; One will always have

pets; One will be attached to maternal uncle; servants, servant maid
etc. Wins litigation, election, etc.
(7) If the sub lord signifies 1 and 7, public enemies disappear,
there will be union; partnership; one will have benefit through wife or
partner; one would like to be always in the midst of other sex, There
will be marital happiness.
(8) If the sub lord is the significator of 1 and 8 one will meet with
danger. There will be accident and injury. One can have legacy, or
entangled money or gratuity, bonus, insurance, share of profit, arrears
of pay, etc. One will accumulate money; do business for others; There
will be occult experiences; mediumistic.
(9) If the sub lord of the ascendant is the significator of 1 and 9,
one likes his father, loves long journey; will have psychic experiences,
be religious - philosophical; higher thought subjects; graduates may
get doctorate; one likes science and research; one may have
prophetic dreams; gains through brother. In-law or wives relatives.
(1 0) If the sub lord of the ascendant is the significator or 1 and 1 0
houses, one does meritorious deed, held in high esteem: One will
have honour, award, prestige; one can come to the front of the public
and be popular; will rise to a high social and professional position.
There can be no indignity, no dishonour but high ambitions, very
auspicious for business and to be a statesman.
(11) If the sub lord of the ascendant is the significator of 1 and
11, large profits; large number of benefactors. One will assist others
and also be assisted by friends; enjoys one life: failure out of question
Cure to disease, speedy recovery and taking prophylactic medicines
preventing diseases, are promised. Hopes and wishes will be fulfilled.
Marriage to children; Prosperity and satisfaction.
(12) If the sub lord of the ascendant is the
significator of 1 and 12, there will be enough of troubles,
jealousy, secret inimical

activity, sorrows, everywhere hindrance and thereby impediments.
Liking to study occult science. Practise Yoga, go to unfrequented
place; prefers isolation: even for minor ailment hospitalisation: there is
the danger of imprisonment. One will be the cause of his own
undoing: one will be a victim for being cheated, swindles, etc. guard
against treachery, conspiracy, etc. one believes in Purchasing and
investing money than to keep in bank.
If the sub lord of the 2nd cusp is the significator of 1 and 2 then
the native will be finding it easy to make money by his personal
efforts; he will serve or do business and try to increase his bank
position. If the sub-lord of 2 is the significator of the houses 1 , 2 and 6
one enters into service or it should be significator of 10 without being
the significator of 7. If the significator of the 2nd cusp is the
significator of the houses 1, 7 and 10 one does business. If the sublord is the significator of 1, 2 and 12 and is connected with Sun or
moon or Venus one loses his vision. If connected with Saturn one
suffers from tooth ache. If Saturn and Moon are connected then one's
mouth will be foul smelling and he will have pyorrhoea.
If the sub-lord of the second cusp is the significator of the second
and the third, one can gain through education, writing, publicity,
Publication, journalism, brothers, colleagues, neighbours and by
taking up agencies, commission business, touring, salesman,
representative, short tours etc. But to younger brother there will be
loss. This sub-lord is very lucky to one's children.
If the sub-lord of the second cusp is the significator of the second
and the fourth house, then one gets estates and money as
inheritance and one will be anxious to own buildings, houses land,
mines, etc. One gains by such investments. One is successful in his
own place, permanent place of residence, automobile, transport, etc.
If the sub-lord of the second cusp is the significator
of 2nd and 5th houses, one gains through music opera, cinema,
pleasant

amusement, sport; entertainments, through younger people and
children. This planet will prove to be very lucky to children and,
mother.
If the sub-lord of the second cusp is the significator of the houses
2 and 6. one makes profit in any transaction. One can have enough of
overdraft facilities; come out successful in the election and gain. One
can deal with pet animals, poultry, public health departments,
medicine, all humanitarian service, gains through labour and labour
department. This is also very good to one's children.
If the sub-lord of 2nd cusp is the significator of 2 and 7 one gains
through partner in business or by marriage, one makes good profit in
contract business and in any manner dealing with others, Success in
litigation. One regains seniority, enemies meet with danger, slightly
good to children.
If the sub-lord of the second is the significator of the houses 2
and 8 one can gain, by legacy, Insurance bonus, gratuity or by will. If
the. same planet is the significator of the 9th house one loses money
due to bank failure. But if this is the significator of 1 !, gain is a certainty.
Children make fortune in their own place and possess property.
If the sub-lord of 2 is the significator of 2 and 9 one makes money
by export, and import by publication of books, by making long
journeys, by contacting foreigners, or by discovering some
Improvements and by patenting the same, One gains through religion,
temples, churches, science, relatives of partner, etc. Speculative gains
to children.
If sub-lord of the 2nd cusp is the significator of the second and
the tenth house, one makes steady progress, ever prosperous, gets
into Government service, or under taking any business, has honours,
awards, increase in reputation, success in all undertakings, Children
get into service or come out successful in competitive examination or
election or litigation.

If the sub-lord of the second cusp is the significator of the
houses 2 and 1 1 one makes money without much effort, gains
without pains, through speculation; friends oblige. There will be
accidental fortune like lottery where the investment is the minimum
and the gain is substantial. Equally it is lucky to children to gain by
business or win in litigation.
If the sub-lord of the second cusp is the significator of 2 and 1 2,
one can make money by serving in a sanatorium, asylum, hospital,
occult investigations, circus, jails, etc.; not good to children.
Thus one is to find out to which house a planet is the significator
and calmly judge what it can do.
CONSTELLATION AND SUB
Since the zodiac is of 360° and it is equally divided into 12
signs, each extending to 30° exactly, in each sign there will be, on the whole
2-1/4 constellations, as shown below.
In Aries
In Taurus
In Gemini
In Cancer
In Leo
In Virgo
in Libra
In Scorpio
In Sagittarius
In Capricorn
In Aquarius
In Pisces
: Aswini, Bharani and 1/4 of Karthik;
; Karthik3/4, Rohini and Mrigasiral/2
: Mrigasirisha 1/2, Arudhra, P Vasu 3/4.
: P. Vasu 1/4, Pushya and Ashlesha.
: Makha, P. P Guni and 1/4 of U. P Guni
: U. P Guni 3/4, Hastha, Chithra, 1/2 :
Chithra 1/2, Swathi, Visaka 3/4
: Visaka 1/4, Anuradha and Jyesta.
: Moola, P Shada and U. Shada 1/4
: U. Shada 3/4, Sravana, Dhanishta 1/2.
: Dhanishta 1/2, Sathabisha, P P Pada 3/4
: PP Pada 1/4, U.P. Pada, and Revathi.

Constellation needs consideration.
The sign is not very important. The house occupied by a planet
should be judged, taking in which constellation the planet is posited.
The role of the sign occupied by the planet is not so important, as that
of the constellation.
If a planet is in 12th bhava, it is said that it should cause
separation, loss, issue of cheque, etc. But actually there is reunion,
gain, receipt of cheques. Example is given below;
Jupiter Dasa 3 years 1 month 6 days.
This Gentleman had gains, fortune and success during
Saturn, Mars and Sun Sub periods; desirable benefits during

Jupiter and Mercury sub periods. But Kethu in 1 0, Venus in 1 1 and
Rahu in 4 gave untoward and undesirable results.
According to traditional system. Saturn and Sun must be the
worst. Jupiter also will fall in 12th bhava and ought to have been very
bad. Venus and Budha causing Dharma Karmadhipathi Rajayoga,
should give brilliant results. Rahu representing, Venus must cause
Rajayoga. Mars should be dangerous. This person was my friend for a
long number of years and such results alone opened my eyes.
In 1939, when I visited Coimbatore, I heard one Nadi reader,
reading the results of a few persons in his cottage. I understood that
planets' results were read as they were found in the bhavas. Then I
heard many Nadi readers. None made use of the constellation. While
reading the Nadi, I understood that without assigning the reason, the
results were read and they were astoundingly meticulously correct. For
the future, they gave the reasons taking the traditional methods of the
bhavas and the future proved to be mostly a failure. So I started the
research, collecting the horoscopes of old people with past events.
Such horoscopes as shown above threw the light. What is it? A
planet 'A' offers the results of the house occupied by that planet 'B'
which is the lord of the star wherein this planet 'A' is deposited.
Again trouble arose when 2, 3 or 4 planets are found in the same
constellation, as all the planets in the same star, though referring the
same matters, yet gave diametrically opposite results, i.e. if planets A,
B, C and D are in one constellation, in the same house, A and C gave
pleasant results whereas B and D gave just opposite results. This
made me think further. 1 found that a particular dasa is to cause
Rajayaga. But yet, he gets most desirable result, in some bhukties and
disadvantageous results in some Bhukties. Then I started doing
research and in all cases I found that planets, though they are in the
same constellation, yet a few are beneficial and a few unfavourable.
This caused me to further carry on the research. I found that every
constellation

must be divided in the manner I have said into 9 subs and each sub
having that area in a constellation in the proportion in which they are
allotted the number of years in Vimshottari dasa.
I proved that planets occupying any one constellation, has
connection with the Bhava occupied by the lord of the constellation,
These planets in that constellation are termed as the "Significators" of
the bhava occupied by the lord of the constellation. Thus if one works
out for all the planets then each planet is found to signify the matters
of a few houses.
Then judge each planet. The planet signifies a matter. Whether it
votes for the progress and prosperity of that matter or due to the sub
lord it is not capable of doing good, further it does harm to that bhava
signified by the planet, is to be studied.
This discovery has crowned me with success.
I say if a planet is the significator of lagna bhava, it gives long life,
success in attempts; it helps to maintain good health, if the sub lord is
not the significator of 6 or 8 or 12. If the sub lord of the planet signifies
6th house and if a planet shows lagna results and occupy such a sub
ruled by the significator of 6, he falls ill. The constellation refers to his
health, sub signifying 6 gives disease. If a planet signifies lagna bhava
and it is in the sub of the significator of 8, he meets with danger.
If the sub lord signifies 12th house and the significator of lagna is
in such a sub, one runs away, or one is imprisoned, or hospitalized.
Therefore constellation lord shows whom or which matter it
refers. But the deciding factor, good or bad, success or failure is
shown by the sub occupied by the significator.
Suppose a planet A is the significator of second bhava and it is in
the sub of 6 one borrows but if it is in the sub of 8 or 12, he lends to
others or repays loan.
If it is in the sub of 11, there is gain; of what? Either
money or son-in-law or daughter-in-law or child birth to the person. If

the significator of the second house is in the sub of the significator of 3,
through brother one gains, brother loses or gives away: if it is in the
sub of 4, one may have car or house during the period of the
significator in 2, in the sub of 4th house significator, in their conjoined
periods, if the significator of the 4th house which rules the sub and if it
is also the significator of 11, he purchases or acquires , if the sub lord
who is also the significator of 12 other than 4, he sells and converts the
permanent possession as liquid cash and his bank position improves
by losing the car or building, if the sub lord of the planet signifying
second house is the significator of 10 and 12, then lets his land for
tenancy or lets the house for rent. Why ? 10th house is the 4th to the
7th with whom you transact, so that which he takes Is given by you
(12) and he is indebted (6).
Suppose a planet is the significator of 7th house and if it is in the
sub of 2 or 1 1 one gains, there is reunion, one gets married, etc. If it is
in the sub of the significator of 12, separation or health to wife. If it in
the sub of 1 and 2, danger to partners's life. There can be 3 or 4 or any
number of significators for the 7th. Therefore during the period or sub
period of a planet in such a sub whose lord signifies 12th house, wife
fails ill-or the native goes away and separation is caused. If the sub
lord signifies 6th house, the wife goes away, thereby there is
separation.
If the planet is the significator of 7th house and sub of 4, partner
gains, makes money and earns name. If the significator of 7 is in the
sub of 5, partner makes money, friendship and enjoys pleasure, if the
sub is ruled by the significator of 8th house, there is either income or
danger to life. If that significator of 8th house is also significator of 5
partner gains. But significator of 8 is also significator of 1 and 7, it
means death as 8 and 1 are maraka house to the 7th.
Thus one should note separately what each planet signifies. Then
in which sub each planet is posited.
Finally one should take each house and judge, to which bhavas the
planet are the significators and the sub lords. Judge

calmly how each bhava is receiving good results from a
few and adverse from the rest.
Say, mother, father, child, etc. Mother is shown by4th house.
Father by 9th house, child by 5th house.
pic
So, note the significators of 4: so also the significators of 9 and
Let us take the above
chart. Kethu Dasa
balance 0-5-23
The constellation ruled by a planet indicates the matters,
signified by the bhava occupied or owned by it.
The sub lord occupied by a planet denotes whether it is
auspicious for the progress of that Bhava or inauspicious so that one
has obstacle or faces disappointment or negation of the matter.

This applies to all bhava results. If lagna is occupied by a planet
or owned by one and if a planet either the same lagnadhipathi or any
other planet is deposited in the occupants or owner's star, then they
indicate first house matters, the depositor in that constellation is in the
favourable sub matters indicated by lagna will thrive. Ifthe depositor in
that constellation is in unfavourable sub the matters indicated by the
lord of the constellation as per its occupation or ownership will suffer.
Lord of lagna is Sun: no planet is in lagna, Sun's stars are
Karthik, Uthraphalguni and Uthrashada. Planets, if deposited in
these stars will refer the matters signified by first house. If there is
no planet, Sun gives lagna bhava results.
In the above chart, there is no planet in Sun's star. Hence Sun
gives lagna results. Sun is in Moon's star. Moon is in 9 and owns 12.
Hence Sun mostly refers to the matters signified by 9 and 12 i.e. long
journey: staying outside: loss of father, permanent possession of
father, separation from father. Let us judge the death of his father.
Note the sub occupied by Sun. It is in Jupiter's sub, what can
Jupiter do to the 9th house? What can Jupiter do to the 12th house?
Jupiter is in Saturn's star. As Saturn is the Bhadhakasthanaadhipathi to 9, Jupiter indicates Bhadhaka to father. Therefore if a
constellation indicates father, then the sub of Jupiter in that
constellation indicates danger to father.
Therefore Sun in the constellation of Moon in 9 and sub of
Jupiter-the Bhadhaka to father, promises dangerto father.
9 house is owned by Mars. It governs Mrigasira, Chithra and
Dhanishta stars. Rahu and Mercury are in Mars star. Rahu is. in the
sub of Mars who denotes, longevity to father. Mercury is in the sub of
Saturn Bhadhaka to father. Hence Rahu is a benefic whereas
Mercury is evil.
To the longevity of father houses 2 and 7 counted from
9th is evil. Both are owned by Venus. Rahu occupies 2 (to 9). Mars

occupies Venus star; none in Rahu star, Mars is in the sub of Venus.
So it is harmful Rahu is in the sub of Mars; it is good.
Therefore Sun, Mercury, Mars are evil. Venus is in Jupiter sub.
Venus is also evil. (Venus is in the constellation of Kethu who
represents 4th and 9th houses. Therefore Venus indicates thA houses
9, 1 0 and 3 -danger to father.)
His father died during Sun Dasa Mercury Bhukthi Venus Anthra in
July 1952.
Let us judge 4th house. It is occupied by Sani and Kethu. It is
owned by Mars.
So planets in Saturn's stars Kethu stars and Mars stars are those
which refer 4th house matters.
Venus in Kethu star, Jupiter in Saturn star, Mercury in Mars star
indicate 4th house matters.
Venus is in the sub of Jupiter, Marakasthanadhipathi and
Venus is in Marakasthana to 4 (2nd from 4th).
Jupiter is in Venus sub. It is evil. Mercury is in Saturn sub. As
Saturn is in rapt conjunction with Kethu and Saturn is in the
constellation of (Mercury, lord of 8th from 4th) Mercury is evil Saturn
is also evil,
Now Venus, Mercury, Mars, Saturn, Moon, etc. refer 4th house
matters. It is. the lord of the sub which indicates whether 4th house
matter will thrive or not.
Venus is in 2 in the sub of lord of 2.
Mercury in the constellation of planet in 2 to 4, owner of 4 and in
sub of evil in 4.
Saturn in the sub of Jupiter and Kethu in the sub of Jupiter, both
occupying 4th house are evil. Hence he lost his mother during Venus
Dasa Mercury Bhukthi Saturn Anthra on 27-4-47.
Let us analyse the date of death of his mother. It was on 11-4- 47
when Venus Dasa (in the constellation of occupant of 4 and sub of the
occupant of 10) Mercury Bhukthi (constellation of

planet in 2 to 4 and sub of planet in 4) and anthra of Saturn which
refers the 4th house (to give life or cause death depending on the sub
which Saturn occupied) and it is in the sub of Mars and Shookshma of
Rahu in 10 which is also in the constellation of Mars in 2 to 4 and sub
of Mars.
Day of demise-Friday. Star Moolam where Dasanatha was
(Jupiter rasi Jupiter significator of 4 in Saturn star and sub of Venus in
2 to 4) at night when lagna was in Poorvashada 15° in Dhanus.
Death of child happened during Moon Dasa Jupiter Bhukthi
Rahu Anthra. Moon is in the constellation of Kethu and sub of
Mercury. Kethu has to give the results of planet with which it is
conjoined, as it is a node. Saturn is lord of 2 to 5 and situated in 12 to
5. Hence Moon is definitely evil as it is in the constellation of the node
representing the second house to the 5th and in the sub of lord of 7 to
5, situated in 2 to 5.
Jupiter is in the constellation of Saturn, lord of 2 in 12 to 5th
house and sub of Venus, which is the occupant of 5 in the
constellation of node in 12 to 5. Venus itself is evil to 5. Mars it Venus
star Venus sub is also evil. Rahu in Venus sign Mars star and Mars
sub is definitely evil.
Hence, Moon Dasa Jupiter Bhukthi Rahu Anthra was evil.
Let us take pleasant functions; Marriage
Judge houses 2,7, and 1 1 counted from lagna.
2, 7 and 11 are vacant. 2 is ruled by Sun, 11 is ruled by Mercury.
7 is owned by Saturn.
Saturn and Kethu are in Mercury star. Jupiter is in Saturn's star.
Kethu Is stronger than lord of 7. Moon and Venus are it Kethu star.
Sun is also strong as there is no planet in Sun's star.
Marriage took place during Venus Dasa, Kethu Bhukthi, Venus
Anthra, Moon Shookshma on 6-7-1947 on Sravanam star day.
Venus is in Kethu star. Kethu is stronger than Saturn,
lord of 7 (7th house vacant).
Kethu is in the star of Mercury (lord of 2 and 1 1 ). Both
houses, vacant.

Moon is in Kethu star. Kethu stronger than Saturn, lord of 7.
Kethu has to predominantly indicate Saturn's result; then only
that of Mars. Moon's star is not in Mars sign. Hence, Sravanam star
governed by Moon in Saturn's sign gave marriage.
Normally when one finds Saturn and Kethu in 4 and 9th house
occupied by lord of 12, one following traditional Astrology must say
that the native will have no tendency towards education. Also that he
cannot come up nicely in studies.
But according to Krishnamurti Padhdhati, Saturn and Kethu in 4
are in the constellation of Mercury, lord of if and sub of Mars owner of
4, education and 9, higher education.
According to my method, if the dasanatha is connected with
houses 4 and 9, they will give education.
Venus in the constellation of node in 4 gave studies throughout
Venus Dasa.
Sun in the constellation of Moon in 9 gave higher studies. As
Moon is also significator of 12, Sun in the constellation of Moon, gave
the break and ended his studies.
He discontinued his studies after successfully completing
Medical College course during Sun Dasa Saturn Bhukthi Sun Anthra
in December, 1952.
Service
Take houses 2, 6 and 10. Sun and Mercury are in 6.
Rahu is in 10. Kethu indicates what Saturn is to do, and
Saturn is lord of 6. Sukra is lord of 10
First appointment was in Sun Dasa (in 6). Saturn Bhukthi (lord of
6). Sun has no planet in its star. Hence Sun has to give surely 6th
house results. Saturn in the constellation of Mercury (lord of 2) and
owner of 6 has to offer. Kethu can give. Also Moon and Venus. Moon
in mercury sub is very strong. First appointment was in Sun Dasa
Saturn Bhukthi and Moon Anthra in January, 1952.
Thus various instances can be quoted.
following PAGES 151 152 is publicity (erased)

SYSTEMATIC PROCEDURE TO ADOPT
K.P. METHOD FOR TRANSIT RESULTS
One must get the following data to have a correct chart. (1)
Place of birth (2) Time or birth (3) Date, month and year.
If the birth is between midnight and the next sun rise, confirm,
at 12 midnight which calendar date was over and which calendar
date, sun is to rise.
Take Krishnamurti Ephemeris where sidereal time and position
of planets are given for every day and 'Krishman KP Tables of
houses'.
Use only Krishnamurti Ayanamsa. Work out. Erect the Nirayana
chart and a ready reckoner for Dasa and Bhukthi, etc. Let us take
one horoscope. The particulars needed are as follows:-
"Alibag: 18°.39'N; 72-55E is the place of birth. 9-00 PM. I.S.T. is
the actual time of birth. Tuesday 23-12-1924 is the day and date of
birth. The horoscope is as follows. It is worked out in strict
accordance with K.P's rules.

This is the way how to present a chart to the person concerned, so that there is
no trouble to note the houses and the planets in each house etc...,
Step 1 Note the extension of each Bhava-House.
I, 18°-22' of Cancer to 15°-01' Leo, ll.15°-01’ Leo to 15°1'Virgo, III. 15°-01 Virgo
to 17°-01' Libra, IV.17°-01 Libra to 19°-01' Scorpio, V, 19°-0T Scorpio to 19°-01'
Sagittarius, VI. 19°-01 Sagittarius to 18°- 22 Capricorn, VII.18"-22 Capricorn to
15-OT Aquarius, VIII. 15°-01'Aquarius to 15°01 Pisces, IX. 15°01' Pisces to 17°
OT Aries, X. 17°- OT Aries to 19°-0T Taurus, XI. 19°-0T Taurus to 19°-01'
Gemini, XII-19°0T Gemini to 18°-22 Cancer.
Step 2:- Note which planet is deposited in which Bhava, and the constellation
ruling them.
OCCUPANTS
Step 3: Note the Planets tenanted In the constellation of occupants from first
bhava (or house) to 12th in an order.
I. Saturn in Swathi, IV. Venus in Anuradha, Mars in U.P.Pada. Mercury in P.Shada.
None in Moon Star, V. Moon in Visaka, None in Sun star, Rahu in Ashlesha, VII.
Jupiter and Sun in moola, VIII. Kethu in Dhanishta.
So, Planets occupy only the houses 1,4, 5, 7 and 8. Planets deposited in any of
the constellation of the occupants are the strongest significators of the bhavas 1 ,4,5,7,
and 8. Then come the occupants.
Step 4: - Note the owners of the signs where the cusps are and their constellations.

Step 5: Note the planets in the constellations of the owners of the signs
where the cusps fall
I. None in Moon star, II. None in Sun star, III. Rahu in Mercury star, IV.
Mercury in Venus star, V. Kethu in Mars star, VI. Moon in Jupiter star,
VII. Venus and Mars in Saturn star, VIII. Venus and Mars in Saturn star,
IX. Moon in Jupiter star, X. Kethu in Mars star, XI. Mercury in Venus
star, XII. Rahu in Mercury star,
So, there are planets in the constellation of the owners of the houses
3 to 12. So these planets deposited in the stars of the owners are stronger
than the owners to offer the results of the bhavas owned by them. But the
Moon and Sun have none in their stars. So they themselves, have to give.
Planet occupying a constellation is Deputy Secretary who is to execute
what the lord of the constellation, (Secretary with a particular portfolio)
indicates by occupation or ownership. If the Dy. Secretary is absent,
Secretary does. So also if there is none in its stars, the owner gives.
Step 6:- Assort, arrange and prepare a ready reckoner for each planet
to know which bhava results each planet will give when its dasa, bhukti,
Anthra operates and which planets will offer the results of a particular
bhava. To note the order of the significators, this is the rule. That is,
(1) Planets in the constellation of the occupants.
(2) Occupants,
(3) Planets in the constellation of owners.
(4) Owners,
(5) Very weak but yet those connected with a bhava are those planets
conjoined with or aspected by the significators found out already.
Now, the above calculations may be tabulated as follows:-

Only to get this map tabulated, one is to work step by step.
These workings are not needed any longer. This chart along with the
horoscope and the ready reckoner table for dasa and bhukti is more
than enough.
For reading Transit results according to Krishnamurti Padhdhati,
the following procedure is mentioned for students so that they do not
miss any point but ever come out successful.
There are 27 constellations.
1, 10 and 19*h stars are governed by Kethu.
2, 1 1 and 20*h stars are governed by Venus.
3, 12 and 21th Stars are governed by Sun.
4, 13 and 22 th stars are governed by Moon.
5, 14 and 23^ stars are governed by Mars.
6, 15 and 24th stars are governed by Rahu.

7, 1 6 and 2th stars are governed by Jupiter.
8, 17 and 26^ stars are governed by Saturn.
9, 18 and 27th stars are governed by Mercury.
Kethu is the significator of the houses 8,10,5,7 and 4. Hence
whichever be the planet that transits the Constellations governed by
Kethu. i.e. whichever planet passes through the Stars 1,10 and 19.
i.e. 0° to 13°-20’; 120° to 133°-20'; 240° to 253°-20', these transiting
planets offer the matters signified by the houses 8,10,5,7 and 4.
Kethu, the significator of 8,10,5,7 and 4 offers these matters during
the occasion whenever planets transit in any of its three stars; the
Source is indicated by the planet transiting.
Suppose 8th house indicates money of the partner; 7th denotes
partner and 4th house business of partner, then 8,7 and 4 indicate
the above matters. If significator of 5 transits, partner gains through
music or speculation or through children. If the 12th house significator
transits, partner makes money by service or by borrowing, making
money by husband or wife or partner is shown by Kethu being the
significator of the houses 8, 7 and 4. How the money is made, is
indicated by the, houses signified by the transiting planet.
They are called Bharani, Poorvapalguni and Poorvashada Stars.
These are ruled by Venus. Venus is the significator of the houses 4,
11,7 and 8. Hence any planet transiting in these constellations will
bring out such matters of the houses 4,11,7 and 8. If in a housewife's
chart, the above transit is found, it means, to her husband it shows
1,2 10 and 5 houses. So the husband may start Brokerage and
jobbing business in Stock Exchange; or open a Book Shop in Race
Club at the time when the 12th house significator of the housewife i.e.
6th house significator of the husband transits.

Suppose significator of the 6th from 7th enter into the
constellation belonging to Venus, do not expect the result on the day
of entry. You have to wait till the significator of the 6th comes to the
sub belonging to the significator of 1 1 . If the significator of 6th house is
Jupiter and it has entered in Poorvapalguni (133°-20'to 146°-40')
constellation, till it touches Venus Sub and Mercury Sub-sub or
Mercury Sub in Venus Star, one cannot be promoted, even though
both Venus and Mercury are the significators of 11 and Jupiter, the
transiting planet is the significator of 6. Mercury Sub in Venus Star
commences at 144° and extends up to 145"-53'-20".
Star 3,12 and 21 are ruled by Sun. They are called Karthik,
Uthrapalguni and Uthrashada stars. They extend from 26°- 40' to 40°;
146-40' to 160°; 266°40' to 280°. Sun is the significator of the houses ,
5 and 7. Whenever any planet transits, it shows love affairs, romance,
payment of share or dividend to the partner. Love affairs will be
pleasant when the significator of 7 transits the sub of 11th house
significator. But when the same planet transit in the Sub of the
significator of 6th house, the girl may go away and there will be
separation till it comes to the sub governed by Significator of 1 1 .
Saturn is the significator of 7. It moves slowly. So the duration
will be long when Saturn transits. Sun is also the significator of
7. So when Sun transits in the same constellation and sub the
duration of separation will be short
Kethu and Jupiter transiting cause separation for a longer
period.
Stars 4, 13 and 22 are governed by Moon. They are called
Rohini, Hastham and Sravanam. Moon is the significator of 4, 1,5, 6
and 9. If the significator of 5th house transits either 40° to 53°-20' or
160°to 173°-20' or 280° to 293°-20' one will go on leave, make long
journey, reaches his native place and remains there.

Thus we have to judge but we should note down
as follows and prepare a ready reckoner:-

Whenever Kethu transits whichever matter is signified by the
lord of the Star, Kethu offers through the matters signified by it.
Kethu is the significator of 7th house. So, through partner or
opponent (indicated by 7th house), the matter indicated by the lord of
the constellation comes through. But it cannot come through 11th
house matters whereas the same position transited by Venus or
Mercury can give.
Whenever Sun transits, the matters signified by the lord of the
constellation will come through, through the matters signified by Sun
If Moon transits a particular constellation, whatever the lord
of the constellation signifies will be given by Moon during its transit
through the matters of the houses signified by Moon i.e. houses 4,
If Mars transits a constellation, whatever the lord of the
constellation, signifies will be offered by Mars through the matters
signified by Mars i.e. 4, 8, 7, 5 and 10.
If the lord of the constellation indicates ‘income’ or receipt of
money if the significator of 3rd houses transits, the income will be
by M.O. or cheque; from brother or neighbour; from editing or
publishing, by Brokerage and so on.
If the significator of 4th house transits, one gets as rent for
the house let by him or one gets the yield or from mother.
If the significator of 5th house transits, one can have the
income through music, opera, cinema or speculation or through
children.

Thus the source is indicated by the transiting planet and what will
happen is shown by the lord of the constellation, whether it will
materialise or not, whether it is favourable or not, is indicated by the
sublord according to the houses signified by the sublord.
DASA BHUKTHI ANTHRA AND TRANSITThere are 27 stars. Planets taken by Hindus are 9. As
mentioned already each governs 3 stars. Depending on the portion
to be covered, in a star by Moon and the lord of the constellation, the
balance of the dasa ruled by the lord of the constellation is
calculated. Then, in cyclic order the other dasas follow. For detailed,
clear and exhaustive explanation, kindly refer to the book 1st
Reader-Casting the horoscope of "KRISHNAMURTI PADHDHATI”.
As there are 9 planets, there are 9 dasas. Each dasa has
nine Bhukties; Hence one may expect there would be 81
combinations. But actually the combination will be 45.
When we take anthras, there should be 9 X 9 X 9 = 729. But the
same combination i.e. A’ dasa ‘B’ Bhukthi 'C Anthra; A’ dasa ‘C’
Bhukthi ‘B’Anthra; 'B' dasa A' Bhukthi ‘CAnthra; 'B' dasa 'C Bhukthi
A' Anthra; 'C dasa 'B' Bhukthi A' Anthra ‘C Dasa A' Bhukthi ‘B‘
Anthra are the combinations of the three planets A, B, and C in 6
different conjoined periods of these three. Again Dasa lord itself may
be bhukthi lord and anthra lord. They are 9 in number instead of 18.
Then Dasa lord, another planets' Bhukthi and Dasa lord anthra or
Bhukthi lord anthra. Thus you can have permutation and combination.
In the map of Heavens erected according to Krishnamurti
padhdhati there are 249 subs and so 249 combinations. Of these
certain positions in the Zodiac are ruled by the same group of
For example we have,

Mars Sign; Venus Star, Venus Sub l3°-20'to l5°-33'-20"
Venus Sign, Mars Star, Venus Sub l82M0'to l84°-53'-20"
These two points are ruled by Mars and Venus.
Mars Sign, Venus star, Sun Sub 15°-33'-20"to 16°-13‘-20"
Sun sign, Venus Star, Mars Sub 137°-20'to 138"-6'A0'.
Venus Sign, MarsStar, Sun Sub 184=-53'-20"to 185°-33'.20".
These three points are governed by the same group of planets.
Venus Sign, Jupiter Star, Moon Sub 209°-26'-40“ to 210°, Jupiter
Sign, Venus Star, Moon Sub 256M3'20" to 257°-20" only two.
Saturn Sign, Mars Star, Mercury Sub 300° to 301°-53'-20" in
Kumba; Mars Sign, Saturn Star, Mercury Sub 215°-26'-40" to
217°-20' - Vrishika; Mars Sign, Mercury Star, Saturn Sub
237°-53'20" to 240° Vrishika; Mercury Sign, Mars Star, Saturn
Sub 177°-53'-20" to 180°. Thus there are four different points
for the group of Mars, Saturn and Mercury.
Therefore when A dasa B Bhukthi C Anthra operates, that
part of the Zodiac governed by these three will be transited by
them, or luminaries and Lagna. For example if it is Venus dasa,
Mars Bhukthi, Venus anthra, then the position to be transited will
be Mars, Venus, Venus, or Venus, Mars, Venus. If Mars dasa,
Kethu Bhukthi, Kethu anthra operates, then 0° to 0°46'40" may be
transited; or Kethu Star, Mars Sub, Kethu sub-sub or Kethu Star,
Kethu Sub, Mars Sub-sub will be transited by Mars, Kethu; or Sun,
Moon and on that day, the moment when the ascendant which
rises in the East for the locality in which the native, then, is so that
the sign lord, star lord, and sub lord agree. One should not always
calculate the ascendant for the place of birth unless the native is
permanent in his birth place.

In the case of Rahu and Kethu, the planet with which they
are conjoined, or the lord of the constellation in which Rahu and
Kethu were at the time of birth or the lord of the sign can give the
result in their Star or Sub: also the lord of the day will be ruled by
any one of the above in the order given. Suppose Rahu is in
Aquarius conjoined with Jupiter; and in Dhanishta Star. Then
Thursday ruled by Jupiter; or if no conjunction Mars by Tuesday. If
Saturn is stronger than Mars, then Saturn can give the result on
Saturday. Whenever Rahu rules the dasa or Bhukthi; the matter
will materialise during Rahu-Kalam followed in Tamil Nadu. This
also will agree.
Table for 249 subs is furnished below, Lord of the sign, Star
and Sub are also given. If one runs Venus dasa, Moon Bhukthi,
Mercury anthra, refer Venus Sign, Moon star, Mercury Sub: Moon
Sign, Mercury Star, Venus sub: Mercury Sign, Moon Star, Venus
sub.
So also if one runs the conjoined period of Merc., Rahu,
Jupiter, refer Mercury sign, Rahu star, Jupiter sub; note also
Jupiter sign, Mercury star, Rahu Sub. If one runs conjoined period
of Sun, Venus, Mercury, then Sun sign, Venus star, Mercury Sub,
Venus sign, Sun star, Mercury sub, and Mercury sign, Sun Star,
Venus sub are the three sensitive and fruitful positions which will
be transited by Ascendant, Luminaries and the planets ruling the
dasa, bhukthi and anthra.

TABLE FOR READY REFERENCE
TO FOLLOW KRISHNAMURTI PADHDHATI
(D Stands for degrees, M for minutes and S for seconds)
Aries - Mesha

Gemiini -Mithuna

Cancer - Kataka

PISCES Meenam
TRANSIT RESULTS
(LECTURE AT CALCUTTA)
Today the subject chosen isTransit and its Results. This is one
of the methods to find out what a person can expect due to the
movement of the planets in various signs as days pass on. General
predictions offered in dailies, weeklies and monthlies are based on
either of the two systems Hindu orWestern.
Hindus take the position of Moon in Nirayana chart at the time
of the birth of a person whereas Westerners take the position of
Sun at one's birth time. Hindus find out in which sign a planet
transits and how many signs away it is, when counted from the

Sign occupied by Moon. They do not take into consideration whether
Moon is in the 1st degree or in the middle or in the end of the sign; so
also a planet transiting in a sign may be in the beginning or in the
middle or in the end. The actual longitudinal distance is never
calculated and included for prediction. Suppose Moon is in the first
degree of the sign Mesha and if a planet is in the beginning or in the
middle or in the end in Rishaba it is always said to be in the 2nd sign
to Moon sign and hence in 2 to Moon.
The longitudinal distance will range between 30° and 60°. If
Moon were to be over 29° in Aries and a planet just leaves Aries and
enters into Taurus it is said to be in the second sign till it leaves
Taurus. Therefore the longitudinal distance between the two will be 1°
to 30°. Does it sound alright to call a planet in 2 to Moon when the
longitudinal distance varies between 1° and 60°. When the distance is
only 1° are they not in conjunction? Only in the map we draw for a
horoscope, we draw lines to separate each sign. In the heavens is
there any partition wall? Will not both the planets appear very close to
each other? If the declination is the same then Moon alone can be
seen and the planet will be hidden. When actually a planet is in rapt
conjunction to say that it is in the second house to Moon and also to
call a planet in 29° Aries, when Moon is in the first degree of Aries, as
conjoined with Moon in Janma Rasi, does not appeal alright.
Secondly, if a person has a horoscope let him take it. Note the
lagna. On that day there were some births. Suppose Moon on that
day was in Cancer. Then, think awhile. Does the position of Moon to
all the births on that day denote the same result to all. Or whom does
Moon indicate? For Aries lagna born, Moon is lord of 4 in 4; So it
denotes mother; to Taurus - born it indicates younger brother and
sister, to Cancer lagna born, the person himself; to Virgo born, elder
brothers, sisters, friends, younger paternal uncle, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law etc., to Scorpio born, Moon denotes father; to
Capricorn boms Moon indicates wife; to Pisces boms, children, etc.,
When such is the case, if the

position of transiting planets is favourable will the person enjoy or
such a relative as is indicated by Moon according to one's lagna
enjoy? which appeals to us? Which comes correct. Therefore how to
judge, is to be solved.
Sun is taken by Westerners. Similarly judge whom Sun
indicates. Suppose Sun is in Leo. to Aries boms Sun indicates
children; to Taurus - boms mother; To Gemini - boms younger
brother, etc., Therefore good aspects to Sun will bestow desirable
results to such a relative as is shown by Sun by occupation and
ownership and predictions offered taking the position of sun,
excluding lagna is also not correct.
But when one has no horoscope, then to offer some mental
solace, there should be some base, some method. So Hindus take
Moon; Westerners take Sun, That is why the general predictions
which are published taking either of the luminaries have to fail and
they fail in majority cases. Not knowing the truth one may attribute
the difference to one's will. As lagna indicates one's health, longevity
success or failure etc., one must take only the lagna, then the
position of all planets and the 12 cusps.
Requisites: Place of birth, actual time of birth, date etc.,
Krishman's Ephemeris for the year of birth and Table of Houses.
Erect the chart using these. Deduct Krishnamurti Ayanamsa for that
year. Mark all the twelve cusps; also all the planets and fortuna.
Next write down First house; Second House; Third
house and so on till Twelfth house, one below the other.
Always take that a house extends from that cusp to the next cusp
(exact degree and minute). Do not mix up - Note down in which house
each planet is.
Then, re-assort (re-classify). Note in which house
Kethu was at the time of birth; which matters will be signified by
that house; also

consider which other house Kethu can represent;
include the matters of that house also.
Kethu Governs Aswini, Makam and Moolam. Therefore in the
the matters signified by the house which Kethu is to represent.
Take Venus. Note down which house it occupies and also which
cusps are found in Taurus and Libra so that Venus becomes the lord
of those houses. Hence the matters denoted by the houses occupied
and owned by Venus will be the nature of result which the 2nd, 11th
and 20th stars i.e. 13°20' to 26°40'; 133°20'to 146°40‘ and 253°20' to
266°40‘ indicates
Sun governs Karthik, Uthrapalguni and Uthrashada, the 3rd, 12th
and 21st stars. Whatever sun denotes by occupation and ownership
will be the results indicated by these stars, similarly note for all
planets including Rahu and Kethu who rule the stars 6, 15, and 24
and 1,10 and 19 respectively.
Thus you will find that all the 360° of the zodiac, divided into 27
constellation; denote 9 groups of results, each repeating thrice.
Whenever a planet transits, it will be in any of the 27
constellations. Whatever the lord of the constellation, according to its
occupation and ownership denote, will be given by the planet
transiting in any of the three constellations ruled by that planet. The
source is shown by the transiting planet according to its nature,
occupation and ownership.
Suppose there are 27 rooms with nine different varieties of
provisions.
Those varieties which is stored in room 1, is also
stored in room 10 and room 19 ; say paddy - rice.
Suppose wheat is stored in room 2, it is also found in
room 1 1 and 20.

If sugar is stored in room 39 it is also stocked in room 12 and 24.
Kerosene if stocked in room 4, it is also kept in room 13 and 22.
Also suppose there are 9 salesman. That salesman in room 1
or 1 0 or 1 9 can give only rice or paddy; in room 2 or 1 1 or 20 can
give only wheat; in room 3 or 12 or 21 can give only sugar; in
room 4 or 13or22 can supply kerosene and so on. If there are
2 or 3 people in the same room, all will give me same, so, the
quality and the nature of the provision which is to be distributed
remains the same for each room; salesmen may be A or B orC;
Sun or Moon or Mars or Mercury and so on. But yet what they
can give depends on the material stored in that room, "Who
supplies", if that question arises, then the stuff is given by that
person who is in that room. Therefore how one gets; through
whom one gets i.e. , the source is shown by the person in the
room i.e., the planet transiting. The planet indicates the source by
its occupation and ownership of houses.
Suppose a planet, say Sun, is in Uthraphalguni 1st quarter
at 27° Leo and it is in the 1 1th house to Libra born. Sun is lord of
1 1 ; it is in 1 1 . It is in the constellation of lord of 1 1 . Hence it
promises profit; success; realisation of ambition, etc., Sun
governs Karthik, Uthraphalguni and Uthrashada. The
constellation may be in 7 or 8 or 1 1 or 12 or 3 or 4th Bhava : In
whichever Bhava it is, planets transiting in any one of these three
stars must produce most advantageous and agreeable results.
But suppose Jupiter transits in any of these 3 stars. Jupiter
is in 3. Then Jupiter as lord of 3 in 3 and as lord 6 shows that
through the matters indicated by the houses 3 and 6, he gains;
through younger brother; by making shortjourney; by editing,
publicity etc., or through maternal uncle etc., he may gain. It is
also indicated that he may recover from the disease, feel healthy
and make friendship with one who attended on him. 6th house,
disease, that is the cause: 3rd house acquaintance and both 3
and 6 show assistants and attendants. 1 1th house indicates
friendship.

Therefore it must be clearly understood that every point in the
Zodiac is governed by a planet, depending on the constellation in
which that point has fallen.
Next, one should note the beneficial and adverse planets to
oneself. By beneficial it is meant that planet which can fulfill his
desire. Suppose one wants to go overseas, then the significators of
the houses 3, 9 and 12 are beneficial; suppose one wants to commit
suicide, then the significator of the 8th house is beneficial to him then.
Suppose one wants scholarship for studies then significators of the
houses 4, 6, 9 and 1 1 are good.
If one wants to marry, significators of 2, 7 and 11; if he wants a
divorce then the significators of the houses 6, 12, 10.8 will finalise the
divorce.
Next we have to remember that when the constellation is ruled
by the significator of the second house and if it is the ruling planet of
the partner in business, the native gains money but the partner faces
difficulties as the second house is the 8th to the 7th. But if the
significator of the 2nd house is the ruling planet of wife, she
experiences difficulties, in spite of husband's gains. Children get
promoted as the second house is the 10th to the 5th; mother makes
good profit as it is the 1 1th house to the 4th; younger brother loses, or
changes job or he is hospitalised or cheated, father falls ill and incurs
debt and so on. Thus it can be seen that the person may gain, earn
etc., whereas different results will be enjoyed by different relatives. If a
pin pricks in any part of your body, it pains in that area you feel it.
Similarly close kith and kin, if they suffer, one will be worried, though
personally one can have some small fortune in one's efforts.
Prediction will be incomplete, if all are not systematically taken,
carefully judged and presented in an orderly manner. (For example
planet denoting 10th house matter may give promotion to the native
but his son may be seriously ill and father pass away.)

Finally one should consider the sub. What is it? It is one of the
nine sub divisions of the constellation, in the proportion in which they
are allotted the number of years in Vimshottari Udu Dasa system.
Each sub has its own lord. Hence the constellation, as the whole, has
one lord who takes the first division sub in that star. Then in the cyclic
order followed in Udu Dasa system, the other subs and sub lords are
noted.
Some planets are favourable to the native and some are evil.
Therefore the subs ruled by beneficial ones will be fruitful whereas
the subs of malefics to that horoscope and matter will be
disadvantageous.
The lord of the constellation has to indicate certain matters due
to occupation and ownership. Whichever planet transits, it brings to
light these matters. Whether they materialise and be advantageous or
they fall through and disappoint the person is judged from the sub.
Suppose Jupiter transits in the constellation of Mercury (lord of 2
and 11 occupying lord of lagna constellation in 2). When Jupiter
passes through Mercury star Mercury sub, an advertisement is made
and many horoscopes are received; astrologer is consulted. When
Jupiter moves in Kethu sub, for 4 days the girl does not keep normal
health. When Jupiter moves in Venus sub (3 and 10), some boys
come and see the girl. Hopes keep them cheerful. During the time
When Jupiter transits in Sun sub, gold ornaments are purchased for
the girl. Jupiter in Moon's sub, brings the negotiation nearer. During
Mars sub period, one belonging to the same place and coming from a
stranger's family fixes the marriage. During the time when Jupiter
transits in Rahu sub, purchases for the wedding and arrangements
go on. When it transits in the sub of Jupiter which was in Gemini in
11, marriage is celebrated. When Saturn sub is entered by Jupiter,
the boy takes leave from the girl, goes alone back, saying that he will
find some accommodation and take her. Thus all the matters refer to
her marriage. But each sub

shows the different stage in the matter. Unless one calculates and
notes down the periods when a planet enter into a constellation and
then it moves from one sub to the other, detailed prediction to the day
cannot be predicted. This is the only convincing method which can
give clear indications offering results without missing any point.
If one wants to satisfy himself, let him do the following test. Or if
one would like to know when his aim will be achieved, let him carry
out the experiments as follows. It will prove to be 100% correct. This
will assure you that what Mr. Morarjibhai told is correct. "Horoscope
shows only the tendency and it is not a certainty. Only Brahma can
predict with certainty" is said by some. I disagree. Mr.Morarjibhai says
that he believes that the law of Karma governs the universe and
therefore he believes in astrology. If a horoscope only shows a
tendency and if one can change the event by one's will, then astrology
has no place. If one predicts that a person will not die at a particular
age, but he uses his will and tries to commit suicide and die, he can
never die. I had already published that a fellow tried to commit suicide
by hanging, drowning, over drugging, shooting etc., But he could not
die. He did not die then.
Everybody has the desire and will to live for some more years.
He exercises his will, he prays, puts on Gems etc., he dies at the
moment correctly fixed by the astrologer according to the horoscope
erected for the moment of birth which completely depends on his
previous Karma. Just like one has no choice about his birth time,
place and his parents, so also there is nothing left in one's hands.
Everything is predestined. None can change it. Then only one can
predict using this science.
A few examples are given to prove that correct
predictions offered cannot be changed.

(1) I predicted to a teacher in Poona that he would have a child
born after 5 months. On the day of query, his wife was admitted in the
hospital for profuse bleeding in the 4th month of the pregnancy.
Doctors declared that she would abort. They also assisted. Yet, in a
few days bleeding stopped. She gave birth to a child and all are alive.
(2) One brilliant student who had been scoring very good marks
and coming out successful with distinction was predicted that he could
not have a pass that year. Actually, he did not sit for the the last 3
papers, as he fell ill and he had to sit for another examination next
year.
(3) A boy related to one of the Directors of Simpson group was
predicted in April 1956 that he should be an engineer from 1961 and
since he must study for at least 5 years to complete the course, he
must be admitted in the Engineering College. In July 1956 he had no
admission. He joined Arts College. But in September, a vacancy fell
and only this boy was selected, and admitted. He passed in 1961 and
from then he is an Engineer.
(4) Please refer the letter written by a high official at Delhi, Dr.
Tiware, in May issue. How his son was admitted in medical college
after November, 1969 as predicted by me though college was opened
in July and admission was over by July.
(5) If one follows stellar astrology, with sub and Krishnamurti
Ayanamsa, one can predict when one can have his desires fulfilled; A
girl was running Mars Dasa Kethu Bhukthi. A bridegroom and his
parents wrote that they would see the bride (for marriage purposes)
on a Sunday when the star was Uthrapathrapada. I told them that they
might not keep up the word and your daughter would be seen only on
Aswini star day. The bridegroom was a A.RW.I. On Saturday he had
an interview for promotion at Bombay. The interview went on and in
the meanwhile the train steamed off. Later he was able to arrive at

Delhi only on Aswini star day and see her as predicted.
She is the daughter of Dy. Director of Estates.
(6) Mr.K.Ganapathy predicted to the father of a young boy who
had made all arrangements to send his son to Germany, that the boy
would be hospitalised for months and could not go as per programme.
The father did not tell anybody. But actually, the boy vomited blood in
the next week. He was admitted in the hospital and was treated for 3
months. That year he did not go. He went only on the date predicted
by Mr. K. Ganapathy. The boy is now in Madras. He is the Sound
Engineer in a Cinema studio.
(7) A person wanted to give his daughter to an I.A.S. officer.
He had no mind to give to an air pilot officer. In spite of
his will, efforts and determination, his daughter married only
the air pilot officer who is now in Delhi.
(8) A sub officer in All India Radio was predicted that he would
leave this and take up Air-Piloting. He is now at Hyderabad as
Air Pilot Officer. An advocate was informed that he would give it up
and take up Cinema line. A professor was told that he would leave the
job and take up business - of supplying fish. It had come true. Thus
one can find that our life is like the taxi-driver who does not know
where he will be driving his car that day. He has to drive as the
passenger at the back seat dictates. The route he has to take, the
number of minutes he has to halt etc., are entirely left to the
passenger who is the God-governing Destiny. Volumes can be written
to prove that none can dodge the fate. It has its own course. As this is
true, astrologers who can predict with confidence, say exactly,
precisely and correctly without mentioning "Tendency, likely, 50-50.
and so on."
Traditional astrologer did predict as follows. A child is born or a
company is started or a ministry is formed. Cast a horoscope and
predict - what? The child will die. Or the company will be closed or the
ministry will come to an end. Everybody knows

that when a child is born, it should die one day or other. If a ministry is
formed, it also will end one day or other in a year or two or twenty and
so on. Therefore people want when such an end will come. If one
says “The combinations indicate change of leadership due to much of
confusion and the health of the political leader. Is it a prediction?
When will the health fail? In 1 967 or 1 968 or 1 969 or when? When will
there be the internal trouble? When will the change come? This alone
is wanted. This is to be predicted by the astrologer. Even a layman
will say that this will not last long. Some may fall ill. they may
disagree, they may fight with each other, etc., Is it a prediction? It will
be useful if such astrologers give the month when such will happen. If
he predicts correctly, nothing in the world can change the result.
Useful Guide
Coming to the point, suppose one just enters into Venus Dasa. It
is to run for 20 years. In which sub period one can have larger profits;
in which sub period, the business will be dull; will there be a partition
etc., then let him strictly observe and record the results as is advised
below :
(1) Venus Dasa is on : Its stars are Bharani, Poorvaphalguni and
Poorvashada. Note from the Ephemeris when Moon enters into
Bharani, Poorvaphalguni and Poorvashada. Note the time when it
enters, when it leaves and the date. Note down for 6 months. There
will only 19 occasions.
(2) Divide the duration of each star and note when the first sub
belonging to Venus ends i.e., 20/120 of the total duration [Suppose, a
child is born this time, we will say that the child will have Sukra Dasa,
Sukra Bhukthi at the time of birth ]. The moment 20/120 of the total
duration is over then Sun's sub will be on for an interval of 6/120 of
the total duration then Moon's sub will follow for 10/120 of the
duration; Mars sub will be for 7/120 of the duration and so on.

Some subs will pass away while asleep; ignore. But consider
such subs on another day when you are busy. In these 19 occasions,
at least on 6 occasions the subs will be during day time.
If during a particular sub, in any of the 3 stars Bharani,
Poorvaphalguni and Poorvashada, you note good sales and profit,
you will note that invariably it is ever good. It means in Venus Dasa,
the sub period of that planet is profitable.
If during the hours, when Moon transits in Venus star and a
particular sub, there is not much sales in those hours, then in Venus
Dasa, the Bhukthi of this sub lord will not be helpful, in its Bhukthi, the
business will be dull. Thus against each sub, note the results.
They will ever prove to be true. This has been tested and found
to be correct by hundreds of the members of the Modern Astrological
Research Institute in between 1951 and 1961,
I carried out such experiments while playing cards and while
betting in the races. Venus is a strong benefic to me and the sub
Rahu is advantageous. So invariably I gain on Venus star days and
Rahu sub i.e. , during other subs (when Moon transits in other subs). I
do not gain. So I play only during the hours when Moon transits in
Rahu sub, either in races or in playing cards.
I had been considering that the whole star day will be good. But
my friend who consulted me whether he would gain on a particular
day, I said that the significator of his Lobhasthana is on; so he will win
on that day. Actually he lost Rs.90 in the games. When he came
home, he understood that his friend who took Rs.6,000/- without even
a promissory note, 5 years ago, returned the full amount, handed over
to his wife and rushed to his place, as he was on his way from
Singapore to Coimbatore. Then, I began to consider and work the
sub. I applied to the races. I found, how I won the second and fifth
races, whereas I lost in others; or I won the first two races and lost the
other ones; or I lost in the beginning and gained on the last.

This sub alone answered. No doubt; no mistake. Those who
want to test, I request them to do. Never you will fail. Follow
Krishnamurti Ayanamsa and work out the interval for each sub.
Forget other ayanamsas.
(a) Suppose one wants to meet an officer, let him select such a
star day and in that the most benevolent planets sub. Work out
when Moon enters this sub and leaves. In those hours, find out
when the lagna will be in such a combination.
The sub may be between 2-30 p.m and 4-33 p.m. In these two
hours select those minutes when the lagna falls in that degree which
is ruled by the star lord an sub lord. These minutes will be lucky.
It is really fortunate. As there was no single occasion of
failure, one can boldly declare and select the moment. This proves
that one cannot change fate and things happen according to the
timing indicated by the planet and not desired by the person. Lucky
act at good time. Unlucky will transact during unlucky time even if
astrologer gives lucky time.
A Silk merchant at konjeevaram told me that a big marriage
party phoned him that they would visit his shop at about 9 a.m. and
that they should return by 12 Noon. He kept the shop open. I went
with an advocate Mr.Kasthuri Rangan to konjeevaram on that day in
the morning to visit the temple. On Punarvasu day, the silk merchant
being a friend to us we stayed with him. At about 11 a.m. the silk
merchant asked me, " I am expecting a rich client who will buy for
thousands at one stroke. He told that he would come by 9 a.m. and
that he should return by 12 Noon. He has not come .-What do you
think?" I looked at the horoscope of the merchant. He was running
Jupiter Dasa Venus Bhukthi. The star day was Punarvasu. I worked
out the sub. Till 12-40 p.m. Kethu sub on. Venus starts after
12-40p.m. and runs up to 5p.m. So I told him that he can expect
them only after 12-40. He must gain on that day. But it is not before
12 Noon. But only

after 3 p.m. when Jupiter star Venus sub and Jupiter sub operates.
Actually they came at 1 p.m. and transaction was over by 3 p.m.
when they paid cash. Thus one can note which hour is good on a
day, and from such minor events, find out which subs are good and
which subs are bad.
Thus noting down the results, apply the same to dasa bhukthi
system. Also whenever any planet transits through those subs, good
or bad as indicated by the subs, must happen through the source
indicated by the nature, occupation and ownership of the planet
transiting.
Those who do not want to understand and apply, those who
want to simply pass destructive criticism, those who do not strictly
follow my instructions (using Raphael Ephemeris, his table of
houses, New comb or my ayanamsa) may say anything. Ignore their
remarks. But truth-seekers will apply - just like my students do, and
congratulate for a very simple method to serve as an index for major
events in one's life.
Suppose one wants to know whether Saturn and Jupiter can do
good or bad to oneself during their transit in Mercury's star Ashlesha
or Jyesta, note when Moon transits in these stars. Work out the sub.
Record what happened during the hours when Moon was in a sub. If
they are encouraging and advantageous when Moon is in a
particular sub, be sure that whenever Jupiter and Saturn transit
those subs you will have beneficial results. But when Moon transits
in a sub and you face some problems in those hours, be sure that
during the time Saturn and Jupiter transit those subs, you must face
difficulties. It is a certainty. Source depends on the transiting planet.
For example a person born in Capricorn, if he has favourable
Mercury and Rahu, he must have good fortune through younger
brother or by editing or by the receipt of a cheque when Jupiter
transits in Mercury star Rahu sub, i.e. , around 9-8-67. Sun also will
transit. Hence 9-8-1967 must be lucky. I shall inform the readers

what happens on that day to him. Jupiter will be in that sub for 12
days. But I pitched up on 9-8-67. As Sun conjoins Jupiter and both
are in Mercury star Rahu sub. (It came true - it was surprising to
traditional astrologer).
If on 9-8-67 he receives a cheque for a good amount or he
enjoys his life by fulfilling a desire or comes out successful in his
efforts which is long pending, again he can expect such an
advantage when Saturn in 1968 passes Mercury star, Rahu sub
through the source indicated by Saturn (This also came correct).
Similar observations in 1969 and 70 came as expected.
Such a calculation alone proves that Astrology is a science which
is in an incomplete stage now, and everything is under divine plan as
is shown by planets and not in the hands of anybody. If the rule is the
same and applying it, you get the same results, then it is a science.
Free will is free from fate. Will, will not change the course of Divine
Plan. It is the attachment to self- importance and egoism one may say
that one can modify the results by one's will and a few take shelter
under it saying that Astrology shows only the tendency : it is not a
certainty. To me it appears that it is more for an excuse. To day, I
conclude by saying that Astrology is a science. It needs further
research and confirmation. There is no use for the word "Likely".
Everything is a certainty. If you follow transit system also, one can
pitch up the time and know the events to one's advantage. Summing
up, let me say how to judge the results by transit system.
(1) Erect a horoscope as is advised by me. (Do not
cast in any other manner and then find that you are nowhere.)
(2) Note the arc of each Bhava where it commences and where
it ends.
(3) Note in which house each planet is posited.
(4) Find out which matters are signified by each planet - Sun,
Moon Kethu

(5) Note which three stars are ruled by each
planet. In their areas, write the matters signified by the lord of the
constellation.
(6) Note, for each matter in your life, which are the significators
and which contributes for the fulfilment of those matters and which are
detrimental, delaying, adverse and disappointing.
(7) Then in those constellations, mark the favourable sub and the
unfavourable ones.
Now you have the whole Zodiac divided into 249 subs, 27
constellations.
Three constellations belonging to the same planet denote certain
matters in your life. Certain matters about your kith and kin. The subs
in those constellations promise whether the matter will materialise or
not and how it would be to the relatives.
(8) A planet transiting in a constellation brings to light those
matters shown by the lord of the Constellation due to its occupation
and ownership. The period when the planet moves from one sub to
the other gives clearly the time when the same result shown by the
lord of the Constellation undergoes various stages.
If the lord of the Constellation denotes 'service' and a planet
moves in that constellation, various stages in the matter of
appointment progresses depending on the lord of the sub. When the
planet is in the first sub, the applicant may be interviewed and
entertain hopes. The next sub may be ruled by a significator adverse
to self acquisition. So, in this period he gets discouraging news. The
planet moves to the next sub. He makes another attempt in another
place. The sub lord being Mars, which is very advantageous to him, he
is interviewed and during the interview itself he is informed that he is
appointed and that he may join duty after 3 weeks when one retires.
So he returns home happily. The next sub belonging to Rahu shows
idling (wasting) away one's time

but enjoy peace of mind. During the time when the planet enters and
moves in Jupiter sub he joins duty. Thus, the significators shows that
its constellation when transited by a planet brings out the results and
the various stages are well explained by the sub lord. Suppose one
runs Jupiter Dasa Mercury Bhukthi Sun anthra then the areas which
must be transited by the lagna (to note the minute of taking charge),
by Moon or Sun and the significator will be,
(a) Jupiter sign Mercury star Sun sub 351° 33' 20" to 352°13' 20" or
(b) Mercury sign Jupiter star Sun sub, 88° 46' 40" to 89° 26' 40" or
(c) Jupiter's star Mercury sub or
(d) Mercury star Jupiter sub.
One knows that Jupiter Dasa Mercury Bhukthi Sun Anthra runs
for 1 month and 10.8 days. So in those 44.8 days, Mercury and Sun
can be in any of the above 4 sensitive points. It will be there. It must
be there. So find out the day and the date. This is what is discovered
by me and found to be very true by many students till 1971.
To carry out such experiments, you must use Krishnamurti
Ayanamsa. If you use any other Ayanamsa, Dasa Bhukthi will
change. The dates of transit in a particular sub also will change. By
using any other Ayanamsa and house division, do not make attempt
to use this method. If you follow strictly what I say, you will find that
this system introduced by me is marvelous, and correct and this
proves that my Ayanamsa is to be followed. For any other Ayanamsa,
stellar astrology will not come correct.

LECTURE ON THE CONSTELLATION
AND SUB THEORY
Friends,
All of you who have gathered here are, no doubt, my students
since long number of years and also those who are very highly
qualified and supremely intelligent, so as to quickly grasp, apply and
with open mind appreciate the role of the Sub, When you all ask me to
speak on this subject especially to know how it struck me, I would like
to tell you my early part of life when this method came to my mind.
In 1939, I found that the Constellation Theory is correct where
as the predictions offered taking the sign and the house alone failed
miserably; brought ridicule to Traditional Astrology.
One of the horoscope which clearly indicated the
above is as follows:
Horoscope

His father died in 1917 January, leaving behind good business
and decent property acquired during Kethu and Venus dasa.
But the native lost everything during his Sun, Moon and Mars
Dasa. During Rahu Dasa, just before leaving India he consulted me
whether he could prosper at least in Rahu Dasa. I encouraged him.
He went at the end of June 1939. Thereafter I don't know what
happened to him and to his family.
My finding was that Kethu and Venus were in the Constellation
of planet in 11. So they gave gains, even though they were in 12
threatening loss as per the misleading traditional method.
Sun, Moon were in the Constellation of planets in 12. So, they
gave loss. Constellation or Stellar System is correct; so useful.
I am sure he would have prospered during Rahu dasa till the end
of his life in Rahu dasa as Rahu was in the Constellation of Mercury in
11. (Though Bhadhakasthana to Libra Lagna born.)
Similarly, I verified series of charts, noted down their results, did
postmortem and discovered Krishnamurti Padhdhati by sub-dividing
the Constellation into Subs, as I could fix an event within a range of
13 days, instead of exact date. There was also another handicap.

If one runs Mars dasa Kethu Bhukthi, I used to predict that a
matter will materialise between 13th April and 26th April as in that
fortnight Sun will pass in Nirayana Mesha owned by Mars and Kethu
Star Aswini.
If it were to be Sun dasa Kethu Bhukthi, I predicted in the
second fortnight of August as Sun would be in Sun sign, Kethu star
Makam. If it were to be Jupiter dasa Kethu Bhukthi; then the matter
will materialise in the second fortnight of December as Sun would be
in Jupiter Sign Kethu star.
But for Kethu Bhukties in other dasas, I could not give, even
this range.
If one had been running Mars dasaVenus Bhukthi, I pitched up
the days when Sun was transiting in Mars Sign, Venus Star; (Aries)
or Venus sign (Libra) Mars star. Thus when I proceeded,
I found that in Mars sign, there is no Moon, Rahu, Mars Stars; in
Venus Sign, no Saturn, Mercury Kethu Venus Stars. Hence to dasas,
many Bhukties had no constellation.
Then it struck me that as long as Stellar theory is correct, instead
of taking Sign, take the Star to represent dasa, and the sub to
indicate Bhukthi. Now every period and subperiod has 3 positions in
the Zodiac at a distance of 120° from one another.
When I had been doing research on the Constellation Theory,
first I thought that if a person were to gain during the period of a
particular planet then the day ruled by it, three Constellations
governed by it, the signs owned by it must prove to be favourable,
and also advantageous. So 1 started to note whether the above will
come true. Prior to 1932, I had gains during the conjoined periods of
Venus, and Rahu, even though the Dasa lord was favourable or not.
Even when A Dasa B Bhukthi was operating the combination of
Venus and Rahu Anthras and Sookshmas prove to begood. So I
thought I could note down in my diary for one full year all the Fridays
and also the days when Moon was transiting either in Venus star or in
Rahu star. On those days

only ( played cards and before 1939, I have found that during some
such days I gained and during some such days I lost. No doubt those
days were either Friday or Wednesday indicated by Rahu in my
horoscope (Rahu was in Gemini) or I played on Bharani,
Poorvaphalguni or Poorvashada star days or during Arudhra, Swathi
and Satabhisha star days. Swathi proved to be much better than any.
I thought it would be due to Rahu Star in Venus sign.
in 1939 I came to the conclusion that whenever I played the
cards on the star days governed by Venus when Moon was in the 2nd
pada, I was coming out successful. In Rahu's stars days when Moon
was in the 3rd pada I had won. Then it came to my mind why I shoufd
not divide a Constellation into 9 Subs. I thought a child born on a day
when Arudhra is transited by Moon then if the time of the birth were to
be within four hours from the commencement of Moon's entry into
Arudhra the child will be having Rahu Dasa, Rahu Bhukthi at the time
of the birth. Then for a few hours when Moon is further Progressing in
that star the sub is ruled by Guru. Next few hours Moon will be in
Saturn sub i.e. , a child born at this position in that Constellation will
have Rahu Dasa Saturn Bhukthi at the time of the birth; A few hours
later if the child is born it will have Rahu Dasa, Mercury Bhukthi at the
moment of the birth. Thus on an average, the 24 hours duration of
Arudhra star sub divided among the 9 planets commencing from Rahu
in the cyclic order of Vimshottari Dasa. There after from 1939. I
thought in Rahu star days the sub of Venus will be auspicious and
similarly in Venus stars days sub of Rahu will be for victory. This I
wanted to test and within three months I found that my finding was
very correct. Every day I had been winning. So I had instructed one of
my children as follows:-
If supposing I expect that I would win between 6 and 8-30 PM., I
used to ask one to come to the club where I used to play and simply
call me saying that somebody has come for consultation. I go to the
Club some 10 minutes earlier so that to

start with I go on losing. Then when exactly Moon enters into Rahu
Sub I start winning. When I know that I would lose, as per instruction
any of my children will come and call me in the last 2, 3 minutes. As
soon as I was called I purposely began to lose so that in the beginning
and in the end I lose for a few minutes whereas for hours I win. Later I
wentto races simply to note how far it works and there also I found
that I lost during the time when other Subs operated whereas
invariably, I had been gaining whenever I bet when the time was
auspicious as Moon would be transiting in either Rahu Sub or Venus
Sub. In playing cards since it is very frequent I could not further
develop my knowledge but in the races I further found that it is not
enough if one bets and gains during the beneficial star day and in the
favourable Sub. Even though the ultimate result is gain, yet we lost in
a few, we gained in a few. Why? Then I found that even though the
Sub period runs for 4 hours unless the Ascendant rising in the East
also transits in such a favourable Constellation or sub at the time
when the horse passes the winning post; even in such a period there
was failure. Therefore, one must note down which group of planets
will offer success and victory over enemies or gaining in races or
winning in competition. Then one should also select the position in the
Zodiac governed by such group of planets. Whichever planet transits
those point, then success is assured. Prediction comes out correct.
Thus I did research till 1951 when I started a Astrological Researach
Institute. In a few months, during my lecture. I narrated the above and
coached them up in this method. (Thereafter they never came to me
to play cards). This is the way how I found out the use of the Sub and
thereafter developed it.
TRANSIT OF ASCENDANT AND RULING PLANETS
Today 20-9-67 is Wednesday governed by Mercury. Moon
transits at 353°-34' in Mercury star Revathi in Meena rasi owned by
Jupiter. Time is 6 p.m. Lagna Is in Pisces, Lord of which is Jupiter.
Therefore, Jupiter, Mercury and Rahu rule this moment.

Place: - Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Curzon Road, New Delhi.
Peon enters the room; he announces "Sir, from this afternoon, there
is no fan, light; electricity failed".
One student gets up. Another writes in a slip. The third asks "Sir,
now we have Sunlight before it gets dark, please predict, when the
electric light will come? If not, shall we go home".
Another says, "Sir, if you ask us to wait, we all will wait. But, let
us know the time when it will come".
The ruling planets are:
(a) Lord of the star now Mercury - Revathi
(b) Lord of the rasi - Jupiter - Pisces.
(c) Lord of the day - Mercury - Wednesday.
(d) Sub lord of Moon Mars; Rahu is in Mars sign, nowadays
take Rahu as long as Rahu is in Aries.
Take the point ruled conjointly by the significators; Mars
and Mercury offer results in the earliest opportunity).
Now, the point that rises in the East is in Pisces. As Mars and
Rahu, do not have stars in Pisces, take Mercury star earliest sub
belongs to Mercury. Sub - sub Rahu.
This Nirayana position is to rise in the East. Krishnamurti
Ayanamsa is 23°-18‘. So Sayana Lagna should be Aries 11°-T 1 1 ° 1 8'
Aries.
Refer to Krishman’s table of Houses, Aries 1 1T will rise at

Therefore, the difference between L.M.T. and i.s.T. = 21
mts. 12 seconds.
If we add this to the figure we get 18 hrs 52mts. 19 seconds
1 1 °-1 8' is over by 11 hrs. 53 mts. 20 seconds.
I predicted that it would come at 6-53 p.m. i.s.T. and it did come.
Tube light will take a few seconds. We have to use common sense
also.
This prediction given to the class regarding the supply of
electricity at 6-53 p.m. by the Professor on Wednesday 20-9-67 at 6
p.m. came very correct to the minute. We endorse our appreciation.
(Students)
1. Gopinath Kapur, M.A.
2. Sesodhra, H.Hom. H.E.D.
3. P.N.Kakkar, S.D.O.M.E.S.,
4. B.L.Batra, D.H.O.
5. Ram Kanuga, D.L.E.
6. J.C.Moorgai, B.Sc., LL.B.
7. A.K.Krishnaswamy
8. G.L.Balakrishnan
9. O.LVarma M.A.
10. S.Seethalakshmi
11. S.Balasundaram
12. K.K.Bajaj
13. VijayKhannaB.E.,
14. S.R. Chopra, M.Sc., B.Ed.,
15. N. M. Kapoor, M.A., B.Ed., LL.B.
16. Mrs. C.K.KMavan. M.Sc,

17. M.Girija, M.Sc,
18. C.B.SharmaM.A., B.Sc.,
19. SunderSingh BA, N.D., Arch etc,
20. I.D. Gupta.,
Thousands of such problems had been tackled, 100% correct results
were recorded. Similar method used when people questioned me
about the arrival of plane at Colombo by which I should return to
Madras that day came correct to the Second (4hrs. 39mts. 20
seconds p.m. It was flashed in all papers at Ceylon).
A LUCKY TIME FOR PLAYING CARD
Practical Method:
Whether one has got a horoscope or not, there should be a
method by which it should be possible to find out the auspicious
period in a day when one can relax himself by going to a club to play
cards or any other game. What he should do and furnish to the
Astrologer is a diary wherein he should note down his gains and loss
on various days, in the past mentioning which minute to which minute
he won and which minute to which minute he lost. Also he should
mention the ultimate gain or sucess on that day. Then the Astrologer
is to adopt the following principles.
1. Take date by date. Then note down when Moon entered
in to a constellation on that day and the duration of its stay, which is
the interval between Moon's entry into a star and its passing on to the
next star i.e. completing and just leaving this star.
2. Find out the number of hours and minutes which Moon
takes to pass on in that constellation. Each constellation is of 13
degrees 20 minutes and to pass it, it may take 24 hours or 25 or even
26 hours or in 22 hours it may pass; most irregular: never uniform:
ever unsteady.

3. Then divide the constellation in the proportion in which
each planet is alloted the number of years in Vimshottari Dasa.
Therfore, if the duration is for X hours , then Venus takes 20/120 into
X hours. Sun takes 6/120 multiplied by X hours, Moon 10/ 120 of X
hours, Mars 7/120 into the total of X hours, Jupiter 16/ 120 of the X
hours and so on.
4. If Moon takes, say, 24 hours to pass through a particular
constellation, then divide it by 120. The number of minutes obtained
will be to a planet, if it is alloted one year. So multiply these minutes
(total duration divided by 120) by the number indicating the number of
years alloted to a planet. For example, if venus is alloted 20 years,
then the duration is divided by 120 and multiplied by number of years
alloted to venus.
Since every hour is of 60 minutes and we divide the duration
of hours by 120, it is quick to work by dividing the duration in hours by
2. That is, if 24 hours is the duration, then 12 minutes will be the time,
if a planet is alloted only one year, in the vimshottari dasa. When Sun
has 6 years in Vimshottari Dasa then 6x12 minutes will be the
duration for transiting the Sun Sub in that star by Moon. If Moon
transits in the Sub of Rahu (as for everyyear it takes 12minutes) for
18years, Moon will take 18x12 i.e. 216 minutes. If Mars Sub is to be
transited by Moon, it will take 7 multiplied by 12 minutes;if it is
Mercury, 17x12 minutes and so on.
5. Note, to which planet the constellation belongs. Then
the first Sub is ruled by the lord of the constellation there after in cyclic
order, each Sub is being transited by Moon. So from the moment
when the Moon enters into a Nakshatra, Be adding the number of
minutes for each planet commencing from that of the constellation
lord in cyclic order.
6. Note down, from which minute to which minute a particular
Sub is running in the constellation.

7. Note down, in which Sub period ,the native had won and
which sub he had lost. Then one will find the group of planets which
offer advantageous results and the group which always work against
his interest. For the future, in the diary, note down the hours and
minutes in a day, when lucky group's sub will be transited by Moon.
There are the hours and minutes when one can surely gain.
Horoscope:
If one has got a horoscope, then note down those planets which
are the significators of 6 and 1 1 . Only those planets not connected with
8 and 12 will give profit. If a planet is the significator of 8 and 12, reject
it, as it will cause loss. Therefore, you have to erect the horoscope of
the native. Note down the significators. Find out which are not
connected with 8 and 12and select those which are the significators of
6 and 1 1 and then work out the days when this group will conjointly be
operating, i.e. when Moon will be transiting in the constellation of one
of the planets, being the significator of 6 and 1 1 and among the sub of
planet which is also the significator of 6 and 1 1 Then only, one can be
sure of gain, even when one runs bad time .
Accordinn to Dasa Bhukthi :
In my experience I found that if the Dasa and Bhukthi is evil,
then there will be obstacle for him to sit and play cards in the club
during such short lucky time . There will be some disturbance. He will
not be in a position to play. But the planets will create, such
opportunity as to visit during the bad hours he will find it to be
unlucky . Supposing one runs, according to Dasa and Bhukthi, a very
good time, then he will not be allowed to play during the hours which
are considered to be dis-advantageous . But he will somehow sit
during the hours and minutes which are ruled by the benefactors and
he will surely win. This very method of working goes to prove that
nobody can change fate and everything happens according to the
Divine Plan

and even in these silly matters, we have no hand in it. We are
helpless and our fate alone, wins the race.
Again it proves beyond doubt that Krishnamurti Ayanamsa is
correct and if the ayanamsa is different, do not apply K.P
Horary New finding :
Only in the month of April, 1971 , while going on doing research it
is confirmed beyond doubt that a person who wants to play Cards or
bet in the Race Course should adopt the following method, whether
he has a birth horoscope or not.
Note the place of judement, provide yourselves with Table of
Houses and Ephemeris'. Take any number which comes to your mind
or which you see. It is preferable to have a book containing 250 pages
and note that number on opening the book. If in that particular page,
the page number is not printed, either you do not play or you neither
lose nor gain. If you find any number please refer to Krishnamurti
padhdhati Table and find out where that particular sub commences.
Take it as the starting point .That is the Ascendant. Work out the
other cusps for that latitude of judement. Note down the position of the
planet at the time of judement. Find out the sub lord of the 5th cusp.
If the sub lord of the 5th cusp is deposited in any sign in any
constellation, but in the sub of the significator of the houses 6 and 1 1
one wins most satisfactorily . Highest reward.
If the sub lord of the 5th cusp is deposited in the sub of the
significators 2 and 10, the gain is moderate.
If the sub lord of the 5th cusp is deposited in the sub of the
significator of 1 and 3 there is the gain. But it will be insignificant.
If the sub lord of the 5th cusp is deposited in the sub of the
significator of 12 and 5 there will be great loss and one will be
necessitated, even to borrow money to run to bankruptcy. But if

the sub lord of the 5th cusp is deposited in the sub of the
significator of the houses 4 and 8 one will not over trade and the
loss will be moderate. Ifthe sub lord of 5th cusp is deposited in
the sub of the significator of the houses 7 and 9 the loss will be
feeble - negligible.
This is the general rule which is proved to be very correct in
about 95 % of the cases according to our statistics. But it is also
found that one in twenty cases if the sub lord of the 5th cusp
moves from one sub at the time of judgment and to the other sub
at the time of playing the game, the results vary. Furthermore,
research is being done and it will be announced in the magazine,
after my next visit to Delhi where this is being done by a few
intelligent and painstaking scholars.
LUCKY TIME FOR HORSE RACING
Example horoscope is given below

At the time of birth Moon Dasa balance 0 Year 7 Months 24
Days.
First of all, one should know which method, when followed, will
give correct time, date, month and year of one's gains in races.
There are innumerable methods to find out the number of the
horse which would win - when we read the books on races and
consider the examples given by the author, the method is appealing.
When we apply the same method on future races with limited
knowledge we find that horse, so selected by us is either scratched or
it chases the other horses. No other horse could be seen behind the
one so selected: being last lost the race.
But to a good extent the previous history of the horse and its
present condition are considered and experienced people guess and
they come out correct only 50-50.
Certainty cannot be declared, as, such a sure horse tumble
down, jockey may fall down or due to its peculiar moment in the
course, it may be disqualified. Hence from experience one can't select
anything as a certainty.
Mangoes are in the tree. A boy anxious to have a fruit throws
stones; unless he is destined to have, he cannot. But if he is fortunate
to have, then he will have that number of mangoes as he is lucky to
have.
Hence, what are we to do?
(1 ) Can I have gains without pains.
(2) Is so, will it be through races.
(3) or lottery or what.
(4) When? Will it be only once in my lifetime or frequently. If
frequently the exact timings.

Answer: (1) To gain without much effort one should have the
period ruled conjointly by those planets deposited, in the
constellation and in the sub of the significators of the houses
(2) If one is to gain through races then any of those planets
mentioned above should be connected with 5th house.
(3) If any of the planets deposited in the constellation and in
the sub of the significators of houses 2, 6 and 11, is connected
with 3rd house one gains by way of lottery.
(4) If the significators are not posited in 2 and 12 to each
other, luck will repeat. But if the significators are in 2 and 12to
each other, then during the period of the planet in 12 to the other
significator and the sub-period of the planet in 2 to the major lord,
one will win. If the major period is governed by one in 2 to the subperiod lord, i.e. if the sub-period lord is in 12 to the major period
lord, one will lose.
But if the significators occupy any other position one will win
often whenever their conjoined period operates.
Yes, a period runs for months. Does it mean that in every
race and on all days, one will win.
No. On the whole, in this period he will have substantial profit.
But to find out in which race and on which day. One will win, one
has to apply only Krishnamurti Padhdhati.
One should select the star days governed by dasa lord and
in that the duration of the time when Moon will pass in the sub of
the Bhukthi lord. Further to note the time when Moon will pass in
the sub sub of the significators of 2, 6, and 1 1 . Lagna at that time
also must be calculated for judgement.
The procedure is follows:
1 . cusps of houses and extension of each house: (Refer
Horoscope)

I. 26°-15' Libra to 25°-34' Scorpio.
II. 25°-34' Scorpio to 25°-34' Sagittarius.
III. 25°-34‘ Sagittarius to 27°-34' Capricorn.
IV. 27°-34' Capricorn to 29°-34' Aquarius. V
29°-34‘ Aquarius to 29°-34' Pisces.
VI. 29"- 34' Pisces to 26°15' Aries.
1 80° added gives the cusps of the other houses.
2. Which are the Planets in each house?
3. Planets in the constellation of occupants.
II. In Jupiter star none. In Mars star none
III. In Moon's star Moon alone.
IV. In Kethu star Rahu alone
V. In Sun's starVenus: In Mercury star, Jupiter, Sun, Mercury
VII. In Venus star Mars alone

X. In Rahu star Saturn and Kethu
XII. In Saturn star none.
Therefore Jupiter and Mars are the strongest significators of the
second house. Venus Jupiter, Sun and Mercury are the significators
of 5th house.
Lords of the houses and planets in their stars.
I and VIII Venus; Mars is in Venus star.
II and VII Mars; none in Mars star.
III and VI Jupiter; none in Jupiter star.
IV and V Saturn; none in Saturn star
IX and XII Merc.; Jupiter Sun and Mercury are in Merc. star.
X Moon; Moon alone is in its star.
XI Sun; Venus alone in Sun star.
Hence second house is signified by Mars, fifth by Saturn, sixth
by Jupiter, eleventh by Sun and Venus. As Rahu is in Sun sign take
Rahu and Saturn as well as Kethu in Rahu's star.
Moon is not connected with 2 or 5 or 6 or 1 1 . The most important
method of selecting beneficials and rejecting the tempters is as
follows:
Note in which sub, these planets are. They should be in the sub
of the significators of 2, 6, and 11 alone: never 5th: 5th we take to
show the mode of gains alone. It is applicable to constellation - never
for sub.
Significators of 2nd, 6th and 11th houses, are Jupiter, Mars,
Sun, Venus, Rahu, Saturn and Kethu.
Jupiter is in the sub of Jupiter
Mars is in the sub of Saturn
Sun is in the sub of Mercury

Venus is in the sub of Rahu
Rahu is in the sub of Kethu
Saturn is in the sub of Rahu
Kethu is in the sub of Rahu
Mercury is in the sub of Rahu
Benefics are Venus, Saturn, Kethu, Mercury and Jupiter
Adverse ones are Mars, Sun, Rahu by that, it is meant that the
benefics in their star days and sub periods ruled by them alone will
give gain. During Mars, Sun and Rahu sub periods, even in the major
beneficial periods or star days will end in a loss.
Reject other star days.
Dates on which races are expected to run and the stars on
those days with remarks:-
Bangalore :
31-5-69 - Saturday. Anuradha till 6-55 RM. I.S.T.
Saturn star day. Total duration 21 hrs. 20 mts. Hence between
12.53 P.M. to 4-05 RM. Rahu sub. 405 RM. onwards; Jupiter sub only
after 4-05 RM., time is lucky.
Saturn as lord of 5 gives the mind to bet. Jupiter as lord of 6, in
its own sub, gives gains, (6th shows loss to competitors).

1-6-69:-Sunday: Jyesta till 4-01 RM. Later Moolam. Hence
only after4-01 RM. luck starts.
7- 6-69: Saturday: Porvapadrapada till next day 3-57 A.M. Total
duration 24 hours. Hence Mercury sub is upto 2-24 RM. which is to
be avoided. Later Kethu sub till 3-48 RM. is good, Again Venus sub
between 3-48 and 7-48 P.M is better.
8- 6-69: Sunday: Uthrapadrapada from3-57 A.M. to 4-34 A.M. on
9- 6-69. So from 108 RM. Venus sub runs for 4hrs. 16 mts.. i.e. till
5-24 P.M. This is advantageous. After 5-24 P.M. sun rules. So, no
good after 5-24 RM. on this day.
14- 6-69: Saturday: Mrigasirafrom 2-29 P.M. Mars rules this star. It is
in the sub of planet in 12owning the house 5. It shows that one will
take venture - event follow doubling system and lose more than
normal.
15- 6-69: Sunday: Mrigasira till 5-18 P.M. later Arudhra. Results will be
like 14th. But anything after 5-18 PM. will be governed by Rahu in the
sub of Kethu. This is also not good. Better 14-609 and 150-69 are
otherwise spent.
21- 6-69 Saturday: Poorvaphalguni from 7-31 RM. till next day 9-28
A.M., 7-31 to 11-51 Venus sub: then 11-51 to 1-09 PM. Sun: Then
1-09 P.M. to 3-19 P.M. Moon sub: 3-19to 4-52 PM. Mars, Later Rahu.
Though Venus star is good, all these subs do not contribute.
22- 6-69: Sunday: Uthra Phalguni from 9-28 A.M. to next day
10-45A.M. Only after 6-01 PM. Jupiter sub comes. Prior to that Rahu,
etc., after 6-01 very good.
28-6-69: Saturday: Jyesta 5-34 A.M. to next day 2-43 A.M. So up
to 1-13 PM. Sun sub. Later Moon up to 2-24. Then Mars till 3-39:
Later Rahu. On the whole, not profitable.
29-6-69: Sunday: Moola Starts at 2-13 A.M. ends by 11-38
P.M.

From 2-34 P.M. Jupiter sub excellent; 5-19 PM. onwards.
Saturn sub; Very profitable so. in the month of June, 29-6-69 is
lucky.
Let us note dasa, bhukthi also. Saturn Dasa Mercury Bhukthi
operates from 27-1 1 -1968.
27-11-68 to 14-4-69 Mercury Anthra.
14-4-69 to 10-06-69 Kethu Anthra.
10-6-69 to 6-7-69 Venus Shookshma.
6-7-69 to 14-7-69 Sun Shookshma.
14-7-69 to 27-7-69 Moon Shookshma.
27-7-69 to 6-8-69 Mars Shookshma.
6-8-69 to 30-8-69 Rahu Shookshma.
On the whole, Venus Anthra is profitable. In that 10-6-69 to
6-7-69 and then 30-8-69 to 20-11-69 are lucky sub periods. In the
other periods, there will be mixed results and profit cannot be
expected: Hence 29-6-69 is lucky after 10-6-69.
LUCKY TIME FOR HORSE RACING
Example II
Sir,
Is it possible to find out (a) in which day this person can
have gains and (b) in which hour? A day may be beneficial
ultimately: but in between there are ups and downs. Have you, in
your research, found out a method which will be useful to

calculate and know which time is advantageous and lucky. If you
can't reply me personally, let me request you to publish it the
magazine taking a horoscope as an example one; I give my
friend's chart.
The horoscope is as follows:
Sun Dasa balance 4 years 1 month and 15 days.
Now he is running Jupiter Dasa Venus Bhukthi from 27-10-66 The
anthras are as follows:

After 27-6-69 in Jupiter Dasa Sun Bhukthi will run.
Cusps:
I.Virgo 6.53; II. Libra4.51; III. Scorpio 4.51; IV.Sagittarius 6.51;
V.Capricorn;8.51 ; VI.Aquarius 8.51.
Therefore lagna bhava extends from virgo 6°-53' to 4°-51’ Libra,
second house extend from Libra 4°-51' to Scorpio 4°-51'; Third house
from Scorpio 4°-51' to 6°-51' Sagittarius. Fourth house extends from
6°-51' Sagittarius to 8°-51' Capricorn.
Therefore, find out in which area, these planets are posited.
I. Bhava-none.
II. Sun in Libra; Rahu in Scorpio and Mercury in Scorpio.
III. None.
IV Moon in Capricorn.
V. None
VI. None.
VII. None
VIII. Kethu in Taurus
IX. None
X. None.
XI. Jupiter in Cancer.
XII. Saturn, Mars, Venus in Leo.
Lordship: Lord of a bhava is the lord of the sign where the cusp
falls. It may be in the very beginning or in the middle or in the fag end
of the sign even: it does not matter in which sign major part of the
Bhava is. Therefore,

Mercury is lord of 1 and 10 as Ascendant is in Virgo and
M.C.in Gemini.
Venus is lord of 2 and 9 as 2nd cusp is in Libra and 9th
in Taurus.
Mars is lord of 3 and 8 as 3rd cusp is in Scorpio and 8 in
Aries.
Jupiter is lord of 4 and 7 as 4th cusp is in Sagittarius and 7th in
Pisces.
Saturn is lord of 5 and 6 as 5th cusp is in Capricorn and 6th in
Aquarius.
Moon is lord of 11th cusp, as 11th cusp is in Cancer and
Moon is the owner of Cancer.
Sun rules Karthik, Uthraphalguni and Uthrashada, Karthik;
extends from 20°46' Aries to 10° Taurus. Uthra extends from 26°-40'
Leo to 10° Virgo. Uthrashada extends from 26°-40' Sagittarius to 20°
Capricorn. Find out whether any planet is deposited in this area.
Kethu is in Karthik in Taurus.
Venus is in Uthraphalguni in Leo.
Moon is in Uthrashada in Capricorn.

Rahu isthe lord of Arudhra, Swathi and Sathabisha; Arudhra
6°-40' Gemini to 20° Gemini; Swathi 6°-40' to 20° Libra; Sathabisha
6°-40' to 20° Aquarius. Find which planet is in this area.
Arudhra none.
Swathi Sun
Sathabisha - none.
Mercury rules Ashlesha, Jyesta and Revathi. Ashlesha extends
from 16°-40' to 30° in Cancer. Jyesta extends from 16°-40' to 30° in
Scorpio. Revathi extends from 16°40' to 30° in Pisces.
Note which planet is in this area.
Jupiter is in Ashlesha.
Jyesta and Revathi unoccupied.
Therefore, planet in second Bhava are Sun, Rahu and Mercury.
Planets in the constellation of the occupants are Kethu,
Venus and Moon in Sun star.
Sun is in Rahu star and Jupiter is in Mercury star. Therefore
Kethu, Venus, Moon, Rahu and Jupiter are in the constellation of the
occupants of 2nd Bhava.
Fourth Bhava : Moon is in 4 : Its stars are Rohini, Hastham,
Sravanam. Rohini extends from 10° to 23°-20' inTaurus. Hastham
extends from 10° to 23°-20' in Virgo. Sravanam extends from 10° to
23°-20' in Capricorn. No planet is in Moon's star.
Moon is in fourth Bhava. No planet is in its stars. Therefore
Moon is the strong significator of the 4th house results.
If there is planet in the star of the occupant, the planet situated in
the star will give the results of the Bhava occupied by the lord of the
star, e.g., Kethu, Venus were in the star of Sun. Therefore note which
house is occupied by the lord of the star, i.e. , Sun.

Sun is in 2. Therefore Kethu and Venus will give second house
results. They are stronger than Sun in offering second house results
and they are called as the significators of the second house. If there
is no planet in any of the 3 stars of the occupant, then the occupant
offers the results of the bhava occupied by it and it is stronger than
the lord of the house. Tenants are stronger than the owners. Here we
judge " who is stronger “ by taking the bhava occupied by a planet
and the owner of the sign where the cusp of the Bhava falls. Here we
judge the sign.
But previously, we take the 9 planets. We distribute 27 stars to
these 9 planets. Each star extends to 13°20' and the owner of 3 stars
will be one planet, e.g. Karthik, Uthraphalguni and Uthrashada are
ruled by sun. Rohini, Hastham and Sravanam are governed by Moon,
hence planets in Sun's star is stronger than Sun in offering the results
of the Bhava in which Sun is posited; and similarly planets in any of
the three stars of Moon are stronger than Moon in giving the results of
the Bhava indicated by Moon by its occupation.
Eighth Bhava : Occupied by Kethu which rules the stars Aswini,
Maka and Moola. Aswini extends from 0° Aries to 13°-20'; Makam
extends from 0° to 13°-20' in Leo and Moolam from 0° to 13°-20’ in
Sagittarius. No planet is found in any of the three zones. Therefore
Kethu is the strong significator of 8th Bhava.
[Node is ever stronger than the lord of the sign, the planet or
planets with which it is conjoined.] Kethu is in Taurus owned Venus. It
is stronger than Venus. But Kethu is in 8th house. 8th cusp falls in
Aries. Mars is the lord of the 8th house. Therefore Kethu is stronger
than Mars in offering 8th house results.
Kethu in Taurus represents Venus who owns houses 2 and 9.
Therefore Kethu will give the results of both these houses.
Eleventh house : Occupied by Jupiter. Its stars are
Punarvasu, Visaka, Poorvapadrapada.

Punarvasu extends from 20° Gemini to 3°-20' Cancer. Visaka
extends from 20° Libra to 3°-20' Scorpio. P.P.Pada extends from 20°
Aquarius to 3°-20' Pisces. Rahu alone is in Visaka star Scorpio sign.
[Rahu is conjoined with Mercury. Hence Rahu in its subperiod and Mercury sub sub period will offer such results which
Mercury is to give. Rahu is in Scorpio owned by Mars. Mars is lord of
Scorpio and Aries. 3rd cusp is in Scorpio and 8th cusp is in Aries,
therefore 3rd house and 8th house results will be given by Rahu in
the conjoined period of Rahu and the significators of the 3rd house
and the 8th house. Mars is in the 12th house. Rahu represents Mars.
Hence planets in Rahu star will give 12th house results also.]
Twelfth house : Occupied by Saturn, Mars and Venus.
Saturn : Pushya, Anuradha and U.P.Pada. Pushya extends from
3°-20' to 16°-40' Cancer. Anuradha extends from 3°-20’ to 16°40'
Scorpio. U.P.Pada extends from 3°-20‘ to 16°-40' Pisces.
Mercury alone is in Anuradha ruled by Saturn. Hence Mercury in
second Bhava will give 12th house results, whereas planets in
Mercury stars will give second house results.
Mars is in 12 : Its stars are Mrigasira, Chithra and Dhanishta.
Mrigasira extends from 23°-20‘ Taurus to 6°-40' Gemini, Chithra
extends from 23°-20' Virgo to 6°-40 Libra, Dhanishta from 23°-20’
Capricorn to 6°-40' Aquarius. No planet in Mars star.
But Rahu is in Mars sign. Rahu is in strong significator than
Mars. Hence find out the stars of Rahu and note which planet is in
Rahu star. This planet in Rahu star will give both the second house
result, because Rahu is in 2nd Bhava and also 12th house results as
Mars, lord of the sign where Rahu is posited is in 12th bhava. Sun
alone is in Rahu star. Hence Sun will give both the second and twelfth
house results. Second house is for increase in bank position and
some member of the family reuniting or

marriage, birth of children, etc., 12th house is for issue of cheques,
expenses, separation, etc., Then, how to predict? If Sun's period is
running and during that period, the sub-periods, are favourable i.e.,
the lord of the sub is favourable one will enjoy 2nd house results : If
Sun's period is running and the sub-period in it is ruled by a planet
which is disadvantageous, you can have only expenses or separation
due to 12th house results.
Venus is in 12 : Bharani, Poorvaphalguni and Poorvashada are
the stars of Venus, Bharani, extends from 13°-20' to 26°-40' Aries.
PPGuni extends from 13°-20' to 26°-40' Leo. P.Shada, extends from
13°-20' to 26°40' Sagittarius. Saturn, Mars are in Venus star. Venus
which is to give 12th house results, is weaker than Saturn and Mars.
Now, you see whether there is any node in any of the Venus
signs, Taurus or Libra. Kethu is in Taurus. Therefore Kethu is
stronger than Venus. Kethu stars are Aswini, Maka, Moola : No
planet is in its star. Hence Kethu will give 12th house results also.
Kethu in 8th house and no planets in its star is to give 8th house
results. As Kethu is in Venus sign, it has to give 12th house results
due to the occupation of Venus ; and Kethu is to offer 2nd house and
9th house matters as Venus owns 2nd and 9th houses and Kethu is
an agent of Venus.
Now the question is about gains with least pains. Gain to one
means loss to another. In betting lagna unafflicted indicates the
person who bets; 7th house denotes the others who compete.
If the other is to lose, it is 12 to 7th house i.e 6th house.
Hence 6th house shows that the competitor losses and
thereby the native gains.
If one makes a profit, the bank position improves. So it is
the matter of the 2nd house.

Profit is shown by the 1 1th house. Hence judge houses 2, 6
and 1 1 . Now we have to select the significators :
(a) Planet posited in the constellation of the occupant of a
bhava ;
(b) Planets occupying a bhava ;
(c) Planets situated in the constellation of the lord of the sign
where the cusp of the bhava falls,
(d) lord of the bhava;
(e) planets conjoined with any of the above significators or
aspected by any of the above.
In this order we have to make a selection.
We have already discussed the 2nd and 1 1th Bhavas.
6th remains unexplained. There is no planet in 6th house which
extends from 8°-51' Aquarius to 6°-53' Pisces.
Hence find out who is the lord of the sign where 6th cusp falls. It falls
in Aquarius. So Saturn is the lord of the 6th bhava. Saturn governs the
stars, Pushya, Anurahda and Uthrapadhrapada. Only Mercury is in
Saturn's star Anuradha. Hence Mercury is to give 2 results; they are 6
and 12; they are diametrically opposite ones: 6 shows gains: 12
shows loss. Then consider and judge in the following manner. If the
lords of dasa or bhukthi or anthra of other planets are beneficial in that
period. Mercury gives gains, If the lords of dasa or bhukthi or anthra of
other planets are adverse in that peiod. Mercury will bring loss.
Hence the significators are as follows:
(a) Kethu, Venus, Moon, Sun and Jupiter:
Second ; Mercury - 12th and 6th bhava : Rahu 1 1th bhava.
(b) Jupiter - 11th bhava.

In this combination we do not find Saturn and Mars. They are in
the 12th bhava, in the constellation of Venus in 12. Hence avoid
Saturn and Mars sub-periods. Again Mercury and Kethu will give
mixed results. Genuine good planets are Sun, Rahu, Jupiter, Moon
and Venus.
Mixed results by Mercury and Kethu. Adverse results by Saturn
and Mars. Therefore if the bhukthi belongs to Mercury and Kethu, the
sub periods in that bhukthi, if ruled by Sun, Rahu, Jupiter, Moon,
Venus, you gain.
During Mercury and Kethu periods Saturn and Mars sub will
incur loss.
During Sun, Rahu, Jupiter, Venus and Moon periods, sub of
Mercury or Kethu and sub sub of Saturn and Mars loss. Sub period of
Saturn and Mars loss. But the other sub-periods will bring good
profits.
Now you are running Jupiter Dasa Venus Bhukthi from 27In that from 5-3-68 to 13-7-68 Jupiter sub sub is to operate.
Again find further subs in Jupiter's sub sub period.

other periods are favourable.
People may play cards : may bet: may go to races. All the 24
hours of the day, or in all the sub-periods one cannot gain. On the
whole, how it could be, may be predicted by any learned astrologer.
But they cannot offer a prediction, with scientific explanation, which
moment one will gain, which moment one will lose and so on.
The method to find out the moment is as follows:-
Note down which dasa is on : which bhukthi operates.
Then select the 3 stars belonging to dasa lord and 3
stars owned by bhukthi lord.
In these 6 star days one will gain, if both the dasa
lord and bhukthi lord are advantageous.
Note when - which moment - Moon enters into that star and
which moment it leaves that star. The interim period or interval
betwen its entry into a star and its exit is the duration of the star. It
may be 22 hrs.or 23 hrs. or 24 or 26 hrs. and minutes.
Take the duration, convert into minutes. Divide by 120. Then if
the period of a planet is only one year then the result obtained by
dividing the duration of the star by 120 will be the time taken by Moon
to move 1 / 120 of the star. If one wants to know the duration needed
for Moon to move the Sun's sub which is allotted 6 years in
Vimshottari Dasa, multiply the result obtained for 1 year by 6.
If the duration needed for Moon to move the Moon's sub which is
allotted lOyears in Vimshottari Dasa, multiply the result obtained for 1
year by 10.

For Mars and Kethu multiply by 7.
For Jupiter by 16; for Mercury by 17; for Rahu by
18 : for Saturn by 19 and for Venus by 20.
When you add all these, then the total duration
will be obtained.
Therefore one knows, which time to which time the
sub-period operates.
For example, let us take this chart. He is running
Jupiter Dasa Venus Bhukthi Jupiter Anthra.
These planets promise him fortune or at least
gains and success.
Therefore note down the stars governed by Jupiter and Venus.
They are Punarvasu, Visaka, Poorvapadrapada, ruled by Jupiter.
Bharani, Pooraphalguni and Poorvashada governed by Venus.
Take the almanac - Note down when Moon enters into these
stars - on which date and at which time : also note when Moon
leaves this star - which date and which time. (Better use K.P.
Ephemeris.)
This interval between the entry of Moon in a star and
its exit is the duration of Moon's passage in that star.
Convert the duration into minuters. Divide it as mentioned above
and note from which time to which time Moon was in that sub.
For example let us take 28-4-1968 on which day there
is races. Moon is in Venus star.
Bharani star ruled by Venus will be entered by Moon on 274-68 at 7-15 PM. It leaves Bharani on 28-4-68 at 10-15 PM. So, the
duration is between 7-15 RM. on 27-4-68 and 10-15 PM. on

28-4-68 = 27 hours convert to minutes = 27 X 60 mts. Divide by 120,
so that the result shows the number of minutes, duration, if the lord of
the sub is allotted only one year.
Hence Moon will be in Sun's sub for a period of 13.5 mts. X 6 as
Sun is allotted 6 years in Vimshottari Dasa = 81 mns. Moon will be in
Mars sub for 13.5 X 7 mts. 94 mts. 30 Secs. The same duration will be
taken to pass Kethu sub. Moon will take 13.5 X 10 mts. to pass
Moon's sub as Moon is allotted 10 years in Vimshottari Dasa 135 mts.
Similarly Jupiter sub will take 16 X 13.5 mts. = 216mts. Mercury 229.5
mts. Rahu 243 mts. Sani 256.5 mts. Sukra 270 mts.
As the star Bharani is ruled by Venus, the first sub will be
governed by Venus, next by Sun, then, Moon, Mars, Rahu ; Jupiter,
Saturn, Mercury and Kethu. Moon will enter Bharani on 27-4-68 at
First sub belongs to Venus = 20 X 13.5 = 270 mts. = 4hrs. 30
mts.
Hence Moon will be in Venus star sub of Venus from 7-15 P.M. to
Next Sun's sub is for 6 X 1 3.5= 81 mts.
Mercury 4-52 PM. to 8-41-30 PM.

Races run between 1-30 and 6 PM. Venus star Saturn sub will
operate upto 4-52 PM. Hence he will lose till 4-52 PM. Then in the last
3 races, it is governed by Mercury. As both dasanatha and
bhukthinatha promise gains, Mercury gives on plurality of the cases.
Hence he must gain in this period.
Suppose he plays cards, from, say, 7 A.M.
As Rahu sub will be till 8-59-30 A.M. he must gain.
Luckily Guru sub is between 8-59-30 A.M. to 12-35-30 PM. He
gains.
Now, this is the time for him to come home, take lunch and have
rest till 4-52 PM. But if he continues to play when Moon is in Saturn
sub, he will surely lose; again during Mercury sub he will make profit.
Thus one is to calculate and find out the time - auspicious and
advantageous to each horoscope.
LUCKY TIME TO COMMENCE WORK
TO TAKE TREASURE
For those who have the horoscope find out whether the Sub-lord of
the 11 th cusp is connected with Saturn and the houses 4 and 6. Only
for such of those people they can find something valuable from under
the ground. Select the Dasa and Bhukthi ruled by the Significators of
2, 4, 6, 11 not connected with 8 and 12. The day when one can start
unearthing to get the treasure should be on such a day when Moon
transits in the constellation of a planet who is the significator of the
houses, 2, 4, 6, 11 not connected with 8 and 12 it should be
connected with Saturn also. In that case one must necessarily come
by treasure on the day when the Dasa Bhukthi, Anthra and Sookshma
are all governed by the significators of 2, 4, 6 and 1 1 .

TO START TREATMENT FOR INVALID CHILD
Having erected the horoscope acording to Krishnamurti
Padhdhati and found out the significators of each houses, one hasto
pick upfrom the horoscope of the invalid child the particular period
(i.e. the Dasa and Bhukthi of the planets who are the significators of
the houses 1 ,5 and 1 1 .) Then the treatment should be started on such
a day when Moon transits in the constellation and Sub ruled by Dasa
lord and Bhukthi lord. In such cases there will be the cure. Here the
administration of the medicine should start at the moment when the
ascendant is also in such a position so that the sign lord, star lord and
sublord are the significators of 1 ,5 and 1 1 .
If everything is correctly done it means the child has got the
fortune of getting cured but if a child is destined to suffer, either the
astrologer will commit a mistake in the calculations or the watch in the
house may not show correct time or there will be some obstacle in
administering the medicine at such a lucky time. If everything is
correctly done there must be the cure.
A LUCKYTIME TO PROSPER AS AN ACTRESS
After calculating the horoscopes and finding out the significators
note, which planets are the significators of the houses 5, 6,10 and 11
in their conjoined periods on the day when Moon transits in such a
constellation ruled by a planet, who is the significator of the houses 5,
6, 10 and 11. Find out the Sub lord of which is also the significator of
5,6,10 and 11. Then there will be success in the attempt which one
makes and if the Sub-lord of the 10 is very strong one will become
famous. Sublord of 2 and 11 show the gains. Therefore, select the
moment to sign the contract when the ascendant also transits in such
a position so that the lord of the Sign, the lord of the constellation and
the lord of the Sub are all the significators of 5,6,10 and 1 1 .

O SUBMIT TENDER FOR CONTRACT WORK
One will come out successful in having certain contracts for
building or supplies if he signs acontract at a time when both the
ascendant and the Moon, transit in such astar and sub governed by
the significators of the houses 3, 6, 9 and 1 1 .
TO START SHOOTING OF A CINEMA FILM
The time selected should be such that the significator of the
houses 6, 10 and 11 operate and such significators are not
connected with 8 and 12. Similarly also a time must be selected (or
each artist to act. If an artist for the first time begins to act, he or she
should start at such an auspicious moment at which time both the
ascendant and the Moon were transiting in the constellation and sub
governed by the significators of the houses 6, 10 andl 1.
As regards releasing of the film whatever be the time in a day
either morning, evening or night, the time should be so selected that
both the ascendant and the Moon transit in such constellation and
sub governed by the significator of the houses, 2, 6, 11 and not
connected with 8 and 12.
LUCKY TIME
To Purchase a Ticket for Lottery:
Nowadays most of us have developed our minds to have easy
gains and at the same time we feel more happy when we are legally
allowed to enjoy the full amount without paying any tax. When every
Pie which has been got either after hard labour or without any effort at
all, strain at all, then if we are allowed to enjoy the entire amount,
there is no room to feel sorry. On the contrary, we are very very
happy. One of the ways by which it would be possible to have a good
lump sum or at least something, is Lottery. Everybody cannot have it.
Therefore, one has to judge whether according to one's horoscope,
one is entitled to have

such a fortune, whether one is born at such a time as to have gains
without pains. Then in their cases we can calculate.
As majority of the people do not have correct horoscope, and also
most of the people in India follow incorrect almanacs, we cannot
completely depend upon the time of the birth given by the native and
also the horoscope presented by them. Therefore is advisable to go
by Horary Astrology and find out the significators of the houses 2.3.6
and 1 1 and also 8 and 12. We have to select such auspicious period
according to Dasa, Bhukthi calculated on the Horary horoscope
and during that time select such days when Moon transits in such a
constellation governed by the significators of the houses 2.3.6 and 1 1
and eliminating the significators of the houses 8 and 12. When one
calculates correctly and selects such a star day and in that such a sub
(that it will be few hours) and in those hours to select such a position
in the Zodiac which will be transited by the Ascendant. So calculate
that minute and purchase the ticket.
Tickets are sold everywhere. And therefore, make sure that you
are purchasing from one who sells the genuine ticket. If a person were
to do so, certainly he must gain for such an action.
Whenever one sows the seed in auspicious moment certainly
the yield from the field will be to one's entire satisfaction.
When to Meet the Agent or the Manager of a Bank to
have Over-Draft Facility :
Even when one is worth a few laksh or millions, occasionally
there will be the necessity for such a person who does business
wherein the money is rolling. During the adverse days of the person
whatever bill he sends will not be honoured, money will get entangled
and he has to necessarily pay to others and thereby the necessity will
arise to go in for Overdraft facilities from the Bank. When honour is at
stake and we have to maintain our prestige, such a facility alone will
offer peace of mind and we will have the go ahead spirit. Therefore, it
is really worthwhile to note down the moment when one can previously
arrange and

have an appointment with the manager or the agent of the Bank and
the businessman goes and finds him at that moment. Such a moment
would be the time which is governed by the significators of the houses
3,6,9 and 11. That is you must go at a time when your Dasa, Bhukthi,
Anthra are governed by the significators of the houses 3,6,9 and 11
and also on the day when Moon transits in such a constellation
governed by the significators of 3,6,9 and 11 and in that star day to
select that sub period which is also ruled by the significators of 3,6,9
and 1 1 and also at the moment when the Ascendant will be transiting in
such a position in the Zodiac which is also governed by the significators
of 3,6,9 andll. In that particular case, even if the person who applies
for Overdraft had already drawn just to over the limit, Yet the agent will
come to an agreement and sanction, allowing him to enjoy the overdraft
even from that moment. Any recommendation is being made by the
agent to the Head Office will be immediately sanctioned and one can
maintain one's prestige. Which person in the world would not like to
have such a success by simply following Astrology?
One thing is to be remembered. Unless one is destined to have such
a facility whether by selecting such a moment after consulting an
astrologer or he himself unknowingly present that application at such
an auspicious time. But if a person is so destined as not to have the
sanction and he is to suffer, then whatever be the calculation by the
Astrologer and whatever effort would be taken by him to reach the
agent's place at the stipulated time, yet there will be break-down while
going by car or there will be some hindrance or obstacle that
he could not utilise the most useful scientific knowledge, but he will
approach the agent in the wrong moment which promises according to
his horoscope that he should suffer and he cannot have the Overdraft
facility sanctioned. Therefore, every student of KRISHNAMURTI
PADHDHATI must first of all note down which houses one is to judge,
which significator of certain houses alone will be helpful, which
Significators will be harmful etc., When once that principle is
understood, then selecting the time is very very easy and

one can be sure of the results by selecting a time and acting either at
the same moment or at the wrong time. So the moment of action
indicates the result which is to come immediately or late.
Lottery Gains or with no Pains :
The chart of a person is as follows :
Fifth house shows whether one is inclined to speculate or not. If
the sublord of the Third is in any way connected with the 5th, 6th or
11th one is hopeful of gaining through lottery.
Here 11th cusp is in Gemini in Jupiter star and Mercury sub.
Mercury the sublord is in Rahu constellation and sub of Saturn in the
3rd house. So, gain is promised. I do not say that there is a tendency
to gain. I declare that you must gain.
“The cusps indicate whether it is promised or not. The
significators point the time of event. Both dasa, bhukthi and gochara
must agree."

11th house is for profit and gains, Lord is Mercury. He is in 10th
in the star of Rahu and conjoined with Rahu. Rahu acts as the agent
of Mercury as it is, in one of the signs of Mercury. So Rahu is to
indicate the second house matters. Rahu being deposited in the
constellation of Mars in 11 and sub of Moon who is the significator of
11 also as Moon is in Venus star. As owner of 12is in 12, Moon
indicates investment, money spent to buy tickets. Also it is in Venus
star, thereby 11th house significator.
Rahu and Moon are the significators of the 11 th house. Rahu is
the significator of the 2nd house also as it is conjoined with Mercury
lord of 2nd and is in Mercury's sign. Rahu and Mercury are the
significators of the 2nd house. No planet is in 6. Saturn owns it.
Planets in the star of Saturn are Saturn, Venus, Mars and Jupiter.
Among these significators we have to select those which are in
favourable subs and reject those in unfavourable subs.
Venus, Rahu and Mercury are very favourable. Financial
position ought to have improved from the time Venus sub period
started.
"Now you must win in the lottery during Rahu dasa Venus
Bhukthi Mercury Anthra and Venus Shookshma. On 30th October,
Sun will be in Venus sign Rahu star, Mercury and Moon also will be in
conjunction in Venus sign Rahu Star."
Actually he had lump sum on 30-10-70.
to Open an Account in a Bank :
The idea behind opening an account in a Bank is to have
savings. However much one may try to open an account in the most
auspicious time during the Dasa and Bhukthi of the Planets which are
significators of 8 and 12, one cannot save money. But the amount will
be either stationary or completely closed. Withdraw the amount to
which he is eligible after deducting the charges for the Ledger etc.,
But if one were to select an

auspicious time during the Dasa and Bhukthi of the planets, signifying
the houses 3, 6 and 11. Then the moment when one is to open the
account normally, (if he is not influential to open it at a time when the
Bank will not be accepting the operation), during those hours on
working days we have to find out whether Moon transits in favourable
stars, the lords of which happen to be the significators of the houses
3,6 and 11 and also the Ascendant in such a similar position. If one
opens an account at that time, it is an indication that he will be
accumulating wealth. It is similar to one, who sows the seed just
before the season starts and naturally it will have good growth and
with sufficient fertility.
When to Start C.I.D. Work to catch the Thief :
If an Inspector of Police were to be entrusted with this job, better
he consults the student of KP to find out the auspicious moment to
start his work in catching the thief. The student will select a day when
Moon transits in such a star governed by the significators of 6, 10 and
Hand in that, he will calculate the time when the Ascendant will be in
the sign, star and sub governed by the significators of 6,10 and 1 1. If
an Inspector of Police were to follow this strictly, and the KP follower
is good in calculation, it is a certainty that the thief will be caught.
If per chance, the significators of 6,10 and 11 happen to be the
significators of 5 and 9, then, the thief will be safe for some time till
the conjoined periods 6,10 and 11, unconnected with 5 and 9 operate.
To Trap one, receiving the Bribe :
I have seen a few horoscopes of the people who had been
trapped and badly caught. In their horoscopes, it was very clear that
the sub-lords of 5, 8 and 12 operated at the moment of being trapped.
That is on that day Moon was transiting in a star which is governed by
the significators of 5, 8 and 12 and the moment at which he was
arrested is also at the moment when the Ascendant

was rising in the East for that place where he was trapped. If a
person were to feel that he would be trapped even though he has this
knowledge, he cannot avoid this, because receiveing bribe need not
be only in the office. It can be done anywhere. I have seen the
horoscopes of the cases wherein people were trapped near Petrol
Bunk, in the office, in the house, in the hotel and other places.
Since fate and Karma come first, God comes only next, however
much you pray, whatever be the extent to which you can either retard
or beg pardon from the authorities, nobody can escape.
to File the case in the Court of Law :
The significators to be selected are 6 and 11. Note down which
day during the office hours, Moon transits in such a
constellation, the Lord of which is the significator of 6 and 1 1 , and has
no connection at all with the houses 8 and 12. Similarly, the
Ascendant also must necessarily be transiting in that sign, star and
sub, governed by the planets who are the significators of the houses
6 and 11 and not at all connected with 8 and 12. If actually, it is done
correctly, then one will come out successful. But the students are
warned that they should not give in writing that a person will come out
successful, in a legal suit, especially after it had been filed in the
Court of Law, since it may per chance account to contempt of the
Court. No doubt the Astrologers will have no mind to disobey Law.
Astrologers are those, who are Law abiding and God fearing.
They will not peacefully, intentionally, commit any crime, but
yet, unknowingly why should we do and be put into trouble?
Therefore, my advice to astrologers would be, "tell them vocally,
whether they will win the case or not. If you have to necessarily
write, and if that consultant lives for away, in that case you simply
answer that if an attempt is made by you at this moment, success is
promised. In that whole letter, there should be no word about the suit,
Law, legal action etc."

When to Start a Strike for fair deal :
What you want is, either increase in income or reduction in the
hours of work. Everyone would wish to have it, very frequently, as it is
not possible to carry on the family enjoying the irreducible minimum of
pleasure. If you have to fill up a tank how difficult it is ? So with great
difficulty, you have to drain a well and fill up a tank. So also to get
money from one, who is to give, is so difficult. Therefore, you have to
give notice personally at a particular moment when the Leader of the
Strike hands over to the person concerned. This time should be
governed by the significators of the houses 6 and 11, not at all
connected with 8 and 12 of that leader. In that case, you can expect a
fair deal in a short time.
Initiation of Manthra for Siddhi :
Find out the moment when Moon and Lagna transits in such a
position, the lords of the constellation and sub will be the significators
of the houses 11 and 10.
Auspicious Time to Commence Music :
Note down the time when the significators of the houses 2, 3, 5,
10 and 11 operate. In that case, one can lead in this line and also
earn satisfactorily.
To Demand Donation :
Whenever a donation is needed for certain good cause and even
though the party will be very willing to give, yet, we should not
approach at the moment when he is not in his seat; nor we should
return with a very small amount. Therefore, it is necessary to find out
the most auspicious time. If possible you kindly try to get the
horoscope of the donor, that it, he, who is to contribute. Find out the
significators of the houses 8 and 12 for him. Select the day when
Moon transits in such a constellation, the lord of which is the
significators of 8 and 12 to one, who is to donate. Also note down the
time when the Ascendant will be rising in the East to that locality at a
time when you meet him. This position

also should be in such a sign, star and sub, all governed by the
significators of 8 and 12 to that person. In that case, you can have
most satisfactory donation. Whenever we want to break a hard nut,
we find whether there is a crack; or whether it is thin. Therefore,
either in unguarded moments or even when one is well guarded in
such moment, when we will give expression in such words, which will
appeal to the mind of the donor, then our effort is amply rewarded. So
you have to select the auspicious time according to KRISHNAMURTI
PADHDHATI and enjoy your life.
LUCKY TIME
To Sign an Agreement:
Cast your horoscope correctly by one of the students of
Krishnamurti or the follower of KRISHNAMURTI PADHDHATI.
Request him to find out the significators of each house and note down
such of those planets which are the significators of the houses 6 and
1 1 . And at the same time note the significators of the houses 5 or 8 or
12. During the conjoined periods of such planets, which are not the
significators of 5, 8, 12, but they are the significators of 6 and 11 or 2,
6,11, they must bring success and profit. (Even though people who
play cards, happen to be friends outside the club, one helping the
other even out of way, yet at the moment of playing cards, one is to
consider the other as the opponent. Similarly, when an agreement is
being signed by two parties, then this agreement is because of
friendship. But astrologically, the other person, with whom the
agreement is made, should be considered as a partner or opponent.
Nobody would like to lose, and everybody wants further progress. So
the 6th and 11th houses alone can give enough money, profit, victory
and success.)
The same student may be requested to note down the days
when Moon transits in such a star which is governed by the
significator of 6 or 1 1 or both. In such a star day the sub should

be governed by a such a significator who signifies the houses 6 and
11. Then in those periods one is to calculate and find out when the
Ascendant will rise in the East on that day, in such a sign, star and sub,
which are governed by those planets which are the significators of 6
If a person were to sign at that moment when it is correctly done,
it is an indication that in the future due to this agreement, he will have
peace, progress and prosperity.
A man will be able to sign only when according to his horoscope,
prosperity is indicated in the future. If adversity is there, certain
circumstances develop which then will delay by a few minutes and at
the time when the sub which rises in the East happens to be governed
by the significator of 5, 8 and 12, he would be forced to sign, will have
obstacles, impediments, difficulties and also dissatisfaction.
Let us pose one question. If a person is unlucky, and if he tries to
sign at this time, simply because an astrologer following KP has
selected this moment for another friend, if a third person takes that
moment to be auspicious, not referring to his horoscope, then, will he
gain or lose. Why ?
If to the third person, the significators of 6 and 11 happen to be
the same, then he also will gain. But those planets which are the
significators of 6 and 11 to the person who consulted a KP follower is
the significator of the houses 5, 8, and 12 to another, certainly, even
though this moment was considered to be very auspicious to one, yet
to the other it will prove to be disastrous. Therefore, everyone should
have his horoscope correctly cast using Krishnamurti Ephemeris and
Krishnamurti Ayanamsa, and thereafter carefully selecting the
significators and then correctly calculating the time when one should
have fortune. This truth never fails.

To win in Cricket match :
Supposing a person's auspicious time so calculated (correctly
casting the chart and calculating the hours which are considered to be
lucky for each individual) makes use of this knowledge. He will score
satisfactorily. Suppose one's luck time commences only after 3 p.m.
and it will run, say, till 6-30 p.m. Even if the Captain would request him
to go and fill up the vacancy at 10-30 a.m. or 12 Noon and so on if he,
in a way suggests to him to allow him to enter the field to bat only
after 3 p.m. then this person has made use of KP and he has got
speedy score of runs and he can continue to bat the next day. Such a
thing can happen only when this Cricketer is destined to score so
much.
But, if the Captain forces him in an inauspicious time, then the
Cricketer is unlucky, even though he knows which hour is the best. In
this case, he will start batting and even with in one over he will be
finished. Therefore, Cricket players, if they note the auspicious time to
each individual player and adjust in that manner, I am sure that
particular team cannot be beaten by the other. It is absolutely
necessary to note which minute to which minute or which hour to
which hour is auspicious to each player.
For Love Affairs
After casting the horoscope correctly according to the KP and
selecting the significators, one has to note down the days when Moon
transits in a constellation, the lord of which happens to be the
significator of 1,7,11 or 7,1,5 or 1,5, 7,11. If the lord of the
constellation happens to be the significators of 1,7,11, the native will
initiate, i.e., act first, when the other hesitates. If it were to be 7, 11,5
the other party will initiate i.e., start and offer courage to the other and
the time spent will be most pleasant as to forget all other worries in
the whole world. One should not select the day when Moon transits in
such a constellation, the lord of which is the significators of 4, 6 and
10. Whenever the significator of 6 operates, mostly even by Phone
call, it will not

be possible to contact the other. When once the lucky star, lord of
which happens to be the significator of 5, 7 and 11, on that day, the
extreme pleasure or expression to the love affairs will be in those few
minutes when the Ascendant also transits in such a position in the
horizon, which is ruled by the group of planets who are the
significators of 5, 7 and 11. According to Moon's transit, one can
select a few hours and in those hours they can meet. They can even
keep company. But yet, the extreme happiness will be when the
Ascendant also agrees.
If the other party were to fix an appointment at a time when Moon
transits in such a sub which is ruled by 4, 6 and 10th house's
significators, avoid since the meeting may start in pleasure but end in
pain. Anybody who would like to gain the influence of the other party,
must follow strictly the rules given above.
I love a girl, parents are not willing; What to do ?
Select such auspicious time when Moon transits in such a
constellation the lord of which is the significator of 3,9,11; better still
3,5,9 and 1 1 in that case if you can have the interview with them and
you discuss in those hours, then at the moment when the Ascendant
falls in particular sign, star and sub governed by the significators of
the houses 3,5,9,11 the parents will agree. In Tamil Nadu, it is said
"What good time can do, even dozens of good people cannot."
Therefore, it is necessary, to find out the good time: not according to
the traditional system (which in majority of the cases disappoints.) but
according to K.P, Avoid the days when Moon transits in the
constellation governed by the significators of 8, 10 and 12.
To Occupy A New House :
You have to select that star day, the lord of which happens to be
the significator of 2, 4 and 1 1 , You should avoid the days when Moon
transits in the constellation of 5, 8, 12. In that star day, select the sub
period of a few hours governed by a planet which is also the
significator of the houses 2, 4 and 11. Never enter at the time when
Moon and ascendant are in the sub ruled

by the significators of 5, 8 and 12. In that star day, select the sub
period of a few hours governed by a planet which is also the
significator of the houses 2, 4, and 11. Never enter at the time when
Moon and ascendant are in the sub ruled by the significators of 5, 8
and 12. Also select the moment when the Ascendant in the East will
be transiting in the sign, star and sub of the significators of the
houses 2, 4 and 11.
To take delivery of Vehicle
Whenever you take delivery of a car, or a Scooter, or a cycle or
any other vehicle, for your use, it is absolutely necessary to cast your
horoscope correctly, find out the significators of the various houses
and assort them to know which planet signifies which house's results.
Thereafter, one has to select such of those planets which are the
significators of the houses 4 and 11. During the time when Moon
transits in such a constellation governed by the significators of the
houses 4 and 1 1 and also in the sub of a planet, significator of 2,4,1 1
and not the significator of 3 and 10 will prove to be favourable,
especially when the Ascendant also will be in the that sign, star and
sub governed by the significators of 4 and 1 1 . If one takes at the time
when the Ascendant transits in the sub of the 9th house, then, his
vehicle will be damaged and has to be sent to the Garage for repair. If
it is taken during the sub transited by Ascendant governed by the
significator of 1 2 , then there will be loss of money. If the sub transited
by the Ascendant, or by Moon happens to be ruled by the significators
of 3 and 12, the vehicle will be lost even by theft.
To Sign the Letter for Scholarship :
As above select the moment when Moon and the Ascendant
transit in such a position which is governed by 3, 6 , 9 and 1 1 .
For Passport select the time governed by the significators of
For College Admission also when you make an application, it
should be signed at a time when the Ascendant and Moon will

be transiting in a position, the sub of which is ruled by
the significators of the houses 4, 9 and 1 1 .
Time to leave the House for airport The moment when one
leaves, the ascendant and Moon should be in such star and Sub the
lords of which are the significators of the houses 3, 9 and 11.
LIFE WITH WIFE : ROOT FOR FRUIT
Though it may appear to be funny, nowadays, I am doing
experiments upon such people who are not having children for the
past 4 years or 5 years or 6 years after the marriage by giving them
the most auspicious time to be friendly with their wives so that they
may have at least one child. The time selected was when Moon was
transiting in such a star, the Lord of which is the significators of 2, 5
and 1 1 and not at all connected with 1 ,4 and 1 0 and the sub
selected also should be governed by the significators of 2, 5 and
1 1 and sub transited by the Ascendant is ruled by the significators of
2,5 and 11. This is a case wherein I want to prove that a lady who
cannot conceive for years, becomes the mother, in due course. One
also should note that the Dasa and Bhukthi should be governed by
the significators of the houses 2,5 and 1 1 and not connected with 1 ,4
and 10. After I come out successful in at least a dozen cases, I shall
write articles in my Magazine, how the auspicious moment was
suggested only in such cases where they were destined to become
the father. But if a person has no chances to have any child according
to the Karma done by him, then I will also find out from them whether
they adhered to my principle or that particular time could not be made
the best use of. All the facts will be published in 1972, after noting
down whether there was abortion or miscarriage or normal child birth
or failure in the attempt. Such a research done is really useful than to
select auspicious time using the Traditional method.

Moon in the Eighth House (cusp ?) in different stars
Moon is generally mentioned as a planet in Astrology. But;
according to the definition given in the dictionary it is not; it is one of
the luminaries. It is the nearest to the earth and it alone revolves
round and round the earth. Daily it moves around 13 degrees in the
Zodiac.
It is a feminine and a changeable planet. Its effect is modified by
the lord of the star and sub occupied by it, by the planets conjoined
with it and also aspecting it.
Moon is termed as "Mathi”, meaning "Mind". There are in all, 12
planets. But astrologers have found it possible to predict the results of
Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Rahu, Kethu,
Uranus and Neptune only, the results of Pluto are still being studied
and it is in an experimental stage. Hence, leaving Moon and Pluto the
other ten planets may occupy any position in the horoscope. In few
cases Moon may be in evil constellation and sub. Those who afflict
Moon, will cause trouble through the source indicated by them: i.e, as
Moon governs the mind, a person will be worried with such matters,
as are indicated by the lord of the star or sub or those with whom
Moon is conjoined or by whom Moon is aspected by. No man in the
world has peace of mind, as Moon becomes evil by any of the above
connections.
Eighth house, according to Ramadayal, author of SanketaNidhi, is the house of mystery and according to us, of misery also. It
shows the fear and danger from enemies, danger caused by
diseases, death, imprisonment and the like, crossing a river, theft,
robbery, siege of a fort, fighting, wrong action etc.
Kalidasa in Uthra Kalamrithasays that the following matters
are to be investigated from the 8th house:
Longevity, happiness or sorrow, defeat, bonus, money of
the deceased, affliction of the face (as this house opposes the

second house indicating face), urinary disease (8th house shows
bladder and genital organs), calamity, brother's enemy (as it is the 6th
house to the third), teasing a wife's tuft of hair, enemy's fort, laziness,
punishment from Government. (10th house shows Government 8th
house is the 11th to the 10th; Hence, the fine paid by the native is the
gain to the Government), fear, loss of money (only when evil planets
occupy), giving a debt (when a benefic occupies the 8th house),
other's money received without knowledge, permanent possession,
wickedness, sin, murder of a living person, amputation, hearing bad
news, chain of unlucky events, war, agony, etc.
The kind of death, wills, legacies, gratuity, provident fund,
insurance business, money through partner and through wife are also
judged from the 8th house.
It also indicates disease of the younger brother, speculative
gains to mother, landed property and conveyance of children,
enemy's younger brother, wife's movable property, her vision, danger
to her life, father's life in a foreign place, or separation, honour to
elder brother, or friends.
To a nation, it shows the conclusion of a peace treaty, public
morality, deficit budget, as regards exports and imports, estate duty,
encroachment by others, loss of territory, loss of the leader, national
grief, calamities, earthquake, volcano, floods, fire, famine, infection,
disease, causing much mortality, serious accident, etc.
Moon as lord of lagna in the 8th house, Aquarius, Kumba in
Dhanishta star actually causes Raja yoga, and offers most brilliant
results, when one in an infant stage, running Mars dasa and the sub of
Moon. Later in every Moon sub-period he will have a rise in his career.
Moon in Sathabisha causes worry and anxiety, unless Rahu,at the
time of birth, is the significator of favourable houses. Moon in
poorvabhadrapada star gives success after much struggle; it causes
anxious ill health; it increases enemies; but one can win in election or
competition. Partner may lose

money. Otherwise, wife may cause worry due to her bad luck, or
hospitalisation.
Moon, as significators of 2 in 8, in Uthrashada star, gives loss
through brothers or while making short journey, or by editing
books, or by Government officials. One may be picked especially in
a public, Government office, bus stand, railway station, etc. Moon in
Sravanam star gives wealth and not health. Moon in Dhanishta,
governed by Mars, shows that one will have litigation and will be
lucky to have grand success. One may suffer from any chronic
disease during other sub-periods. Whereas Moon gives cure in its
period, as it is in the constellation of lord of 1 1 , Mars.
Moon, as lord of 3 in 8, causes anxiety and worry, if it would
have been in Moolam star. But, one can make money. If it was in
Poorvashada. He may become a partner and give finance to run a
show with satisfactory bank position. Moon in Uthrashada star
indicates sale of landed property and reduction in the permanent
holdings. Moon causes troubles through vehicles, mother, etc. A few
will change their residence to avoid the persistent trouble given by the
house owner if Moon was in Uthrashada star.
Moon, as lord of 4 in 8 in Visakam star, gives success in higher
education, long journey and life in a far-off place, after experiencing lot
of troubles. Separation from family, hospitalisation of father and sale of
property are also indicated. Moon in Anuradha star indicates that one
can have through legacy or inheritance, landed properties and one
may serve in insurance or chemical engineering industry or in mines. It
indicates enjoyment of life in decent quarters, erected by the
Government, and also purchase of property at competitive prices
through the influence of friends. Moon, in the constellation of Jyesta
ruled by Mercury, threatens, enmity, disease, frequent change of
residence, debts, purchase of property through any society or by
raising loan. So also, one may buy a car under hire-purchase system.

Moon, as lord of 5 in 8 in Chithrai star ruled by Mars, Indicates
that the native will lose money in speculation or by producing pictures,
in cinema drama or by betting. It also shows ailment to brother or
misunderstanding with him. Moon as lord of 5 in 8 in Swathi, threatens
that one may divorce the partner who will never cooperate; or the
partner may be ill. At least it gives separation for sometime due to lack
of understanding and adjustment. Moon in Vishakam star in 8 gives
success in speculation, unexpected gains by betting, lottery, etc. One
may serve in a maternity hospital or stock exchange or race club. One
will become very popular and also rich, if the malefic planets do not
afflict Jupiter, by forming adverse aspect.
Moon, as lord of 6 in 8 is most advantageous, only when it is in
Hastham star. But, if it were to be in Uthraphalguni, the native will
incur debts, suffer from abdominal trouble, indigestion, loose bowels,
etc. Health will fail; bank position will deteriorate, enmity will increase.
Moon in Hastham causes loss to the opponent and gain to the native.
Health may fail, but the native will not lose money in his transactions.
There will be law suits, but he will invariably win; may cause gastric
ulcer. Health of brother also will fail and both cannot have good
understanding. Separation and partition are threatened.
Moon, lord of 7 in 8 in Makam star, denies happy domestic life,
especially in adult age, when one is to really enjoy peace of mind and
be happy. It is dangerous to his partner's longevity. She may have fear
complex or hysteria. Partner in business will be very wise and he may
silently make up larger profits without the knowledge of the native.
Moon, lord of 7 in Pooram star in 8, makes one religious and forces
him to speculate; invariably, he will lose. Venus rules Poorvaphalguni.
It is lord of 5 and 10; its star is occupied by the lord of the 7th house -
opponent - competitor - and Venus is lord of 11 to the 7th house.
Moon, lord of 7 is in 2 to the 7th house. Hence, the competitor wins.
The native will speculate as Venus is lord of 5. Moon in

Poorvaphalguni gives opportunity for one to enter into cinema line or
share broker's office or to take up music or deal in scents, petrol or
milk, moon in Uthraphalguni in eight causes ailment to partner, but
much gain to him with minimum effort. Rather he will be a partner
assisting with finance alone, whereas the native is to work hard,
earn; give away major part to the financier.
Moon, in 8 in Cancer in Punarvasu star, shows disposal of
landed property, hatred towards close relatives and loss of comfort
etc. One may sell away the conveyance. To his mother, Moon offers
most desirable results. She may have popularity. Moon in Pushyam is
very bad, as the person will lose money, and have many enemies; he
will be a pessimist. There may be fear complex, inferiority complex
and failure due to his own laziness, reluctance, silence and
negligence. Annoying letters and depressing messages will be
received. He may incur debts due to business in petrol or mine
products. Moon in his own sign, the 8th house in Aslesha star
promises fortune, money through partner, house, property, etc.
through wife or husband, as also vehicle through them and promotion
in one's profession. It offers advancement in one's career, inclusion of
a Mercurian to expand his business, name, fame and reputation.
Moon in 8 owning the 9th house indicates that father will be
fortunate in a place other than his native place; father will have mixed
results by speculation, etc., if Moon was in Mrigasirisha star owned
by Mars. He may purchase a property at a price higher that the
market rate. In the bargain he will lose. Moon in Arudhra indicates
danger to father, failure in higher studies, unnecessary attempts to go
overseas, etc. Moon, as lord of 9 in 12 to the 9th house in Rahu's star
Arudhra, is definitely evil if Rahu would have been in the 3rd or the
10th house. Moon in Punarvasu star gives satisfactory bank position,
gain of money, success in pleasurable pursuits, chances of marrying
one, born in a stranger's family or "Love marriage", intelligent children
and making money in cinema, music or speculation.

Moon as a lord of 10 in 8 in Karthigai star, will prove to be a
Maraka. It may end his life even in youth, when other planets are weak
and also afflicted, because Karthikai is ruled by Sun, who is a
bhandhaka Sthana-adhipathi. Planets in the constellation of bhadhaka
Sthanathipathi will give death in their period or sub period. As regards
his profession, he will have satisfaction in his remuneration. He will be
much respected. He can save money. He will have peace, pleasure,
prosperity and permanent tie of friendship. Moon in the constellation
Rohini indicates early demise of father, dissatisfaction in service,
though well-paid always thinking of a change, desire to go overseas,
etc. Moon in 8 in Mrigasirisha in Taurus indicates success in
enterprises, a very liberal partner, a spend-thrift wife or husband, delay
in marriage, difficulty in the state of married life, profit by insurance or
gaining money by legacy.
Moon, as a lord 11 in 8 in Aswini star, is definitely evil. The native
can neither have pleasant life, nor friends to oblige him, or at least
console him. He cannot think straight. He will be confused. He will be
rash and will land himself in trouble. He may nave friends in the Police
or Military or in such departments where the officials have
extraordinary powers. In his weak and unguarded moments, he may
take them into confidence and may talk about his wrong action. When
Moon Bhukti operates, these friends will betray him and will give
valuable assistance to the colleagues to spoil the person. Moon in
Bharani star gives wealth, music, large circle of friends, much respect
in society, separation from father due to the transfer in the father's
profession, loss through paternal uncle, difficulty through son-in-law or
daughter- in-law (5th house shows one's son or daughter and 11th
house is the 7th therefrom. So their partner in life is indicated by the
11th house). Partner will speculate and lose; Whereas the native will
gain. Moon in Karthigai star shows loss through friends, or by paying
penalty to the tax department or fine in the court of law or even
imprisonment. Father may dispose of the ancestral property

Moon, as lord of 12 in 8 in Poorattathi star, shows that there will
always be difference of opinion between the person and the partner.
The partner will gain in all disputes and it is advisable to effect a
compromise, rather than fight out a case. One can return the loan or
give away the share of profit to the partner. Wife's health will not be
good, though she may make larger profits and purchase movable
properties and costly jewels etc. Moon in 8 in Uthrapathrapada star is
dangerous for one's longevity. One may suffer from any chronic
disease. Hospitalisation during the period of Moon may be necessary.
Partners in business and wife at home will bring about loss and also
unnecessary expenses, outweighing one's income. Enemies will
cause worry, though success to the native is assured after a long
delay. It is the delay and the period of suspense which will irritate the
native. Moon in Revathi star will prove to be lucky. Good investment,
sudden gains, satisfactory bank position, substantial profit, large
number of benefactors and fortunate partner to carry on business are
all indicated by Moon in 8 in Revathi.
Moon in 8, in the constellation of Sun, Significator of Bhadhaka or
Maraka Sthanas cause death from typhoid, heart disease, cerebral
meningitis, sharp fever or malaria etc., or give death by paralysis,
dropsy, beri beri, intestinal diseases, catemental disorders,
convulsions, excess of drinks, uremia, tumors and diabetes etc.
Moon in Mars star similarly deposited indicates death due to
inflammation, plague, haemorrhage, boils, stones in bladder,
abortions, profuse bleeding, fistula and dysentery.
Moon so posited in Mercury constellation causes death by
mental derangement, nephritis. Vitamin 'B' deficiency, hysteria,
nervous breakdown, paralysis and digestive disturbances.
Moon in Jupiter star as significators of 8, bhadhakasthana or
marakasthana cause cerebral congestion, liver complaints, jaundice,
dropsy, flatulence, pleurisy, carbuncle, blood poisoning, etc.

Moon afflicted by Venus, gives death by diabetes, tonsils,
amoebic dysentery, cysts, diseases in the generative system, goitre,
etc.
Moon, afflicted by Saturn, gives death due to cold wave, gall
stones, chyluria, TB. of bones, T.B. of lungs, cancer, paralysis,
Bright's disease and pus formation.
Western:- Moon, afflicted by Uranus, threatens danger by
paralysis, hiccough, hysteria, gas trouble, breathing troubles and
spasm.
Neptune, afflicting Moon, makes one mad after something or
other and finally lose control. So, brain troubles, overdose of
medicine, especially sleeping dose, use of narcotics, coma, etc., are
indicated.
Moon, conjoined with many planets in 8 will cause sudden tragic
and unnatural death. Moon in the constellation of lord of 6 or 8 and
also afflicted by them will give a watery grave. 8th house shows boat.
So it may be that the boat capsizes and the native loses his wife while
crossing a river.
The above is applicable in natal horoscope to ascertain the
results of Moon when Moon Dasa or Bhukti or Anthra operates.

IS CHANDRA - ASHTAMA EVER EVIL ?
Then how has my desire been fulfilled on chandra
ashtama day?
The following is the letter and horoscope of Mr. H Viswanathan
who wants the scientific explanation for his success on chandra
ashtama day.
On Thursday 30-9-1965 at 3.30 PM. I have been relieved on
leave by my present employer for undergoing training in a leading
firm after passing a professional examination. There had been delay
in my relief to this day. Can you explain why I had my desire fulfilled
on a chandra ashtama day?
(Sd.) H Viswanathan
Khandari Colony
Bombay

At the time of birth, balance of Venus Dasa was 9 years 5
months and 23 days.
Answer:
On 30-9-1965, Jupiter rules the day, Mars governs the sign
Scorpio-Vrichika where Moon was transiting and Jyeshta was the
constellation in which Moon was passing at 3.30 PM. and the
Ascendant was the 1 st degree in Aquarius.
On the day you were relieved, you had been running Mars
Dasa, Mercury Bhukti, Mars Anthra. It commenced on 19-3-1965.
1. Generally if the Dasa lord and Bhukthi lord are strong in the
sign, then the matter signified by them can be had when Moon
transits in the sign, star and sub ruled by them. Actually on that day
the star was Jyeshta, governed by Mercury in Scorpio, owned by
Mars. Whatever be the position of Moon in the horoscope, whether it
is chandra ashtama or not, the matter will be fulfilled.
2. You are born in Capricorn ascendant Moon owns Cancer the
7m house. It indicates those with whom you transact. It shows one
with whom you work, one who is to issue orders, etc.
Jyeshta is governed by Mercury which rules both the 6th and 9th
house. 6th house signifies service; 9th house is negative (12) to the
profession house 10. Hence, to get relief in service, the lords of 6 and
9 will prove to be helpful. Further, Mercury was in the constellation
Poorvapadra, ruled by Jupiter owning the houses 3 and 12 indicating
changes in the routine.
Mercury owns the houses Gemini-Mithuna and Virgo-Kanni. It is
to be remembered that Rahu or Kethu in Gemini or Virgo will offer the
results themselves, and during the period of the planet in its
constellation. Kethu is in Gemini. It represents Mercury, the lord of the
sign and Jupiter, the planet which aspects Kethu. Hence, Kethu is the
agent of Mercury and Jupiter who indicates change in the routine,
transfer, higher education training or probation.

Mars and Jupiter are in Kethu stars, Aswini and Moolam
respectively.
Mars Dasa, Mercury Bhukti, Mars Anthra shows that you should
have a transfer. Mars, the lord of 4 in the 3 house indicates change of
place. Mercury, the lord of 9, promises further study.
Hence, on a Jyesta star day you are relieved.
To your ascendant, Moon, the lord of 7, with whom you have to
deal, was transiting in the 11th house. So the officer was helpful on
that day and relieved you.
Moon is the lord of 7. It was in the constellation of Venus who
rules the 11th house counted from the 7th house. So when the lord of
the 7th transits in a sign, eighth from the sign occupied by it in the
horoscope, and if that lord is in the constellation of the lord of 1 1
counted from the house which it owns, It shows separation. The
period was Mars dasa, Mercury Bhukthi, Mars Anthra-Mercury was in
Jupiter's star. Hence, on a Jupiter day, Thursday, on Jyesta star day
ruled by Mercury, when Moon was in Scorpio owned by Mars, the
officer had to relieve you.
The moment when you were relieved also needs explanation.
The lagna was Aquarius at 3-30 PM. on 30-6-65. It was in the 1st
degree. According to Krishnamurti System, 1st degree Aquarius is
Dhanishta star ruled by Mars and the sub belongs to Mercury.
(Suppose a child is born with Moon in the 1st degree of Aquarius.
Then according to Vimshotari Dasa, what dasa and bhukti will the
child have at the time of birth? Is it not Mars dasa, Mercury Bhukti? So
that area is ruled by Mars and Mercury). The general rule is that
Chandra ashtama day is evil and that, one cannot have his desire
fulfilled.
The students car verify in all horoscopes and invariably they can
find that results depend on the lord of the constellation in that sign and
the general statement fails miserably.

CHANDRASHTAMA AND ITS TRUTH
(moon in 8th sign from natal moon)
Q. Why do the Astrologers advise the consultants to avoid
Chandrashtama days ? Is there any truth ?
We have to take only the exact position of the lagna, which alone
indicates the person. Also we should consider the exact position of all
the planets (constellation and sub) and offer the prediction. Otherwise
the prediction given by either of the western or Hindu system will be
similar to blind persons, touching any part of an elephant and
describing how its physical features appear to be or touching some
animal and giving elephants description.
By Chandrashtama, Hindus mean those days whenever Moon
transits for nearly 2 1/4 days in a sign, which is the 8 th counted from
the sign occupied by Moon in Natal Horoscope. They do not take into
consideration whether at the moment of the birth time, Moon was in
the very beginning or in the middle or in the end of the sign. Nor they
take into consideration whether the transmitting planet is in the
beginning or in the middle or in the end of the sign. They count sign by
sign not from the exact position of Moon to the exact position of any
planet. This is most unscientific.
Those who are born in Ashwini or Bharani or the first quarter of
Karthik star, will have Moon in Aries. The other 3/4 of Karthik, Rohini
and Mrigasirisha first half, will be in Taurus : thus all the 27 stars
contained in the 12 signs so that each sign has 2 1/4 stars. So, for
Aries-born, Scorpio is the 8 th Chandrashtama. For Taurus-born,
Moon transiting in Sagittarius, is said to be Chandrashtama. The
Gemini-born, Chandrashtama means that Moon is transiting in
Capricorn. So, for Cancer, which sign transited by Moon is said to be
Chandrashtama. Aquarius, is it not ? Thus to each sign one is to note.

Astrologers consider that planets transiting in 8 th sign must
cause damage and do harm. But the truth is not so.
Now, coming to Chandrashtama, let me not give many
examples to prove that no useful purpose is served by mentioning in
the monthly predictions, the days or dates when Moon will be in
Ashtama. Why do they give ? What do they mean by that ? Do they
expect that Chandrashtama days must be evil ?
They have not noted that during Chandrashtama day, some win
the case, some come out successful in Election, some pass the
examination, some get married, some have easy delivery of children,
some gain by lottery, some win in the races and so on.
is it wise, simply going on threatening people or like an ill- omen
to mention these dates ? No doubt, whether one threatens or not,
according to destiny one will win or gain in the period when planet
transits in the 8 th house.
Similarly whenever Saturn transits in many signs, the traditional
astrologers threaten people by giving undesirable and disagreeable
results, especially ashtama Sani, etc., They do not take into
consideration that during Sade-Sati, i.e., 7.5 years Saturn, most of
the people have grand success. If this is brought to their notice they
say look at dasa, bhukthi etc., But when the twins horoscopes are
handed over and asked why one of the twins has passed the
examination and the other failed, they have no explanation. First of all
they follow a wrong method. Secondly there is either limitation or only
confusion. IF one were to follow Krishnamurti Padhdhati, he can very
well differentiate and come out correct in all cases, by taking into
account the "Sub".
Let me give you an example of one of the very well-known
politicians. The horoscope, which was published in page 20 in April,
1986 "Astrology and Athrishta" issue, is as follows.

If according to Hindu system we take the position of Moon, it is in
Aquarius and he has won very meritoriously with overwhelming
majority against the wish and obstacles thrown by his opponents. Is
he not having sade-Sati and do we not find a group of planets in
Ashtama (in the 8 th sign counted from Aquarius) ? Saturn and Rahu
are in 2 and Saturn is said to be causing Sade-Sati. Jupiter, Kethu
and Moon are in Ashtama. If a person takes this chart and shows to
an Astrologer to give the results as per transit how can he give correct
results using Hindu System ? Will not he dissuade the person ? Is it
not doing harm to the person and also bringing ridicule to astrology.
But follow Krishnamurti Padhdhati. On the day of the
announcement of Election results, i.e. , 9th January, 1969 in the night,
when Jupiter, Kethu and Moon were in 8 and Sani and Rahu were in
2, he came out successful. According to

Krishnamurti, Saturn was transiting in Mercury star and sub of Rahu,
who is to give the results of the Houses 2 and 1 1 , in his horoscope. It
is said by Krishnamurti that houses 1,2,3,6,10 and 1 1 are the
houses, which will promise success in one's competition, election,
litigation etc., Therefore, even though Saturn was in the th house
from the lagna, as it was transiting in the constellation and sub of the
planets occupying and signifying the house 2 and 1 1 , he came out
victorious. One may ask how can Rahu offer beneficial results during
the time a planet is transiting in its sub. Rahu is in the 2nd house. It
is in the constellations of Moon and sub of Mercury. Moon is in the
7th. 7 shows opposition. Moon is lord of 12. It shows that the
opposition will be in a foreign place and position of Rahu was 18°24'
in Virgo. It shows that it was in Mercury's sub. Therefore, Rahu is
occupying Mercury's sign and also Mercury sub. Hence good luck
has repeated. Guru was in the th counted from Moon. But it was
actually transiting in Mercury sign, Moon star and Rahu sub. Moon
was transiting in Sun star. Sun is lord of the lagna posited in 11 in his
horoscope. Therefore Uttaraphalguni Nakshatra is a fortunate one
when one has regained the lost position.
[ Please referto the article written "No Rose without aThorn"
wherein this chart is taken as an example. Now he is elected. Where
is a Thorn ? Mother died. So good and bad come side by side.]
It has ever been mentioned that our Deputy Prime Minister
regained the lost position and had a better one during Ashtama Sani
and also when majority of the planets were in Ashtama, counted from
moon position (because he is born in Poorvaphalguni Nakshatra in
Simha Rasi) and at the time of announcement of the result and also
at the time of taking charge of Deputy Prime Minister; there was no
Guru Balam according to the Traditional Astrology because Guru was
in 12 and there were Ashtama Sani, Ahstama Rahu, Ashtama Surya
and so on.

After reading this, I trust, the readers will follow Krishnamurti
Padhdhati. and forget the traditional system which is useless.
Now my desire and my request would be that the traditional
Astrologers should switch on to Krishnamurti Padhdhati.
The Honourable Guruji Jyotish
Marthand
K.S. Krishnamurti Brahmin
Street, Saidapet, Madras -15.
Respected Sir,
Jai Samb Sadashivji !
The principles of Advanced Stellar System propounded by our
Guruji Shri K.S. Krishnamurti under the title 'Krishnamurti Padhdhati'
are strikingly unique and have revolutionised the Astrological World.
The discovery of the system by the application of which to the
practically handled horoscopes - clients. Astrologers may be a novice
or scholar in the the field - every one is convinced of the 100 %
accurate predictions. If just like the discovery of Electron - that tiny
particle (within the Atom) discovered by English Physicist Joseph
John Thomson (which won him Nobel Prize in Physics) which startled
the then Scientific minds, the discovery of this Padhdhati has made
Astrology not an 'art' but 'an' exact Science'. This credit goes to Shri
K.S. Krishnamurti - our Guruji and consequently whole astrological
world is indebted to him.
For last two decades, myself and other celebrities of our Institute
had solely been predicting on the basis of age old principles which
ones however correctly and strictly applied could not place us in a
position to predict meticulously beyond 40 per cent margin of
accuracy. Now all the members of our Astrological Institute have
totally switched off all traditional principles and have been happy
enough to switch on yours one.

May lord Ganesh bestow a long span of life so that the Science
itself may be most benefitted by more and more discoveries
propounded by our able Guruji Varahamihiracharya of our age.
How long will it take us to have your forthcoming books in
Astrology ? Their outcoming is eagerly awaited.
Yours faithfully, Jyothir
Pandit
HIRA LAL SHARMA,
Hon. Director,
Sri Markandaya Astro. Cultural Institute,
Ballagarh, Mandir, PO.Banjar
District Kulu (Himachal Pradesh)

Ashtama Sani and Honour
Is Ashtama Sani ever evil? No.
The honour and reputation conferred on a Hotel Proprietor and
his success in the competition during Ashtama Sani is discussed.
The following is the horoscope of Sri. A.R. Sethumadhavan
proprietor of Hotel Ooty at Daba Gardens, Visakapatnam.
At the time of birth, the balance of Saturn dasa was 16 years 5
months and 20 days.
Rotarians are noted for their kindness, sympathy, pure and refined
affections. They are fond of society and sociability. Like Geminiborns, they are intelligent. Like Librans, they are very capable in
proper assessment and correct judgment. Like Aquarians, they are
most loyal to friends and they have highest grade of humanity. They
never act in a hurry and so they seldom

have cause to regret their actions. Rotarians are generally rich in
wisdom and wealth. They have the qualities of the three airy signs
Gemini, Libra and Aquarius.
In Visakhapatnam, the Rotarians are very enthusiastic. They
give life to the people who have a routine and monotonous career.
On 15-7-1964, the positions of the planets were as follows:-
The proprietor of the Hotel Ooty was presented with a fancy and
costly rolling silvercup by the Rotarians recognising his Hotel to be
maintained in the best condition in that year (1964) - the hygenic
condition in which the hotel premises are kept, the absence of fly
nuisance inside, preparation of delicious dishes, prompt service
without any waste of time, the proper sterilisation of the utensils and
the cleanliness of the kitchen, cooks and servers, etc.
On 15-7-64, according to Vimshottari Dasa, he was running
Venus (lord of Lagna) Dasa - major period, in the constellation 253

lord of 10 (for honour), Moon (lord of 10) bhukti in the constellation of
occupant of 10th house - and sun (lord of 11) Sub - Sub period -
Anthra. Sun was in the constellation of Rahu who represents Jupiter
lord of 6 in the constellation of the occupant of 10.
Generally, lagna indicates the results enjoyed by the native of
the horoscope. Lord of Lagna offers grand success to a native if it
would have occupied the constellation of the lords of 1,2,3, 6, 10 or
11th house: The sub (according to Krishnamurti System) in that
constellation must be ruled by one of the lords of 1,2,3, 6, 10 or 11th
house. Then in their conjoined period one can look for success. Here,
Venus - Sukra - is the lord of the lagna. It is in the constellation of
Moon, lord of 10 and is also in its own (Venus) sub (Krishnamurti
System) as it was in 21°-25', which is between 20°- 27’ and 22°40' in
Capricorn - Makara - ruled by venus in Moon's star Sravana. So
Venus will contribute for success.
10th house is owned by Moon, ttis in its own sign conjoined with
lord of 4 and 5 and in Pushyam star, the constellation of Saturn, lord
of 4 and 5 and in the sub of Mercury. Therefore, Moon who is under
the influence of Saturn and Mercury cannot confer any honour during
the joint periods of Moon and Saturn or Moon Bhukti, Mercury Anthra.
Venus aspecting Moon (lord of 1 aspecting lord of 10) gives beneficial
strength to Moon to offer benefitial results, after Saturn and Mercury
sub - Sub - periods are over, and during Venus dasa Moon Bhukti,
Venus Anthra alone, it has to give.
It may be a fact that a few months prior, mostly in January and
February 1964, the judges could have considered this hotel as one of
the two to be recognised. Moon in conjunction with Saturn is called
Punarphoo. That is, in the first attempt Saturn conjoined wth Moon
does not offer the desired results. Either it may be delayed or denied.
Only on the subsequent attempts the native will be crowned with
success. But the moment when Venus Anthra started after 5-4-64,
this Lodging House could have

impressed on the customers and Rotarians that his hotel is second
to none in Vizag. Probably he would have improved the hotel from
11th house is always for success, Lord of 11 contributes for
social and financial success; also one can come victorious in any
conflict, litigation, competition or war only during the beneficial sub
period of lord of 11. That is why, Ravana tried to keep all the planets
in the 1 1th house to lagna when his son Indrajit was about to be born.
But Saturn stretched itself to the twelth house to save the lives of the
Devas by bringing misfortune to Indrajit. This is to commit to memory
that in any horoscope, the 1 1th house promises success.
Lagna indicates the native. The seventh house shows the
opponent. The sixth house indicates enmity - open inimical activity
and also the loss to the opponent, as the sixth house is VRAYA to the
7th house. The eleventh house is for success. Tenth house brings
honour, name and fame. Therefore, when this native was running the
dasa of the lord of the lagna - Venus (Sukra), sub period of the lord of
10, Moon bhukti and lord of 11 (Sun) anthra, he had this honour and
prize.
According to transit followed by the Hindus, taking the position of
Moon alone in the horoscope at the time of birth, one has to say that
the native's chart shows that Moon was in Cancer (Kataka) and
Saturn, on 15-7-64, was in Aquarius (Kumba), which is the 8th house
from Cancer. In Tamil Nadu, it is said that people who could have
been uniformly happy for many years will suffer during the time when
Saturn transits in 8. For example, one may be committing a crime for
a great number of year. But he will be caught and punished during
Ashtama Sani. This is the common saying in the south.
Also, it is said that Jupiter, transiting in the 10th house, portends
a fall in one's career. It may bring scandal and ill repute.

Such slogans should end. Proper application of the science
alone is needed.
Astrologers may say that Ashtama Sani is evil in a few cases
especially when the dasa is adverse. They may add that Ashtama
Sani cannot prove to be harmful if the dasa is good. It is true. But the
statement is incomplete. In which cases Sani is a benefic and (b) in
which cases Ashtama Sani is evil, has not been scientifically
discussed elaborately.
Western System amended by K S K
Lords of 1,2,3,6,10 and 11th houses, whenever they, during
transit, form favourable aspects, offer desirable results during
competition, election, lititagion, etc. And, lords of 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 12th
houses, whenever they form evil aspects during transit, the native
wins. Find out to which house Saturn is the lord.
The native will lose in the competition whenever the lords of 1, 2,
3, 6, 10 and 11th houses form evil aspectto their original position at
birth and loss is also to be expected during the time when lords of
4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 12th houses form favourable aspects to their radical
position. This is the truth which the readers can confirm after
application and verification.
1. Who is Saturn? He is lord of 4 and 5 to the native born in
Thula Lagna. Therefore, he is lord of 10 and 11 to the Mesha (Aries)
boms, which indicates the opponents as 10th house and 11th house
show reputation, success and profit. Saturn the lord of 10 and 11 to
the opponent, will do good to the opponent; if Saturn forms good
aspect with radical Saturn in Cancer, then the opponent will win and
the native will lose. But if Saturn form evil aspect with its original
position, it is incable of producing its beneficial results and hence the
opponent loses and the native gains. Therefore, Ashtama Sani is bad
to the opponent and not to the native (Ashtama to Moon sign). It is
also worth doing research to confirm that those who are born with a
planet in

retrograde motion, have on advancement in their career when
the same planet is again retrograde during transit.
When will he lose the rolling cup? -
Astrological explanation.
When Saturn transits in Pisces-Meena-and forms favourable
aspect with its radical position i.e. in the year 1967, after having had a
"Hat Trick", the cup will leave his hands. At that time, the dasa will be
ruled by Venus, and the sub-period (bhukti) will be ruled by Rahu.
When Sukra and Moon have jointly done this good to him, the planet
in 6 or 8 or 12 to these two planets will undo what they have done.
This is one of the truths. If planets A and B in their periods give a
result, then the planet in 6 or 8 or 12 to A and B will give the
diametrically opposite results. If one joins a service during A dasa B
bhukti, then he will lose or leave this post during C Bhukti. If C is in 6,
8 or 12 to A and B and forms evil aspect with A and B.
Rahu is in 12 to Venus and it forms (45) semi-angular aspect
with Venus. Moon and Rahu are forming quincunx aspect (150) and
Rahu is in 6 to Moon. Therefore, the honour conferred on him during
Venus Dasa, Moon Bhukti, will be withdrawn during Venus Dasa,
Rahu Bhukti in 1967, as Rahu is in 12 toVenus and in 6 to Moon.
Therefore, while judging the transit results, the following must
be included:
(a) take the radical position of the planets;
(b) consider whether they will contribute for one's success or
not; and
(c) find out what aspects they form, during transit with their
original position.
Such a consideration will be corrective method for the
Western System.

Sade-Sati- Satisfactory Gains
The following is the horoscope of a native born on 9-5-1926 at
At the time of birth the balance of Mercury dasa was 1 1 years 6
months 29 days.
He purchased one Prize Bond having effect for 5 years. He won
a prize and received the cash during his Sun dasa, Moon bhukti on a
Friday when Moon was transiting in its own star Sravanam. Therefore,
he had his success ultimately, though there was long delay for a
period of 5 years. First one should know how normally one will predict
and then the corrective method.
Hindu System
(1)Sun, lord of Lagna; was in the 9th house in the
constellation of lord of 1 0 and conjoined with lord of 2 and 1 1 .

So Sun has to cause Dhana Yoga (Lords of 1 , 2, and 1 1
conjunction is beneficial).
(2) Can it be said that Moon, lord of 12 will produce this
yoga only when it is not connected with other planets which do not
own either 6 or 8 or 12. But Venus is conjoined with it. Venus owns
the beneficial house, the tenth - a Rajayoga house.
It is also likely that one may threaten saying Moon is lord of 12. It is
in 8. Both are evil houses. Hence you will lose and suffer or it may be
said that lord of 12 spoils the planet with which it is conjoined. As
Venus and Moon are together in one sign and Venus is the lord of the
1 0th house, one may say that the native may be reverted; his income
may be reduced as also the status and it is likely that he is
transferred.
Another astrologer when consulted a few days before shuffling,
may advance his argument and ask the native to forget about the
luckin prize bond by saying, "Sir, when you had Saturn transiting in
the Labhasthana - 1 1th house, you did not get any. When Saturn's 7.5
years transit is on, especially when Saturn is in 12, how can you
expect any luck." He may recite some slokas. Further he may add that
Jupiter transiting in the third sign counted from Moon sign is very very
bad and most unfortunate. He can quote the malefic effects of
Thritheeya Brahaspathi". It will appeal to those who have not done
research, that when a man did not get prize when Jupiter was in 2 and
Saturn in 11; he can never get during Saturn 7.5 years and Thritheeya
Brahaspathi period.
The fact is that he has gained. How can he win a prize?
KRISHNAMOORTHI SYSTEM.
(1) (a) Suppose Planet A’ is in the constellatin of another planet
'B'. 'A' is stronger than 'B'. That is why Venus, lord of 10, could not
give easy money in the last portion of its dasa. (b) it was purchased in
Mercury Bhukti which was under the sway of the node - Kethu in the
5* house. So neither Mercury in its own

sub-period nor Kethu could give. 5th house gives inclination to
speculate but profit to the opponent. Lagna denotes the native - 7th
house represents those with whom one competes. 5th house to Lagna
is the (Labhasthana) 11th to the 7th. Hence, 5th house gives the mind
to speculate and contribute for the benefit of the competitors and not
for himself.
(2) Always houses 1, 2, 3, 6, 10 and 11th promise grand
success and gains without pains.
(3) Planets must be judged by considering the constellation
occupied by them. One need not worry about the name of the lord of
the constellation. But note which houses are governed by the planet
which rules the constellation. If Moon is in Revathi for one born in
Simha Lagna then one is to consider that the lord of 12 throws light
through the modifying side which owns the houses 2 and 11. Hence,
the matters of 2 and 11 alone will operate. Lordship of the 12th house
shows that one can gain through investment, Prize bond is an
investment for many people, without interest. For those who win the
prize the interest is many times the capital itself.
Hence, Moon in the constellation of Mercury i.e., in the
constellation of the lord of 2 and 11 gave money in Moon's star day,
i.e., Sravana star day.
Venus, in the constellatin of Saturn, the lord of 6 and 7, rules
Friday when he received the prize. Any planet in the constellation of
lord of 6 occupying the 8* house or in the constellatin of lord of 8
occupying the 6th house will invariably bring luck without any strain.
For the 7th house represents opponent, 6 and 8 are the 2nd and 12th
houses to the opponent. So, if there is connection between houses 2
and 12, one is to lose. Hence the opponent's loss is the native's gains.
So, the day of receipt was Friday, governed by Venus;
Sravanam star day ruled by Moon and the rasi was Capricorn

owned by Saturn which owns the 12th house of the opponent
and it aspects the 12th house of the competitor.
As regards 7 a years Saturn, it is an incorrect statement. How
many people, after waiting for a long number of years get married
during Sade-Sathi. How many get into service only during Sade-Sathi.
How many bring forth children. Also how many gain by lottery, races,
speculation, prize bond, etc. The astrologer who attributes any loss
only to 7.5 years Saturn, has no experience and has not gained
sufficient knowledge. So also his argument of Thritheeya Brhaspathi
is to be valued.
As per transit, Saturn causes Sade-Sathi. Jupiter was in the
constellation of Sun, lord of Lagna which is advantageous to the
person. Sun was in its own constellation.
Hence, one is to follow the stellar system; analyse by taking the
7th house as that of the competitor or opponent. Then alone correct
result can be had.
(A planet may own any house; when it transits, it gives such
matters signified by the lord of the constellation, through the source
indicated by the transiting planet, by lordship, occupation and its
nature e.g., suppose a planet owns the houses 3 and 10. 3rd house
denotes brother editing, short journey, etc. 10th house indicates
profession. If any planet transits in the constellation of that planet
owning houses 3 and 10, the results will refer to the matters signified
by the houses 3 and 10, irrespective of the lordship of the transiting
planet).

SADE-SATI AND ITS TRUTH
(HOW TO GIVE GENERAL PREDICTION)
Sade-Sati means that Saturn will be transiting in the 12th sign to
the sign occupied by Moon (whatever the position of Moon be in that
sign either in the first degree or in the last degree of the sign), then
Saturn transits in the sign where Moon was deposited and in the
second sign counted from that tenanted by Moon. Therefore, the three
signs, the 12th sign to the sign where Moon was, the sign occupied by
Moon (called Janma) and the second to it are considered to be the
three consecutive signs which when transited by Saturn, it is said to be
Sade Sati or 7 1/2 years Saturn. People who go by mere traditional
convention and the general principles will sing a song or reproduce a
sloka and translate it that it is 7.5 years Saturn which is harmful; one
will be dissatified, there can be denial, disappointment, depression,
difference, dispute, disharmony and no desirable results. Thus they
threaten. But, I am very confident and I can boldly say that they do not
care to correct themselves after knowing the facts. Why ? It is not
unlikely that they know well that people born in this star, get married
during Sade Sati, have promotion, make purchases of land, construct
houses, possess new car and enjoy all fruits of life. Those who had no
business at all or no profit when Saturn was transiting in the 11th
house, (considered to be lucky according to tradition) they actually pay
a much larger amount of Income-tax. Why ? When they have SadeSati the profit is much greater than the previous years, even though
the rate may be reduced.
But, when a person is to note down the stars in which certain
people were born (the sign where Moon was) and also the 12th and
the 2nd sign, they will find that the general Principle which had been
expounded by our sages do not agree at all with the results which we
enjoy. At the time when they predict adverse results, we enjoy
pleasure. At the time when they predict and promise good future,
there is actually much of pains. So,

generally at the time when they say that there will be pains, we enjoy;
and we really suffer at the time when they encourage offering
auspicious results. It is really the misfortune of the consultants that
they approach those Astrologers who do not care to find out how far it
has acted and how they have to modify the rules.
Let me treat this in brief. Saturn will transit in Pisces. What are
the three Nakshathras in that sign ? The first 3° 20' happen to be
Poorvapadra ruled by Jupiter, who owns the houses 9 and 12 to Ariesborns. It is after all 3 degrees 20 minutes. Let us leave it. Then, there
are 26 degrees 40 minutes in that sign which are covered by two
Nakshathras (stars), Uthrapadra and Revathi. Uthrapadra is governed
by Saturn. It owns the signs Capricorn and Aquarius which are the
10th and 11th to the Moon sign Aries. Consider in the following
manner. When lord of 10 and 11 transit in the constellation of lord of
10 and 11, what will it offer ? Can anybody predict that there may be
any evil even though it will transit in Meena-Pisces. By lordship,
Saturn promises to do good. But if the sublord is adverse then during
transit (Gochara) it may offer evil results. At that time, Saturn is
incapable of doing any good; it is helpless ; its hands are tied. A father
may have money. He would like to send Transit Money Order to his
own son. But if there is the postal holiday, what can he do ? Similarly,
Saturn as lord of 10 and 11 to Mesha rasi is a strong benefactor as
regards friends, finance, fortune, pleasure, profit etc., even though it is
Badhakasthana Athipathi which may affect only the health, if its dasa
or bhukthi is operating or the dasa or bhukthi is ruled by the planet in
the constellation of Saturn. Excepting that, Saturn has to necessarily
do good to Mesha rasi-borns when it transits in Saturn's star,
Uthrapadhrapada. So, if it transits in its own constellation it is
auspicious and advantageous to the person if it is the significator of
beneficial houses. Saturn gains strength. It will surely do good,
irrespective of the fact that Pisces is the 12th sign to the sign Aries,
where Moon was. At the time when Saturn passes on to Revathi, it
offers the results signified by

M2).-)y the lord of Revathi. Mercury owns Gemini and Virgo which
are the 3rd and 6th houses. Third house shows short- journey; it
indicates that one will be helped. Also, there will be prosperity through
the neighbours, cousins, brothers and sisters; to make money by
editing, publishing, etc., is also indicated. As lord of 10 and
11 transiting in the constellation of lord of 6, it shows that it is the time
the native will take all preventive measures against infectious diseases
and that he will gain as the opponent is destined to lose. The
opponent loses, thereby the native gains.
During election those who are born in Mesha rasi, if their lagna
also happens to be Mesha, they can take it tor granted that they will
have thumping majority, victory over enemies and they may be
confident that the enemies will lose their deposit unless Saturn in
one's horoscope is the significator of 8 and 12. But, Saturn is such a
powerful planet and it is in a fruitful sign. Therefore, it can never
disappoint when it is in its own constellation. It is really very beneficial
to people born in Mesha Lagna. It is certain.
For general public, not taking individual charts, let us see if a
person is born in Rishaba lagna and Mesha rasi, then you may be
sure that he will win whether it is in Uthrapada or Revathi as both the
stars are ruled by the benefics to Rishaba lagna. To Mithuna lagna, if
Saturn were to transit in Uthrapadra then there will be mixed result, as
lord of 8 is Saturn and lord of 12 is Mercury. To Simha (Leo-borns), it
shows that the native will have victory over enemies most easily and
opponent will lose against expectations. Leo-borns may have a strong
opposition. Does not matter. Because those who promise that they will
work for the opponents will finally let them down without their
knowledge. To Kanya lagna, we have to take that Saturn will
ultimately do good and compensate, as he may have to lose some
money during the 2.5 years period. To Thulam (Libra - boms), it is
really against their interests. So, people born in Libra may very well
withdraw at least in the last moment when the deposit amount may be
refunded to them. But suppose somebody wants to

take a financial partner to do business, better he selects one born in
Libra, asthe moneythatis received by Librawill be mostly given away
to the partner, if a girl were to marry a Libra-born, she can expect
such advantage and gain through her husband. People who were
married a few years ago, if they had no children so far, they can
expect a child when Saturn transits in Uthrapada.
Now one may ask "Sir, I am born in Libra. Does it mean that all
Libra-boms cannot come out successful in the election." No. It is not
so. Suppose one is born in Libra and at the time of birth Saturn was
not the significator of 8 or 12 then what will be the result ? Saturn
cannot do that which it has to do. If Saturn has to do harm to Libraboms, it does offer, but it is insignificant as greater, good results are
enjoyed when other planets contribute for success. It is similar to a
person gaining in 5 races and losing in one race; ultimately there is
profit.
Therefore students are to note that the lordship of the planet
ruling the star decides the fate and the house signified by Saturn
indicates the source. Coming to Scorpio, he is another loser. Coming
to Sagittarius-Dhanus, he will come out victorious.
Capricorn people will come by most desirable results. He can
make fortune. "Make Hay when the sun shines". So reiterates Saturn
when it is transiting in Uthrapada Nakshathra. People born in Makara
lagna, people born with Sun and Moon also in Makara they will note
that when Saturn transits in Uthrapadra star, they will come by
fortune. It is not unlikely they gain in lottery; they have some
unexpected income and it will be sudden and substantial. To
Kumbalagna, Saturn transiting in Uthrapadra, shows that there will
be mixed results; so also to people born in Pisces Lagna.
Consider in which constellation a planet transits. Note down the
matters of the houses signified by the lord of the constellation. That
alone will be offered by the transiting planet through the source
indicated by transiting planet and the sub shows the success or
failure, pleasure or pain.

TRANSIT: MARS - SATURN CONJUNCTION
Sir,
I am sure that you are aware of Mars now transiting in the
position of my Saturn in Scorpio and in a few weeks Saturn will be
transiting in Aries where there was Mars in my birth chart. I have
heard many, so far. I had only different opinions from my friends and
confused and worried.
I would like to hear from you so that I can have the clarity;
Horoscope is as follows:
Rahu Dasa Balance lOyrs. 5 months 8 days. Now running
Saturn Dasa, Rahu Bhukthi upto 1-10-1969.
Mars is in Aries 18°16'. It means it is in Mars sign, Venus
star, Rahu sub. Saturn is in Saturn star Saturn sub.

How to predict ?
What is your ascendant ?; "Libra".
What does each planet signify ?
Sun, lord of 11. deposited in Rahu star, Moon sub. In which
house is Rahu ? It is in the 9th house. Hence Sun will offer the
matters signified by the 9th house, i.e. father, wife's younger brother,
younger brother's wife, grand child, next elder brother's elder brother,
as regards relationship; other matters are higher education, long
journey etc., Hence during Sun period and whenever a planet transits
the position occupied by Sun (though it is in lagna) 9th house matters
will be enjoyed. Is there any planet in Sun's star ? None - In that case
Sun will also indicate lagna bhava results. (If there is any planet in
Sun star, then that planet will give to a greater extent, lagna bhava
results.)
Is there Rahu or Kethu in Sun's sign - No. Then its results
will not be shared by or represented by any other planet.
If there is any, then what are we to judge ?
If there is any or there are many, those planets situated in
Karthik or Uthraphalguni or Uthrashada will give the matters signified
by lagna bhava.
No planet is in Sun's Star.
So Sun will give both lagna and 9th house results as it is in
Rahu star.
"Yes".
How will it give?
The nature of the result is shown by the lord of the
constellation according to its occupation. So 9th house results.
Also, only when there is no planet in its star, the matters
signified by the Bhava occupied by it will be given.

Apply systematically. Arrive at each, methodically. Proceed
patiently and properly; then predict precisely.
Sun rules Leo. 11th cusp is in Leo. It extends upto 8°32' in Virgo
from 7°32' in Leo. In this are, there is no occupant. So you should
take that Sun, owner of the sign Leo, where 11th cusp has fallen as
the significator of 1 1 because there is no planet in Sun's star. Sun has
to indicate the 11th house matters also".
“So Sun indicates the results of the houses 1 , 9 and 1 1 .
"How will the above results be accomplished ? i.e. the source for
this nature of result ?
"Source is to be judged from the matters signified by the Bhava
or Bhavas owned by the planet and also the Bhava occupied by it.
Saturn is in Lagna Bhava and hence slow in grasping. When
once learnt, then never forget as one repeats whatever is learnt within
himself.
Take Moon. It is in Libra at 12°-15', i.e. in Venus sign Rahu star
Saturn sub. Moon rules Rohini, Hastham, Sravana Stars. It is in Rahu
star who is situated in 9th house. Hence any planet in Rahu star will
give 9th house results. So Moon also will give 9th house matters.
No planet is in Moon's star. So the Bhava occupied by it
being lagna Moon will give lagna, effects also.
Further in Moon's sign, the meridian alone is. In 10th house
there is no planet. So Moon is to offer 10th house results also as
there is no planet in its star. Hence Moon is to bestow the results of
the houses 1, 9 and 10 during its periods, sub periods, etc., and any
planet transiting in the position occupied by Moon will indicate matters
connected with the houses, 1, 9 and 10.
The source will be from first and tenth houses, as it owns
the 10th and occupies the first Bhava."

Mars is in the 7th house. Its stars are Mrigasira, Chithra and
Dhanishta. Hence Jupiter in Dhanishta will give the results of 7th
house. Mars is in Venus star, Rahu sub. Lord of the constellation is
in lagna. Hence Mars, though lord of the houses 2 and 7, and is in 7,
yet will offer the results of the lagna. Second house is occupied by
Mercury. So, the second house matters will be given by the planets
in Mercury constellation and if there is no planet, in Mercury star
Ashlesh, Jyesta and Revathi, Mercury will offer second house
matters. Actually there is no planet in its star. Therefore Mercury
indicates both the second and 12th house matters.
The source will be through 9th and 12th houses. As regards
Mars the source will be 7th and 2nd houses and the result will relate
to lagna.
Saturn is in Lagna Bhava, it is in its own star, and sub. Mercury is
also in Saturn's star. Therefore, Saturn as it is in Lagna Bhava and
Mercury, in Saturn's star, show lagna results. (Mercury has another
portfolio, i.e. , the 12th house.) The source or in other words how it
will be accomplished is judged from the houses owned by it; they are
4 and 5. As there is no planet in the 5th, 5th house results also will
be given by Saturn. Even though he owns the 4th house, as there is
Jupiter in 4th Bhava; planets in Jupiter star or Jupiter himself will
give 4th house matters through 6th house source. Saturn gives
mostly through 5th house and partly through 4th house matters.
Thus, one should analyse and keep ready, a ready chart wherein for
each planet, which houses, matters they will offer and which is the
source for the materialisation of the nature of the result.
Sun gives the results of the houses 1,9and 11 as there is no
planet in its star and it is in the constellation of one in 9 and it is the
owner of the 11th. The sources are 1 and 11.
Moon gives the results of the houses 1,9 and 10 through the
1st and 10th houses.

Mars will give the result of the first Bhava through the second
and seventh sources.
Mercury offers the result of lagna, 12th and the second
houses through 9th and 12th houses.
Jupiter offers the results of seventh, sixth and the 4th houses
through the 3rd and 6th house matters.
Venus gives its results of 9th houses, results through lagna and
8th house matters. Saturn offers the results of the first and the 5th
Bhava through the first, 4th and 5th houses.
Rahu will give the results of 9th and 12th houses matters : also
the second. The sources will be the 9th and 12th houses.
Kethu gives the first house, 8th house, 6th house and 4th
house matters through the third and sixth houses.
When a planet transits, the transiting planets show the source of
the result. Transitting planet indicates how a matter is brought out.
What is the matter ? That is judged from the lord of the star in
which it transits.
If we take Mars as the planet which transits the star of Saturn
Mars shows the source. Saturn indicates what aspect of life is ignited
then.
As Mars signifies the first Bhava, the source is mostly first house,
partly second and seventh. Saturn is the significator of lagna. Hence
Mars conjoining Saturn indicates good health and success in your
efforts. To younger brother prosperity; To mother, poor health, and
gains. To children, long journey, to wife indifferent health. (Saturn is in
Bhadhakashthana to mother and it is Bhadhakasthanaadhipathi to
wife); to your father, loss in speculation; to your elder brother short
journey. Gains by salesmanship or by taking agency; gets brokerage
etc., If Mars

conjoins Mercury younger brother unhealthy as Mercury is
Bhadhakasthanaadhipathi to him.
If Saturn conjoins Mars, your health is good. Younger brother
gains. To mother reputation, success; to Children long journey and
pleasant. Wife or partner unhealthy; to your father loss; to elder
brother auspicious, agreeable results.
As in this example chart many have the connection to first
house only, one more example will be of advantage.
Mars Dasa balance 0 yr. 6 month 6 days.
Let us judge Mars and Saturn.
Mars is in 4th house. Jupiter, Rahu and Moon are in Mars star.
4th house matters will be given mostly, to a good extent, by Jupiter,
Rahu and Moon. But Mars is in Kethu star which is also in 4. Hence,
Mars also denotes 4th house matters. Then Kethu and Mercury also
indicate to a little extent. We are concerned

with Mars. It is in 4, in the star of node in 4. So it gives 4th
house matters, i.e. , it is connected with 4th house.
It owns the 5th cusp and no planet is in 5. So Mars gives 5th
house results also along with Moon, Rahu, Jupiter and Kethu (Kethu
conjuntion Mars is the way how it gets strength for Kethu). There is a
planet in 12th Bhava. Hence 12th Bhava results attributable to to
Mars will be given to a mild extent by Mars. Hence Mars gives the
results of the 4th and the fifth house, through 5th house matters
mostly, and through 12th house partly.
Saturn in 12 is in Mercury's star which is in 8th Bhava. Therefore
Saturn has to give the 8th house results. The source will be 2, 3 and
12. Therefore when Saturn transits at 8°14' Aries and conjoins with
Mars, 4th and 5th houses matters will come to forefront through the
2nd, 3rd and 8th house matters.
As he is a boy of lOyears, regarding 5th house matter one should
not predict love affairs. But one has to say, that nowadays most of the
people are very ambitious and even avaricious to have gains with
minimum pains by way of lottery, etc., So he will speculate ; source
being 2, 3 and 12, younger brother may buy (3rd house) and give (the
2nd is 12 to 3). Purchase by brother and getting it, will be at that time,
12th house shows investment. This is a pleasant prediction for which
astrologer will be thanked.
Again it can be said that 5th house indicates profits to the
opponent. 3rd house indicates pocket. 2nd house money purse. 12th
house loss. So he will be pickpocketed on that day
Westerners consider that the conjunction of Saturn and Mars is
very evil. Here the prediction is given taking only the nature of the
planet into consideration ; nothing else. So, one should not apply
universally to all. The results given by them is mentioned briefly. "One
develops rash, hasty and even murderous tendencies. Uncontrollable
anger, cruel - accident, surgical diseases, separation, eminence, etc.,
- outburst of temper, demoralising tendencies - ruins himself by
committing rash acts

commit theft, squander away estate, suffer from poxes,
carbuncle, rheumatic diathesis, etc."
The above is applicable only when Saturn and Mars in a chart
were depostied in the constellation and sub of the occupants of the
houses 6, 8 and 12 which is rare, i.e. lord of constellation and lord of
sub of both Saturn and Mars must be so. Therefore, majority will
never suffer. Only a few will.
Individual chart must be studied and prediction offered.
General statement is useless.
SATURN-RAHU CONJUNCTION
Saturn a natural malefic, conjoins with the ascending node,
Rahu, another malefic at 1 1-30A.M. on 25-4-1968 at 24°35‘ in Pisces
in Jupiter's sign, Mercury star and Rahu sub.
According to Krishnamurti Padhdhati, whomsoever have Mercury
and Rahu favourably deposited in their horoscopes will be benefitted
then, whereas those who have Mercury and Rahu ill - posited must
suffer at that time (suffering will be ill - health, financial loss, enmity,
failure in attempts, etc., depending on the matters signified by
Mercury and Rahu in their horoscopes). Mercury indicates the nature
of the result whereas Rahu shows whether in that matter the native
will gain or loose, proceed or meet with obstacles, maintain health or
suffer etc.,
Mercury governs the signs Gemini and Virgo. Mercury rules the
star Ashlesha, Jyesta and Revathi. Planets including nodes posited in
any of the three above stars will offer the results indicated by Mercury.
Mercury can occupy any Bhava. Then, the planets and the nodes in
those 3 stars will offer the results of the matter signified by that Bhava.
Therefore, people born in Aries, could have had Mercury in any
of the twelve Bhavas, Though the lagna remains the same, Mercury
by occupation indicates any of the 12 houses and so,

the planets or the nodes in any of the three constellations of Mercury,
will offer absolutely different results. If there were to be no planet, in
any of the 3 constellations of Mercury, Mercury will offer the results of
the house occupied by it. As it can be in any of the 12 houses, and
each house has its own results which vary widely from each other and
in some cases they are diametrically opposite. Therefore, to all Aries
boms, planets in Mercury star will not yield the same results. They
depend on the Bhava occupied by Mercury.
The source of the results given by the planets either deposited or
transiting the constellation otherwise called nakshathra, asterism or
star will be through the relations or matters indicated by the house
occupied by Mercury and also owned by Mercury.
Again, people are born in different signs as lagna and different
cusps of the houses therefore, will be in Gemini and Virgo owned by
Mercury, so to different lagna boms, the source of the results will vary
as Mercury will be the lord of different houses.
Anyhow, the results we have, can be broadly classified into two :
i.e. good or bad, desirable or undesirable; successful or failure ;
pleasant or painful etc. Hence Mercury, ruling the star Revathi,
wherethe conjunction of Saturn and Rahu is to happen, indicates
different nature of results to the people and Rahu sub shows whether
it is advantageous or not, depending on the lord of the constellation in
which Rahu was posited. Rahu might be in the 11th house but it could
be in the constellation of the planet occupying 12th house ; thereby
Rahu is incapable of giving a profit, whereas loss will be the
experience. Also Rahu may be in 8th Bhava ; traditional astrologers
may call Rahu as a malefic, but Rahu may be in the constellation of
the planet in 11, when Rahu brings fortune. Hence, one should not
pass a judgement whether a planet is a benefic or a malefic, only from
the house occupied by it, but one is to note where the lord of the
constellation is deposited. No doubt, Rahu in an evil sign can do such
a harm as is threatened by that house, only when there

is no planet in its constellation, Arudhra, Swathi or Sathabisha.
Therefore, if at all, any astrologer is to predict the results to be
enjoyed by Aries-borns or Taurus-borns etc., it is only general, it is
not applicable to all, percentage of failure will be greater than the
percentage of success. As you want the general prediction, I give
below.
Saturn's transits. It is lord of 10 and 11 to Aries-borns, 9 and 10
to Taurus-borns : 8 and 9 to Gemini-borns; 7 and 8 to Cancer- boms
and so on.
As the owner of these houses, it can offer the nature of results
indicated by Mercury as lord of 3 and 6 to Aries-borns; 2 and 5 to
Taurus-borns; 1 and 4 to Gemini-borns : 3 and 12 to Cancer- boms
and so on.
(1) Aries-borns : Short travel : new friends helpful ; proceeding
on camp : receipt of traveling allowance, good relationship with
brothers and uncle, release of books and journals, new agency,
commission taken ; enters as a liaison officer, gets telephone, if it was
long pending, victory, success in litigation, etc., provided Rahu is a
benefic. If Rahu is evil, the adverse results in the above nature of
results is to be judged. This rule applies to all lagna boms. The results
are given to the lagna-Ascendant; not to Moon sign (Nakshathra or
Sun sign) date of birth.
(2) Taurus-borns : Gains money through music, opera, cinema,
goes overseas, strangers and foreigners lend their assistance, gets
into service in a far off place : Tonsil operation successful; So also,
cataract and one can regain the vision. Success in higher studies,
departmental examinations and thereby improvement in status is
shown. Loss to younger brother, prosperity to children are marked.
(3) Gemini-borns : Good health, recovery from disease,
Construction of house : erection of machinery, purchase of vehicle,
disease to mother, younger brother or sister either getting

married or gaining through partner, success in education, litigation,
higher status, promotion, admission for higher studies, gain through
strangers are to be expected.
(4) Cancer-boms: Loss by having brokerage or commission
business - Loss of Liaison office. Loss during short trips, ill- repute and
receiving irritating and annoying letters, Difference of opinion with
partner, dispute, Publication in this period will not be advantageous.
(5) Leo-borns : Even though the conjunction is in the 8th house,
yet Mercury governing Revathi, owns the houses 2 and 11. Therefore
grand success, social and financial success, victory over enemies,
win in election, defeat to opponent in litigation to have a new financing
partner in business. A successful time.
(6) Virgo-borns Promotion, prosperity, name, fame, reputation,
award, gains through business, new contracts, agreements, good
health; grand success, purchase of property by partner. Equally father
also makes money, whereas elder brother will lose heavily; children
will fall ill and treatment will be given in headquarters hospital.
(7) Libra-boms : Long journey, overseas higher education;
speculation or gain through music or cinema in far off places, sale of
property, retirement from service, termination of service, are to be
expected, Younger brother is fortunate, gets a wealthy partner, gains
in profession.
(8) Scorpio-borns : Gains through commission, legacy,
brokerage, success in mediation. Purchases property, vehicle etc,
success in examination. Receipt of bonus, gratuity, Insurance amount,
wife will be more lucky, ailment to youngsters, marriage to children
though this is Maha Maka-year or Kumba Mela; loss to father.
(9) Sagittarius-borns : Good luck, Prosperity, is assured.
Marriage takes place. One can have child born. New partner joins for
business. Publicity will be made. Propaganda will be done.
Salesmen will be changed. Speedy turnover, larger profits, good luck.

(10) Capricorn-boms : Victory over enemies, easy overdraft
facilities, scholarship for higher studies - foreign assignment,
reputation, honour - unexpected gains by correspondence,
competition and speculation, good luck to children.
(11) Aquarius-borns : Worries, anxieties, child may be missing,
or may cause anxiety, Purchase of property on child's or partner's
name, ill-repute, Loss in speculation, litigation etc.,
(12) Pisces-borns : Marriage, purchase of land, house, vehicle,
assistance through friends, success in examination, may leave the
native place. Change of residence. Entry into new house. Loss to
children. Gains to younger brother.
Thus, a general picture can be given by following Krishnamurti
Padhdhati.
As regards mundane astrology, I have very clearly stated how it
is in an infant stage and one cannot using traditional astrology,
pinpoint any event. For example, if one predicts an event due to the
conjunction of evil planets, why it should happen is to be scientifically
explained. Otherwise the readers may take that the prediction is his
wish. For example, if one has said that between March and June of
any year, policies may be modified, we expect such whenever the
conjoin.
Capricorn; 24-7-1922 in Virgo; 2-5-1911 in Aries; 10-11-1899 in
Scorpio, Saturn and Rahu conjoined.
Saturn and Kethu were together in conjunction, similarly once in
11 years. On an average, once in 5 1/2 years Saturn conjoins with
either of the nodes.
Let us refer to Indian History and World History. Except that in
1939 when Saturn and Kethu conjoined (not Rahu), Germany began
the Second World War, no incident had happened when Saturn came
in conjunction with Rahu.

TRANSIT OF SATURN
Let us take the year '1964'
On 26th January, Saturn passed on to Nirayana Aquarius and up
to 23rd March, it moves in direct motion in the Nakshathra Dhanishta;
then it transits in the same direction in Sathabhisha star ruled by Rahu
the Ascending node till 15thJune 1964. On 15-6-1964 it commences
to retrograde, and till 17th September 1964, it is in Sathabhisha, from
18th September Saturn by retrograde motion, transits in Dhanishta,
governed by Mars in the same sign Aquarius - Kumbha. On 2nd
November it takes a direct course, and throughout the year, it is in
Dhanishta.
One should note that Saturn is not the only Planet which
indicates what a person can expect in 1964. Every planet contributes
to certain events in one’s life according to (Hindu) System (1) its
lordship, (2) the position which it occupied at the time of one’s birth,
(3) the houses owned by the planet (4) the house transited by the
planet, (5) (Western System) the various aspects it forms with the
other planets with its radical position, with the Ascendant, with the
meridian and also its conjunction with the planets in the sign in which
it transits and (6) (K.P) the nakshathra or star in which the planet
transits, and the house signified by the lord of the nakshathra and
Sub. All the points are very important, according to the system
followed. But one should follow only K.P. System. Both the nature of
event and the time of event will be correct only when properly judged,
using K.P System.
Western : - It may be said that good aspect from planet to any
other planet may get cancelled by the adverse aspect to another
planet. It is not correct. Both the results will be enjoyed and
experienced. If Saturn as lord of 11 forms good aspect with Sun, lord
of 5, and bad aspect with Venus, lord of 2 and 7, latter adverse aspect
will not rob away the former beneficial aspect. Actually, due to the
favourable aspect to Sun, lord of 5, he may

gain in races, speculation, or betting, or be benefitted by children, and
because of the adverse aspect with Venus, Saturn may indicate
ailment to wife some worries at home and also uncommon expenses.
The day will not pass, without all these events; one will not cancel the
other. It may be that, whatever he gained he had to spend away. But
he ought to have felt happy for the success in speculation of gain
through children and miserable, due to wife's ill-health, and in his
ledger he should make both the entries, the first is the income through
speculation or children and also the expenses of the medical bill, etc.,
due to the adverse aspect.
So, also if a planet forms good aspect with any other planet
which also receives evil aspect from a third planet, then also both the
results will be enjoyed by the person.
Thus when an individual's chart is taken, and the transit results
are offered; by considering all these vital points, the prediction will
come nearly satisfactory and be to some extent helpful : but for a
general prediction all these points cannot be included, as either lagna
or Moon's or Sun's position alone is taken, that is the main reason
why the transit results, given in general do not come to pass.
What Saturn can generally do : - Saturn, forming good aspects
with other planets, will make one sober, thoughtful, and
contemplative, will be careful and attentive. There will be an increase
in one's popularity and prosperity. Saturn will offer self- reliance. One
will be able to re-organise, and systematise his work or business. He
will advance, to a good extent, and find much progress due to his
sincerity, methodical approach and tact. One can look for a position
of trust. One may not have rapid progress, but yet success will be
slow, steady, sure and well secured. It will be long-standing. One may
purchase land, begin to construct a building, lease out one's building
or land, or enter into a long-term agreement. It is also likely that one
takes excavation work, or get employed in mines, or deal with
plumbers,

shoe-makers, hide-and-leather dealers, masons, gardeners,
agriculturists, coal and fuel dealers and also be benefitted through
aged persons.
Saturn, forming evil aspect with planets, shows that the person
will be unfortunate. One will be discouraged due to failures in one's
enterprises. Even petty problems will appear to be big and difficult.
The depression and the melancholy feelings will gain possession of
the person. However much one guard his speech or controls his
tongue, yet he will be mistaken, if he speaks out anything: if he keeps
quiet, and observes silence, that too, will be mistaken. What a pity it
is. His judgement during this period will be poor and there can be no
intuition. Even if he tries to start a new business the impediments and
obstacles will so much depress him that he will be inclined to give up
his projects, and find himself helpless. Further, as Saturn represents
elderly people, only aged persons or those born on Saturdays or in
Makara - Capricorn, or Aquarius - Kumbha Lagna or rasi, and those
born in Pushyam. Anuradha, or Uthirattathi star, will do harm to him.
So you should deal carefully with old people. Also if you are living
in any old house, not at all repaired by the owner, try to shift from
those quarters. If you work in a mine, you should be careful. Those
who deal in the business governed by Saturn, will incur much loss.
Compensation for the loss of the life of a servant, is also threatened.
You have to take all precautionary measures to avoid falls, injuries
and accidents. Try to keep company with people who are witty, and
who will cheer you up. Join those clubs where many younger and
more active people assemble. Even though you cannot apply your
mind and concentrate, you be witnessing it you will laugh, when they
laugh, and be counting days, when the evil effects of Saturn will be
over. You will again become active and more wise than before, when
the evil aspect is over, and Saturn forms good aspect with a benefic.
KP General Prediction : - To be modified to individual's chart.

SATURN'S TRANSIT
commences Rahu Saturn)
to 2-1 1 -64 Mars Sun
15-12-64 enters into Sathabisha star.
From 26-1-64 throughout the year, Saturn is in Aquarius. Hence,
Sign Lord is Saturn. Between 26-1 -64 and 23-3-64 it is in Dhanishta
star, governed by Mars. Between 23-3-64 and 18-9-64 it is in
Sathabisha, ruled by Rahu. Later it is again in Mars' star Dhanishta
between 18-9-64 and 15-12-64, when it enters Rahu's star, Sathabisha,
again. The above statement furnishes the Nirayana Longitude of each
sub, its lord and the time of transit of Saturn.
Aries-Mesha : - This refers to people born in the Ascendant -
Lagna Aries or with Ascendant in Ashwini, Bharani and first pada of
Karthikai Nakshathra.

When Saturn transits between 26-1-64 and 11-2-64 from 0°
Aquarius, (Kumbha) to 1 degree 53 minutes and 20 seconds, it will be
in Mars' star, Dhanishta and in the sub of Mercury. Mars is lord of 1
and 8: Mercury is the lord of 3 and 6. Hence, one may receive
annoying and irritating letters, reminders and even notices for the
repayment of loans; pressure from bankers, or summons from the
court. Or one may make short journeys and incur loss; or one may
have misunderstanding with brothers, claim for partition, and receive
his share of property from his brother. But one may gain through
editing and publishing and publicity. Efforts will be successful after
getting over some difficulties or meeting with some accident or after
hot discussion, negotiation and at last compromise.
Saturn between 11-2-64 and 18-2-64 will be transiting between 1
degree 53' 2" and 2° 40' governed by Mars and sub of Kethu. This is a
time for visiting holy places, or disposing of landed properties, or
worrying oneself with the difficulties which crop up. Separation from
family members during this period due to travel on duty, is also
indicated. A few business people may suffer from the troubles caused
by their subordinate staff and labourers.
Saturn between 18-2-64 and 7-3-64 will transit between 2°-40'
and 4°-53'-20". It shows reunion, pleasant life, gain through partner,
receipt of bonus or fixed deposit, facilities to overdraw from banks :
larger profits, social and financial success; new friends and grand
success to those who deal in the leather industry, mine products,
motor spare parts; silk, soap, tailoring, etc.,
When Saturn transits between 4° 53' 20" and 5° 33' 20" (between
8-3-64 and 13-3-64).’ (Mars star and sun sub) unexpected advantages
will accrue : Government officials will be favourable; there will be
larger profits in speculation. Quick buying and selling will amply
reward you in the short period. Children will co-operate and help you.
Even though normally you

may not attend cinema, drama, etc., you will be taken by your
children. They may complete the construction of any building or
purchase a plot of land.
Saturn between 5°-33'-20“ and 6°40' will be under the sway of
Mars and sub of Moon, between 13-3-64 and 23-3-64. Hence you
may gain through landed properties and permanent investments: To
come out successful in the examination, to acquire a new
conveyance, or have the old one repaired, and mostly renewed, to
have some benefits through mother or mother leaving her permanent
place of residence and joining you. all these are presaged.
Saturn now enters Sathabisha governed by Rahu on 23-3-64.
Depending on the matters signified by Rahu to each individual, the
results will vary. In general, when it transits, between 23-3-64 and
12-4-64 in Rahu's star and Rahu's sub, between 6°40' and 8°40' one
may have some difficulty or other. One may not come out successful.
One gets dejected. There will be misunderstanding, disharmony and
dispute with others, also rheumatic pains near the knee cap, calf
muscles, etc., chronic sufferers have to take prophylactic measures;
filarial patients must observe hygiene, and should not exert much. Do
not hurt your leg : use mosquito curtain; avoid culex bite. If Rahu
would have been in Leo, at the time of birth and if one has heart
trouble, he has to keep his blood pressure under control by taking the
sedative, regularly and avoiding exertion, emotion etc.,
Saturn transits in Jupiter's sub, in Rahu's Star Sathabisha from
desire to go overseas for higher studies will proceed now. Business
people will go on long journey and come in contact with foreigners
and enter into contract with them. They can have foreign
collaboration, and improve their exports; politicians and administrators
will be helpful, and they will receive quota for imports. Father may
have a transfer to a desired place. Mother may fall ill and cause
anxiety. A few may enter into service in any

foreign embassy. Elder brother will enjoy beneficial results in these
days and realise his ambition.
Saturn, then proceeds on till 15-6-64 in Saturn sub: A few may
have positions of trust. Some will be promoted. New friendship will be
formed. It is a troublesome period for mother. Her health will run
down. Wife may go to her native place for delivery and beget a child.
Saturn, retrogrades on 15-6-64, and continues to be in Saturn
sub till 27-7-64. Labourers may cause trouble. In speculation, there
may be a little loss; or money may get locked up. Obstacles and
hindrances will not allow you to complete any work. Around 26-6-64,
health of mother will be critical, and even expert medical aid to a few
may fail.
On 27-7-64, Saturn enters into Jupiter's sub, and it is a period
when one can return home after a long journey or rejoin duty, or
reunite with relatives and friends. You may invest money on landed
properties, or celebrate the marriage of children in the 3rd week of
August. Younger brother will be transferred in his service. Donation
for religious functions, or for temple renovation, is a drain within
On 21-8-64, Saturn passes on to Rahu sub and on 17-9-64
enters into Dhanishta star. Saturn indicate ill health, but there will be
larger profit, and anxiety to recover the entangled money.
Between 17-9-64 to 2-11-64, Saturn retrogrades in Dhanishta
and becomes direct on 2-11-64: throughout this year, it is in
Dhanishta. Therefore, the results mentioned under Moon-sub for a
period between 13-3-64and 23-3-64, will be repeated. When Saturn is
in that position, the experiences between 8-3-64 and 13-3-64 when
Saturn is in Sun's sub, will be similar between 9-10-64 and 2-11-64,
when Saturn will be in Sun's sub. On 2-11- 64, Saturn takes direct
course, and is in Sun's sub till 25-1 1-64. This result will be similar to
what is experienced between 8-3-64 and 13-3-64.

Between 25-11-64 and 15-12-64, Saturn will be in Moon's sub,
and the results will be the same as were experienced between
13-3-64 and 23-3-64. On 15-12-64, Saturn enters into Sathabisha
Star, and the end of the year is similar to the period between 23-3-64
Thus, the transit results are to be read according to
"Krishnamurti Padhdhati".
In general, without considering the various changes in the same
sign, one will normally predict that Saturn in 11 to Aries, will be very
good.
As per Western system if at the time of birth, Saturn would have
occupied Taurus-Rishaba. Leo-Simha, or Scorpio-Vrischika, and form
square or opposition, the native will have adverse results and will be
disappointed. But if Saturn would have occupied Aries, Gemini, Libra,
Sagittarius, Capricorn or Aquarius, they can expect brilliant results.
TAURUS - RISHABA
This refers to people born in Taurus Ascendant i.e., the
Ascendant in the Nakshathra, Karthikai second, third and fourth
quarters, Rohini, and Mrigasirisha first and second padams.
Saturn shows vast improvement in one's financial position frame
of mind, etc., Unnecessary fears will come to an end. A new cycle of
bright life will start. Partner in business may go on a long journey. You
may have short tours. A few having Sun in Taurus, will dispose of
their landed property or car. Moon in Taurus indicates that the brother
may have some difficulties, and his health may fail, though he may
have to overwork. He may be transferred, or he may be touring
Between 18-2-64 and 7-3-64, Saturn indicates that you may borrow
easily to meet extra demands. Health is restored. There may be social
function at home. Success in efforts, or improvement in business, or
increase in salary is portrayed. One

may make long Journeys in connection with his business, and fulfill
his desire. The partnership deed will be renewed. Wife may come
back from her tour, and domestic life will also be pleasant. Musicians
and actors may have new contracts. Those, who deal in skins and
hides, will gain much, by exporting large quantities. Between 8-3-64
and 13-3-64, advance payment for the purchase of a plot, or building,
or vehicle is indicated. Advantages from Government officials, benefits
to mother, and journeys of children, are also likely. Any one of your
children may have minor injury while playing.
13-3-64 to 23-3-64 is a brilliant time to receive encouraging
letters, get back locked-up money, and earn larger profits, Assistance
from brothers, gains by editing, publicity, etc, and improvement
through salesman, brokers and agents, are promised. Health will be
normal.
23-3-64 to 12-4-64 will be a busy period. Name, fame, and
reputation will increase. Dullness in mind, or in business will
disappear. You will entertain hopes, and will be optimistic about the
future when enterprises will be launched. There will be much activity
and boldness in all undertakings, coupled with popularity. Bank
position will improve.
12-4-64 to 5-5-64 is a prosperous time for making money in life.
Success in litigation, contentment and gain in speculation, are
assured. Business people can speculate to their maximum, and gain
immensely. There will be no loss, nor any quarrel with anybody. New
friendship will be formed. There will be vast increase in their list of
customers. Lawyers, bankers and professors will have advancement
in their career.
Between 5-5-64 and 27-7-64, Saturn shows that some may go
on long journey. They may make arrangements with foreigners and
have foreign collaboration. A few may invest much money on
business. Some will sit for departemental examination, and come out
successful. Those, who work in foreign concerns or embassy, will
have satisfactory increase in their income. Good

relationship with higher officials and their support will be had in this
period. Later, between 27-7-64 and 21-8-64, success will be slow.
The gain will be less than what you had between 12-4-64 and 5-5-64,
When Saturn was in the same position as it is in this period.
Whenever a planet is retrograde, if it transits in evil sub lord's
portion, the malefic results will be aggravated and if the sub-lord in
that star is a benefic in retrograde, the advantages and advancement,
during that time, will be less than normal. A planet in direct motion in
a beneficial sub-lord's portion in aconstellation, gives satisfactory
gains. When it is vakra or retrograde in the same position, gains are
assured, but it is much less remunerative for the same extent of
pains. Hence, Saturn, a benefic to Taurus-Rishaba, will not be
adverse at all in this portion in Aquarius, ruled by Saturn, in
Sathabisha Star governed by Rahu and in the sub of Jupiter between
Similarly, when it further retrogrades in Rahu sub, between
21-8-64 and 18-9-64, the results will be favourable. There will be
speedy turn-over in business, and profit in every transaction, but yet
the margin of profit, will be very little, and unsatisfactory. If you are a
pumpset dealer, and if you normally gain seventy rupees per pumpset
when the planet was in direct motion, now when it is retrograde, you
will be able to make only ten or fifteen rupees. The profit will be
booked but the amount will be little unsatisfactory. One will come out
successful in examination, but will not have a rank. In an interview for
service, he will be one among the many applicants selected, but he
will not be considered to be the best in the lot. A few may shift their
residence, if Rahu would have occupied Leo-Simha or if Rahu would
have been in Karthikai, Uthiram or Uthiradam star in their horoscopes.
Those having Rahu in the 7th house, or in the constellation of
Mrigasirisha, Chithirai or Dhanishta ruled by Mars, the lord of 7, will
get married, especially those who had Saturn in retrograde motion at
the time of their birth.

Between 18-9-64 and 9-10-64, arrangement to go overseas will
fall through. There will be much of correspondence, etc., Brothers
may go on journey. Salesman and representatives will be paying visit
to the customers who will not be able to help them in this period.
Between 9-10-64 and 2-11-64, delay will cause worry, and
money may get locked up. Any reminder, written in this period, will
have no response. Assistance from Government officials will be
absent. Those who work in the Defence department will be transferred
or will proceed on leave. It is a dull period for business people.
Once for all, evil results, rather the dullness, will come to end,
and people born in Taurus-Rishaba, will have again prosperous
period, commencing from 2-11-64, when Saturn becomes direct.
Between 2-11-64 and 25-11-64, these people will have such results as
they enjoyed between 8-3-64 and 13-3-64, Later, the results between
25-11 -64 and 15-12-64, offered by Saturn will be similar to what they
had between 13-3-64 and 23- 3-64. The end of the year will be as
good as it was after 23rd March, and before 12th April, 1967.
GEMINI-MITHUNA
This refers to people born with their Ascendant Lagna in Gemini
having the Ascendant in Mrigasirisha 3rd and 4th quarters, Arudhra,
and Punarvasu 1st, 2nd and 3rd padas.
Between 26-1-64 and 11-2-64, it will pass from 0° Aquarius to 1°
53' 20" which portion is governed by Mars, as lord of Dhanishta star,
and the sub is governed by Mercury. Hence, Saturn, lord of 8 and 9,
will transit in the 9th house, in the constellation of lord of 6 and 1 1 .and
the sub of 1 and 4. Therefore, success in litigation, victory over
enemies, realisation of money that had been entangled, escape from
accidents and injury, investmenton landed properties, borrowing
loansfrom aSociety, change of residence, acquisition of a vehicle or at
least sanction

of officer to make use of the office conveyance, are indicated.
Reunion with relatives is also shown. Between 11-2-64 and 18- 2-64,
Saturn transits between 1°53' 20" and 2°40' which portion is
governed by Mars and Kethu. Heavy work, anxiety to keep up
promises, inability to have them fulfilled, minor ailment, irritation and
excitement visit to a sacred place or meeting any elderly, religious
person and donation to religious functions, are portrayed.
Between 18-2-64 and 7-3-64, Mars and Venus rule the portion
betwen 2°40' to 4°- 53' - 20" in Saturn's sign Aquarius when the
person born in Gemini will have unexpected gains and advantages
accruing, as regards finance is concerned. But, if he drives any car or
vehicle, he has to exercise care, be slow, and try to avoid accidents.
A few may fall down and enter hospitals for treatment.
Some people may have to appeal to higher authorities as, in this
period, success is indicated only for subsequent attempts. Some may
repair their houses or conveyance or pay the medical bill due to
mother's ill-health. Those who deal in shoes, skins and hides will
invest more and realise very good profit.
Saturn, during its transit in Sun's sub between 8-3-64 and
13-3-64, portrays sanction from Government for any licence etc.,
applied for. One will have pleasant correspondence and also
assistance from men in power. Short journeys will be fruitful. Editing
and publishing will bring honour. Advertisement will be a good source
of income. Salesman and representatives will be able to show
unusually large turn-over.
Saturn in Mars star, Dhanishta and Moon's sub between
5°33'20" and 6°40‘ show that one will receive a large sum of money
even the so-called bad debts will be realised. Bank position will
improve. One will be successful in all his efforts during this period
between 13-3-64 and 23-3-64 and he will become popular, a brilliant
period promising new cycle of bright life.

Saturn between 23-3-64 and 12-4-64 passes on to Rahu's star,
Sathabisha and in that star the first sub governed by Rahu, between
Those, who could have had Rahu in a favourable position at the
time of birth, will be happy. They will enjoy peace and prosperity. But
if Rahu had been in a bad position in the natal chart, one has to
exercise much care, to avoid difficulties.
Anyhow, from Tamil New Year's day for some weeks the time is
very brilliant, between 12-4-64 and 5-5-64. When Saturn transits
between 8°40' and 10°26'40" promotion, progress in one's
undertakings, partnership in business, gain to partners, new
customers, bulk orders, satisfactory margin of profit, bankers'
voluntary assistance, purchase of property to wife, if the native is male
or acquisition of property by husband, if the person is a woman, and
good understanding between the couple, and between the higher
authorities and the Gemini-borns are promised. This is a very good
period.
there will be uncommon expenses, both pleasant and also unnecessary ones. There will not be as much enthusiasm as it was
before. One will be very careful. Pickpockets will select only Geminiborns in this period and deprive them of their holdings. Cashiers have
to be careful. A few will escape such losses proceeding on leave.
Lazy, lethargic days do not permit to be reduced. Business turn-over
will be dull. Unlawful actions will face difficulties. Minor injuries and
misunderstanding with old people are threatened. Between 27-7-64
and 21-8-64 the results will be favourable and will compensate for the
previous bad period. One may over-work. Yet there will be good gain
and satisfactory bank position; success in examination, admission in
colleges for higher studies and scholarship are indicated. New
customers will increase the income of the advocates. A few may get
into service. Extension of the building and expansion of the business
are indicated.

Agents of banks will feel happy on their achievements. The
period between 21-8-64 and 18-9-64 will be similar to that between
that the benefits enjoyed during 13-3-64 and 23-3-64 will be
repeated but the amount of gain will be less. The period from 9-1 0-64
to 25-11-64 will be similar to that between 8-3-64 and 13-3-64. Then
one can have favourable orders from the Government, contractors will
realise their profits. Agents show much progress. Representatives will
push the products and increase the sale. Advertisement bills will be
received, and Bank position will be satisfactory. Health will be normal,
relatives and friends will be frequently visiting. A good period indeed !
Contentment is necessary. The time from 25-11-64 to 15-12-64 is a
still better period. Grand success, vast improvement in status pleasant
purchases and gains with very little effort are promised.
At the end of the year, results will be brilliant for those
who could have had Rahu in a favourable position at the time of
birth.
CANCER - KATAKA
This refers to people born in Cancer as Ascendant in
punarvasu 4th Pada or Pushyam or Ashlesha star.
Saturn passed on to Aquarius on 26-1 -64. It was in the sub of
Mercury up to 11-2-64. Between 11-2-64 and 18-2-64, it is Kethu
sub.
For people born in Cancer, when Saturn transits In Dhanishta
star, as lord of 7 and 8, passing in the constellation of Mars, a
Rajayoga dhipathi, normally the results will be brilliant. During the sub
of only evil planets, the results will be adverse.
Between 18-2-64, and 7-3-64, the sub is ruled by Venus, a
Bhadhakasthana dhipathi, and also lord of 4 and 9, when Saturn
moves from 2°40' to 4°-53'-20". One may acquire a new vehicle;
occupy new quarters; or gain through mother; returns from
investments will be satisfactory; new friendship will be formed;

financial partners may assist; gains through friends, and renewing
old friendship are indicated.
It also indicates that around 2nd and 3rd March, when Moon
transits in Mars star, health may not be alright.
Between 7-3-64 and 13-3-64, there will be much of activity; you
will concern yourself more with financial problems. Luckily, you will
receive the arrears, your bills will be paid, your claims will be
approved, and you may expect promotion. This is a short period in
which you can have many pending problems solved. Government will
be helpful.
When Saturn moves between 5°33'20" and 6°40’ it is under the
sway of the sub lord Moon, who is the lord of the sign Cancer. You are
concerned with your health, and the new efforts that you may make.
You will be contemplating, planning and scheming. Health conditions
need rest. Financial position will not be satisfactory. You may have to
pay many bills. In business, you have to be issuing cheques, whereas
the receipts will be less. Those who desire to go overseas, can have
permission, etc. You may meet foreigners and enter into an
agreement.
On 23-3-64, Saturn enters into Sathabhisha star and till 12- 4-64,
it is in the sub of Rahu. Depending on Rahu’s position at the time of
birth, the results will be enjoyed. If Rahu had occupied favourable
position, and has to offer beneficial results, even though Saturn may
transmit in ashtama, the unfavourable eighth house, yet the results will
be good. You may not be satisfied or pleased. Yet success is
promised. When Saturn transits in a favourable house, success will
please you. In evil houses, though you are able to complete your
undertakings, you do not feel contented or pleased. Suppose you
purchase one 'win' ticket, and one 'place' ticket in the races, when
Saturn transits in favourable constellation, and in 8, your win ticket will
pay 15 rupees for every ten rupees you bet. But, when Saturn transits
in a favourable house and star, even though you have a 'place'

ticket for Rs.10, you will have a return of Rs.100/- and more.
Thus, planets will offer results
If Rahu was in an unfavourable position at the time of your birth,
when Saturn transits in Rahu's constellation, In the sub of Rahu or
Saturn, you have to be very careful. You should avoid driving a car;
you should not venture to cross a busy road, you have to observe
hygiene. Chronic sufferers will have the relapse of the disease.
Patients with heart disease and those, who suffer from general
nervous debility, should nor exert much. It is better to be on leave
and be cautious.
Between 23-3-64 and 12-4-64 when Saturn is between 6°40'
and 8°40', health will not be normal. There may be misunderstandings
with subordinates and colleagues. Income will be reduced. There may
be ill-repute or scandal. Secret inimical activities will come to light and
this will irritate you. Short journeys will not be fruitful. Money will get
entangled. Cheques will not be realised.
Between 12-4-64 and 5-5-64, you will be able to accomplish
some of your desires. Bills will be paid. Receipts of old arrears will
improve your bank position. You will come out successful in litigation.
Arrangement to go overseas may be made. It is likely to have a short
stay outside. Your partner may fall ill. and you may have to take him
for treatment to a far-off place, your wife may lose her health, and will
need proper medical aid. Thus, in this period, there will be grand
success on one side, and worry on the other.
After 5-5-64till 15th June, Saturn proceeds in direct motion, and
between 15th June and 27th July, by retrograde motion. It is in the
sub of Saturn : you will feel dull. You become Pessimistic. You find
much opposition. Your servants may go on strike. Whatever appeals
to you, now, will prove to be detrimental. Avoid disputes. You will find
that you are not able to stick to any single programme. You may even
give up your principles. Business

will be discouraging. Health will be causing worry or anxiety between
19th and 30th June. Your attempts to expand your business will not
be fruitful. You will have to face a lot of obstacle? and impediments.
Financial position will be very tight.
Luckily, you receive Providential help between 27-7-64 and
21-8-64, when again, you are normal. You have success in every
walk of life. You will attend to your work with zeal. Turn over in
business will be satisfactory. You will come out successful in litigation,
or atleast by arbitration and compromise, you will get rid of the worry.
Children will have grand success. They will show vast improvement in
their status. They will have promotion and prosperity. You will also
gain by speculation. Your partner will show rapid recovery. You will
be, once again, entertaining hopes for further advancement in your
life.
Between 21-8-64 and 18-9-64, results will be similar to those
you had between 2-3-64 and 12-4-64. Between 18-9-64, and
9-10-64, you will enjoy as much as you did between 13-3-64 and
23-3-64. Between 9-10-64 and 25-11-64 better results, for a longer
duration can be had, similar in nature, to what you had between
will cause worry. After 15-12-64, Saturn offers the same results as he
did between 23-3-63 and 12-4-63.
LEO - SIMHA
This refers to people born in Leo-Simha as Ascendant-Lagna in
Makam or Pooram or Uthiram star first pada.
Saturn entered Aquarius on 26-1-64. Up to 11-2-64, Saturn was in
Dhanishta star governed by Mars and in the sub of Mercury. Saturn is
lord of 6 and 7 and it is in the constellation of lord of 4 and 9 and in the
sub of lord of 2 and 1 1 . Indeed, it is a fortunate position which will help
the native to come out successful in competition, election or
examination. One may make a long journey, be assisted by a relative
and gain satisfactorily. He may dispose of his landed property, at a
substantial profit. Between

11-2-64 and 18-2-64, Saturn passed in Kethu sub. It denotes dispute,
disharmony, worry and difficulty. If Kethu would have occupied the 5th
house, one will lose by speculation, ill-health to children and
hospitalisation are also threatened. Between 18-2-64 and 7-3-64, the
sub part is governed by Venus. This is a period when both the
husband and the wife will be enjoying as Mars and Venus rule the 9th
and the 10th houses counted from the 7th as well as the first house.
Happy, harmonious life with wife, pleasant functions at home, reunion
or both traveling together and visiting holy places, are indicated. They
may acquire a vehicle, or shift to their own new Quarters. It is also
likely that they receive the yield from the field, etc., In business the
partner will be successful in his long journey, contact with strangers
and fulfilment of the agreements in time. The pending bills will be
realised. Film producers will be able to finish their picture. Speedy
turn-over of business and absolute satisfaction are indicated. One will
be honoured and his services will be recognised. Since Saturn
transits in Mars and Venus, it is likely that a few may have illegal
intimacy and may resort to undesirable method to gratify their urge.
Between 7-3-64 and 22-3-64 Saturn will be in the sub of the lord
of the Ascendant Sun. Assistance from the Government officials, rent
control officer or house allotting society may be expected. It is a
favourable time to get into a service or to have permanency in the
post already held by him. Only those who have Saturn forming good
aspect with its original position will suffer from heart trouble or severe
headache and fever.
Between 13-3-64 and 22-3-64, Saturn will be in the sub of Moon,
in Mars star DHANISHTA. It is an unfortunate position. Unexpected
and uncommon expenses have to be met with irritation or depression.
A few may change their residence and incur double expenses. There
may be fair complex and one may be confused due to the matters
being kept in suspense and it is impossible for him to guess the
result. If there were to be any litigation, the judgement will be kept
reserved. It is likely that

there is secret inimical activity. Delay or denial or disappointment in
one's enterprise is portended. Pressure for money and reduction in the
bank overdraft facilities, will cause much anxiety.
Saturn leaves Dhanishta and enters the star of the ascending
node Rahu, i.e., Sathabhisha and the first sub is also governed by
Rahu. Saturn will be there between 23-3-64 and 12-4-64. Those
people who have Rahu in any of the followoing houses 1,2,3,6,10, or
11 in their horoscope will maintain good health, come out successful
in their enterprises and also make good profit in their business. Those
in service can expect increase in their income and improvement in
status. But those who could have had Rahu in the other houses
4, 5, 7, 8, 9 or 12 will incur loss. Bills will remain unpaid. Some objection
may be raised. Pressure for money will continue. Assistance will not
be had in time. The enemies will have the upper hand.
Between 12-4-64 and 5-5-64, Saturn will be transiting in the sub
of Jupiter. It is also inauspicious as lord of 6 and 7 will be transiting in
the constellation of lord of 5 and 8. The seventh house represents the
opponent, so the lord of 5 and 8 will be lord of 2 and 11 to the
opponent. Hence, when the lord of the opponent transits in the
constellation of his lord of 2 and 11, the opponent is sure to gain, and
the native will lose. Therefore, Saturn the lord of 7, during the period
when it passes in the constellation of lord 5 and 8 will be your foe's
friend and hence there will be loss in litigation, reversion in service,
failure in the competitive examination, disappointment in any interview
for the selection, candidates on merit, etc.. But in a few cases, the wife
will be making costly purchases for her use and the native will have to
issue cheques for heavy amounts. If the chart is that of a girl, it is a
beneficial period to husband. Therefore careful judgement is absolutely
necessary. Father will go on a long journey, in connection with his
profession, Will have good reception in a foreign place and return
successfully in the next sub period of saturn in that of Rahu.

in the sub of Saturn one cannot expect success in any of the
attempts which one makes. Unfortunately, Saturn is in direct motion
in this area till 15th June; later it is in retrograde motion in the same
area till 27th July. As Sun, lord of the Leo sign, will be transiting in the
favourable signs, one may not suffer due to any adverse result, but
everything will be delayed and there will be the doubt whether it
would be possible to finish in time a project he or she may have
undertaken. It is a period of suspense and very slow progress. One
will be dejected. For a few, the last week of June and the first
fortnight of July will be so evil that they may have to relinquish their
office or resign from any post or get reverted, especially when one
has Rahu in the fourth or the 8th house counted from Leo.
Between 27-7-64 and 21-8-64, Saturn will be retrograde in
Jupiter's sub and it is likely that the native's son disposes of his
vehicle or house. The person continues to face many problems and
realises that he is not respected as much as he was, due to various
losses. Litigation and waste of money are also shown. Bills from
lawyers and physicians will be received at short intervals and one will
be dejected.
As was already mentioned for Rahu sub, when Saturn passes
between 21-8-64 and 18-9-64 in that area, depending on Rahu's
position at the time of birth, one will have unexpected fortune or illluck. It is necessary to note in each chart where it was.
From 18-9-64 to 9-10-64, the person will be planning, scheming
and making many arrangements to get over the various difficulties. A
few may make attempts to get into a new service or to have a new
partner. There may be the chances to appeal and one can entertain
hopes that shortly there will be success.
Between 9-10-64 and 25-11-64, pleasant success and
satisfactory gains are indicated. One will win in the appeal. He may
be reinstated. Enemies will disappear. A few may even pass away.
The immediate troubles will end. To some extent, there will be
financial relief and also peace.

From 25-11-64 to 15-12-64, there are indications of change of
place, heavy expenses, necessity to have overdraft, etc., After
15-12-64, those results which one enjoyed between 23rd March and
12th April, will be repeated.
The above are the results indicated by the transiting Saturn.
Other planets will contribute what they have to offer. According to
Dasa Bhukti system, whatever is indicated will also be enjoyed. A
beneficial transit of a favourable planet in favourable star and sub will
not cancel what Saturn threatens, but both will be experienced.
VIRGO - KANNI
This refers to people born in this sign as Ascendant - Lagna in
the Nakshatra either Uthiram 2nd, 3rd, or 4th quarter of Hastham or
Chithrai 1st and 2nd padas.
On 26th January, Saturn passed on to Aquarius and it was in the
sub of Mercury. Therefore, the lord of 5 and 6 was transiting in the
constellation of lord of 1 and 10. It is auspicious to mother. For the
native, gain by speculation or betting or in games would be the result,
as for the 7th house, the opponent, Saturn is in 12. Those interested
in cinema film production will be able to finish or release the same
and begin to realise money which had all along been locked up. His
children may sit for higher examination in this period and be confident
of success. Wife may misplace any of her holdings and lose it. The
partner in business will mistake and his mind will be gloomy, bitter
and given much to worry.
Between 11 -2-64 and 18-2-64, Saturn in Kethu sub could have
given trouble through writing, either letters or documents. There
would have been great inclination to travel and sudden changes.
Danger, while on journey and through digestive disturbances or blood
pressure might be due to Kethu sub in Mars star.

Betweenn 18-2-64 and 7-3-64, the sub is ruled by Venus who is
a strong benefic to Virgo. Therefore, in this period one may come out
successful in any departmental examination or in litigation; or one
may borrow money from any cooperative society and try to reduce
the worry. A few may receive their gratuity or provident fund or any
legacy. His children will have very brilliant results and they may even
invest on landed property or vehicle. They may attend many pleasant
functions and also gain through them. It is not unlikely that one of his
children gets married in the first week of March.
The next sub belongs to Sun. This is a bad combination. Mars,
lord of 6 in the star of lord of 8, and Sun in the sub of lord of 12 is
really evil. The father may ask you to sign any bond as a surety so
that he can borrow money or there may be secret inimical activity by
father and he may do harm to you or you may be involved in any
case and the government will be against your interest due to your
faults or allegation against you. Aged people may be confined to bed
due to giddiness or blood pressure.
Relief comes during the period from 13-3-64 to 23-3-64 when
Saturn will be in the sub of Moon who is lord of 1 1 . If you would have
been a bear and before budget you had sold some shares, now you
will find that the prices of shares daily come down and you are able to
book your profit. Even the amount you would have lost in the games
of chances also can be recovered. New partners in the business may
be taken. Marriage may be negotiated and concluded.
On 23-3-64 Saturn enters into Rahu's star. Beneficial Rahu
promises success in litigation, competition or election. There will be
no obstacle and disappointment. This position quickens the mind and
tends to a thoughtful, profound and penetrating attitude. Those who
deal in mine ores, vehicles of transportation etc., will be able to make
good profit. All the unpaid bills will be cashed and the bank position
will be good.

Between 12-4-64 and 5-5-64, the period is favourable to invest on
landed properties as Saturn transits in the constellation of lord of 4 and
7. Some may buy vehicles and enjoy more comfort. A few may invest
in their wife's name. Young people will get married. Those in service
may be transferred to another place. Bank position, domestic facility,
success in submitting a thesis for higher degree for business
expansion or to get into any research department, this is a successful
period
After 5-5-64, Saturn moves directly till 15th June. Then it
retrogrades. In both these motions, it will be in the sub of Saturn itself
up to 27th July. As Saturn is in this sub for a long period and is not
favourable, one has to exercise care and avoid injuries, accidents,
etc., Partners may leave him and he may have to face singly all the
problems. Money position will become tighter and tighter. Children
also will increase the expenses and so the expenses will far outweigh
income. The native may have enmity with his colleagues and peace of
mind is denied. Loss through fraud, improper speculation and
cheating may be expected. This position necessitates care in diet. A
near relative's health may cause anxiety. So, this period is
unfavourable for the commencement of any new venture. The evil
results during retrograde motion will be very severe. The severest
time is the period when Saturn is stationary.
Fortune or misfortune is never constant. There will always be a
break when some relief could be had. Similarly, Saturn moves on 27th
July to the sub of Jupiter and then one can have easy borrowing
capacity to repay the loans, etc., The fear that he may have to lose
much in the transactions will end. Prices will be favourable. One will
be able to acquire property or conveyance. The mother will gain much
through the investments she has made. Wife may have a journey. If
the chart belongs to a girl, the husband will be posted in a far-off place
and there will be separation for some weeks. Health of the partner
alone will not be satisfactory, and he or she may have to meet
uncommon

and unexpected expenses. There may be trouble through law
and one may have to squander money to maintain prestige.
The results between 21-8-64 and 18-9-64 will be more or less
the repetition of those enjoyed between 23-3-64 and 12-4-64. What
experience one had between 13-3-64 and 23-3-64 will again be
repeated between 18-9-64 and 9-10-64. Another successful time
when you, can go ahead with your programme. This period is very
short. The next one is a period of loss or waste between 10-10-64
and 25-11-64. Again better days pass on and after 15th December,
delay and pressure for money are presaged.
LIBRA - THULAM
This refers to people born in Libra as Ascendant in Chithrai star
3rd and 4h padas, Swathi, Visakam star 1st, 2nd and 3rd padas.
Saturn passed to Aquarius (Kumba) on 26-1-64. It was in
the star Dhanishta in the sub of Mercury.
To Libra-boms, Saturn rules the fourth and the fifth houses, it
transits in Dhanishta, the star of Mars; it governs the second and the
seventh houses. Therefore the results are to be read as the lord of 4
and 5 transiting in the star of the lord of 2 and 7 and not as Saturn an
evil planet transiting in another evil planet's constellation. So when
Saturn was in this sub, the effect of Mercury, lord of 9 and 10, would
have been enjoyed. Saturn as lord of 4, in the constellation of lord 2,
indicates that one will have the receipt of money already lent on
mortgage to a person, or one will acquire property. Also it is likely that
one changes his residence. As lord of 5 in the constellation of lord of
2, 7, 9 and 12 it indicates that he who takes risk in gambling will make
a profit. Opponents are indicated by the seventh house, and so
Saturn, lord of 1 1 , will transit in the constellation of Mars, lord of 1 and
8. Lord of 5 gives the mind and the opportunity to bet.

That is all. Houses 2, 6 and 11 alone indicate gains. Reunion in the
family and celebration of marriage to children are also indicated.
Between 1 1 -2-64 and 1 8-2-64, Saturn was in the sub of Kethu
depending on its position, one is to offer the results. If Kethu would
have been well posited, one will surely gain. But if it is in an evil
house, mental worry, disharmony, irritation and ill health to wife are
threatened. Between 18-2-64 and 7-3-64 the sub is ruled by Venus,
lord of one and eight. It is not beneficial and threatens loss in the
transactions. Over work and unsatisfactory returns would have been
the result then. One might have disposed of one's property. Officially
due to pinpricks, one might have been depressed. The owner of the
house might cause worry. But for his mother, it was an excellent
period to have her desire fulfilled. Between 7-3-64 and 13-3-64 Saturn
will be in the Sun's sub. Either permanency or promotion may be
looked for. Arrears of pay may be received; or the long pending bills
will be passed for payment. Government officials will be helpful.
From 13-3-64 to 23-3-64, Saturn is under the sub of Moon.
Brokers of landed properties will have larger turn over and will have
substantial gains. A few may go on long journeys to improve the
business. Returns from permanent possessions will be more than
normal. But children may fall ill. Temporary separation from the
members of the family is indicated.
On 23-3-64 Saturn passes 2 degrees 40 minutes and enters the
star Sathabhisha ruled by Rahu. One is to note where Rahu was, at
the time of birth in the birth chart. If he is a benefic, such of those
favourable results indicated by Rahu will operate. The transiting planet
and the house it transits indicate which house matters will be enjoyed
by one. The lord of the star indicates the source and decides whether
it is favourable or unfavourable. Hence depending and Rahu's
position, good and evil are to judged. Generally, the results will not be
favourable. Health of children will be indifferent. Mother may get their
partition and

get away. Only the wife will have advantages, accruing in this
period, and the native will enjoy mixed results.
Between 12-4-64 and 5-5-64, Saturn will be in the sub of Jupiter
and the person may mortgage his property and raise a loan. Or he
may have overdraft facilities to construct any building. He may take
up land on lease. Short journeys will prove to be successful. Editing
and publishing in this period will be profitable and popular. One may
take up agency or may be appointed as a representative of any
business. This is the period when children can give peace of mind to
the parents. They may get into service or be selected for any higher
post. If it is a lady's chart, then it is likely that her husband goes on a
long journey and comes in contact with foreigners who will be helpful
for expanding his business.
From 5th May to 15th June, Saturn will be in direct motion in its
own sub. Later till 17th July, it will be retrograde in the same sub.
Therefore one will be concerned with matters relating to mother,
lands, conveyance, children, speculation, pleasurable pursuits, and
change in occupation. The health of mother will be indifferent. Cars
will often give trouble and there will be double expenses. There may
be Kisan trouble, too. Servants will not cooperate. They may demand
more wages. Subordinates may write anonymous petitions or carry
tales and cause anxiety and irritation. Forget speculation in these
days, Saturn who is called "The Tempter" will tempt you and if you
fall a victim, you are sure to lose. The partner may go away for a
short period, and there will be temporary separation.
This state of affairs will not continue long. On 27-7-64 Saturn
again enters into the sub of Jupiter when you will receive the help
from lawyers, judges, politicians and professors. You will tide over
difficulties and regain peace of mind. There will be reunion with
partner in life. Depression will end. You will attend to your duties with
great enthusiasm and will be optimistic. Compromise with the
servants and labour is also promised.

Children will come out successful in their examinations. Some will
take up new business. In this period, the father of the native may have
promotion and prosperity. All-round success is promised up to
Between 21-8-64 and 18-9-64, similar results as you could have
had between 2-3-64 and 12-4-64 will be again enjoyed. Whatever
effects Saturn had produced between 13-3-64 and 23-3-64 will again
be repeated between 18-9-64 and 9-10-64. For a longer duration,
much better results will be enjoyed by you between 9-10-64 and
25-11-64 and the nature of result will be similar to what you had
between 8-3-64 and 13-3-64. Because, on both the occasions the sub
in the constellation of Mars, was ruled by Sun, lord 11. Thereafter, till
the end of the year, the same results enjoyed by you between 23-3-64
and 12-4-64 will operate.
(Always the nature of the result and the source are strongly
indicated by the lord of the star and the sub. The sub-lord clearly
indicates the exact period when one can expect.)
SCORPIO • VRISCHIKA
People born with scorpio as Ascendant (or Vrischika Lagna
having ascendant) in Visakam 4th pada, Anuradha and Jyeshta
constellation.
On 26-1-64, Saturn came to Kumbha and was in the sub of
Mercury in the star Dhanishta ruled by Mars, lord of 1 and 6. It is an
evil one. Health of the native would be causing anxiety. Those who
had piles or blood pressure could have had expert medical aid to avert
the danger. The pressure from the creditors and the necessity to meet
many demands also might upset one. Therefore between 26-1-64 and
1 1-2-64 it was an unfavourable fortnight.
Between 11-2-64 and 18-2-64 Saturn had proceeded to the
sub of kethu. Hence the threat of the creditors would have

disturbed your peace of mind and caused worry. A few might have
entered into litigation. Tenants would have given trouble. There might
have been loss through short journeys. Silly quarrels with brothers
and neighbours are indicated. Or it would have ended in separation
for them. Brother might purchase car with your assistance. Wife also
could have gone on a journey but she had neither difficulty nor loss.
Between 18-2-64 and 7-3-64 Saturn will be in the sub of
Venus. This is the period when one will be able to repay debt and
regain peace. Assistance from friends will come uncalled for. In a
way you will get over difficulties. If you take up any venture now, you
can be sure of success shortly. You can depend on those whom you
approach. Brothers also will enjoy most beneficial results now. They
may have substantial gains without pains. Children alone may not
maintain normal health. Father may buy a car or land.
Between 7-3-64 and 13-3-64, the sub transited by Saturn is
governed by Sun. Therefore he who had been trying to enter into
Government service so far, will now secure one. Those in business
will be successful in obtaining the licence, for the import, etc., from
Government. A few may start new business. It is likely that the
contractors, may have to supply materials or erect buildings. Young
and active people may become the representatives of any medical
and chemical concern. To become a liaison officer, this is indeed, a
good period.
Between 13-3-64 and 23-3-64 Saturn will be under the sway of
Moon. Hence, one may make attempts to go on a long journey and
also borrow. Or one may try for higher education and go overseas.
Connections with strangers and foreigners will prove to be fruitful.
Editing, publishing, etc., will also be popular and receipt of money that
had been locked-up for long will help to avoid unpleasantness. It is
likely that mother falls ill and brother gets married. Generally during
the period of lord of 3, transiting in the sub of lord of 9 and in the
constellation of lord of lagna, one can expect younger's marriage;
because, lord of 3 represents

younger brother. 9th house is the 7th from the 3rd and the lagna of
the person is the 11th from the 3rd. Always the younger brother gain
whenever lords of 1 ,3, 4 and 9 jointly operate.
Between 23-3-64 and 12-4-64, Saturn enters into the star
Sathabhisha which is ruled by Rahu. If one had already enjoyed the
period of Saturn Dasa, Rahu Bhukthi in his lifetime, then he can
expect the same type of results to a much less extent than what he
enjoyed then. Note whether Rahu is good or bad. If it is well posited in
your chart, then you can expect agreeable results; otherwise the
results will not be agreeable. If Rahu had occupied the 10th house,
you will have expansion of the business, larger profits, benefits from
Government, etc., This result will also be enjoyed if Rahu had
occupied the stars Karthigai, Uthrapalguni or Uthrashada star ruled by
Sun, the lord of 10. If Rahu had been occupying the 12th house, it
indicates monetary loss, change of place, litigation and secret inimical
activities. Between 12-4-64 and 5-5-64, Saturn transits in the
favourable sub of Jupiter. It will help much to have speedy turn-over in
business to get back the money that had been entangled all along, to
have a child or any son getting into service in a far-off place, etc., But
it is not good for gambling or making money in the share market. It is
helpful only to the opponent. Even in election or in any competition,
one may have to lose. But the person will be courageous and will not
feel sorry for the failure. In these days, one may purchase costly
jewels for his wife. Or if the chart belongs to a lady, the husband will
get a decent position in his career, by coming out successful in any
competitive examination or interview. Partners will be able to expand
the business.
Between 5-5-64 and 15-6-64, Saturn transits in its own sub
direct motion. Then till 27th July it is retrograde and in, the same sub.
If Rahu had been bad, this sub period will prove to be very bad.
Hence it is necessary to judge properly the results of Rahu in one's
chart. Saturn is evil by nature. As lord of 3 and 4, if does not improve.
Rahu is another malefic by nature and if he

occupies undesirable houses, one has to be careful in these days.
Labour trouble may crop up. The vehicle and the house will be
requiring urgent and unavoidable repairs. Money position will become
more and more tight. In the office, higher officials may not appreciate
the arduous nature of the work and give relief; whereas unnecessary
pin-pricks will depress the native. In business, the turn-over will be
poor. It will be dull, and money will get entangled.
Life is like a wheel and one will neither suffer long, nor enjoy
uniformly. Again Jupiter comes for rescue. Good natured people or
those who have Jupiter as a ruling planet, will lend their
assistance and help you to get out of the troubles. Your son also will
assist you. Normal conditions in business will again prevail. The dues
long outstanding will be received, if the native is a contractor and has
some difference of opinion with the engineers and if his case is taken
up by the arbitrator, this is the season when he can expect favourable
orders and payments made in his favour. If there is any litigation in a
court of law, it is better you enter into a compromise
as it will be beneficial to you. It is a lucky period for your daughter to
get married.
Between 5-5-64 and 15-6-64, Saturn passes on its own sub in
direct motion and between 15th June and 27th July, it is retrograde. It
is again dull, lethargic one. But there will be frequent short journeys.
Neighbours will be helpful. Writers and authors will be able to
complete their books and release them. Brother gets promoted.
Mother goes on a journey and there will be temporary separation.
Children also will be touring. Partner in business is capable of
improving the business and arrange for further expansion. He may go
overseas and make efforts to take up agency to obtain foreign
collaboration. He may try for international trade.
Between 27th July and 21st August all matters take a
favourable turn. Reunion in the family, return of the partner, or his or
her grand success will contribute your peace of mind. You will attend
to your

duty with greater zeal. Bank position will automatically improve.
Popularity will also increase. It is a jolly good time for a short period
just like the bright sunny day in the continuous rainy season. A few
may have Grahapravesam for their new house. The brokers of
landed, Properties and cars will book larger profits. Those in the
cinema line or music will also gain much in these days. They should
make all efforts to come out successful, especially those who were
not fortunate in the examination on the last occasion. Shortly, you will
come out successful.
From 21st August to 18th September, Saturn will be in Rahu
sub. Those, to whom Rahu was good, can expect decent promotion to
partner, long journey and success in higher studies. Those who work
in mine ores, will have larger profits and greater transport facilities.
Those in the transport can have a change for the better. Dealers in
automobiles, motor spare-parts, etc., will expand their business. The
financial position of the younger ones will be satisfactory. Mother may
go on a journey. Father's health may cause anxiety which is the only
evil result. Between 21-8-64 and 18-9-64, Saturn again enters into the
star Dhanishta governed by Mars and the sub is ruled by Moon.
Hence the results which will be enjoyed now will be more or less
similar to what you had between 2-3-64 and 12-4-64. It is a desirable
one. Next, Saturn will be in the sub of Sun between 18-9-64and 9-1064 and the benefit will be just what it was during the Sun sub period, it
is favourable for the fulfilment of your hopes and desires. Between
9-10-64 and 25-11-64, the results will improve.
Thereafter, between 25-11-64 and 15-12-64, your partner's
health may not be alright. You may have to pay medical bills and
loans previously outstanding. Short journeys will not bring immediate
fruit. You may have some trouble with brokers or servants. Your
colleagues will not cooperate with you now.
After 15-12-64 Saturn will offer such results which it gave
between 23-3-64 and 12-4-64 and the next year will be a happy one,
much better than the present one.

SAGITTARIUS - DHANUS
This refers to people born in the ninth sign of the Zodiac.
Sagittarius as their Ascendant, in the constellation Moolam,
Poorvashada or Uthrashada first pada, at the time of birth, or when
Sun was passing in Dhanus when the birth date was, between 16th
December and 13th January any year.
(The so-called Sade-Sati came to an end on 26-1-64 when
Saturn left the sign Capricorn and entered into Aquarius-Kumbha.
This is mentioned by those who predict the transit results taking the
position of Moon at birth. Such a method of prediction is not offered
by Westerners. Many who follow the Hindu system will be happy to
note that the evil period has come to an end and that better period will
follow especially after Jupiter enters, Aries the fifth sign from the
position of Moon in Sagittarius. In their experience, they will observe
that it is an approximation to some people, and not exact one to all. In
many cases the opposite results will be experienced.
The explanation is that:
1 . the radical position of the planets is not taken into
consideration. One might have been born in Moolam and he may
have a friend and a foe born in the same star. The person may have
Saturn in Taurus, whereas the friend or enemy may have Saturn in
Aries. For the native, when Saturn transits in Aquarius, it will square
its original position, whereas for the other it will form harmonious
aspect. Hence the results must be just opposite to each other.
2. The constellation and the sub in which a planet is transiting
is not considered. When Moon is given importance for transit results,
the lunar mansion is somehow omitted. In practice, it will be seen
that the lord of the constellation alone offers the nature of the results
and the sub is more important for fixing the exact time.

Saturn on 26-1-64, entered Aquarius and was in the sub of
Mercury till 11-2-64. It is a period when some would have had change
in the institution with satisfactory increase in salary. A few would have
received arrears of pay. The contractors might have received the
amount which was long pending. New contracts would have been
signed by the cine actors. Increase in the income of the musicians
during this period was also promised. To come out successful in all
the efforts and to have the benefit from the government, this period is
propitious. The birth of a child is also likely. The health of the native
will improve.
Between 11-2-64 and 18-2-64 Saturn was in the star of Mars
and the sub of Kethu. It indicates visit to holy places and meeting
great sages. One may donate for the renovation of a temple or spend
money on religious functions. Though there is no adverse result in
this week, something or other would have caused unnecessary worry.
Between 18-2-64 and 7-3-64, the sub is ruled by Venus, lord of
6 and 11. Those who are having litigation may enter into a
compromise which will result favourably. Younger brothers will have
some improvement in their health and thereafter it will not worsen.
They will start attending to their normal duties. Children will come by
unexpected fortune. The partner in business may proceed on a long
journey. Mother's health may cause anxiety. Speculators will make
satisfactory gains in their transactions, especially when they are
"Bears".
Between 7-3-64 and 13-3-64, Saturn will be in the sub of Sun
who is lord of 9. As Dhanishta is ruled by lord of 12, it is likely that a
few may enter into foreign service, while a few may go overseas and
enter into a contract with foreigners. Advantages from the
Government and high officials are also indicated. Students sitting for
competitive examinations and those who are interviewed for any
selection will be successful. Providential help is promised.

13-3-64 to 23-3-64 is the period when Saturn would be in the
sub of Moon. This is an anxious time. Worry and difficulties will
increase. In spite of all comforts and success in his own personal
attempts, unavoidable troubles will lessen his enthusiasm. It is likely
that he will differ from officials and incur their displeasure; health of
younger ones will again cause anxiety. A few may invest money on
landed properties or change their residence.
On 23-3-64 Saturn enters into the star Sathabhisha, ruled by
Rahu. If Rahu would have occupied a sign other than Cancer
(Kataka), and Scorpio (Vrischika), or if Rahu had not occupied Moon's
star Rohini, Hastham, or Sravanam or Mars star Mrigasirisham,
Chithrai or Dhanishta, the native can expect financial improvement,
peace of mind, prosperity in business, success in his efforts and vast
advancement in his career which was denied in the past two years
when Saturn was transiting in Sravanam star governed by the lord of
eight.
Between 23-3-64 and 12-4-64 only those to whom Rahu was illposited as mentioned above, will face many problems and they will be
saying that even though seven and a half years Saturn is over, the
trouble had not come to an end, whereas fresh ones also crop up. If
Rahu is beneficially posited, health of brother will improve. The
partner will return after her short tour. Litigation will end in a
compromise. There will be no more waste of money, in the near
future.
Between 12-4-64 and 5-5-64, the sub period is very good.
Happy celebrations at home, change of residence and construction of
a new house, partner's promotion in service and partner joining a new
concern are all likely. There will be many social functions. Popularity
will increase. Pleasant expenses also will go up equally in this period.
Those who expect the facilities from bankers will have them to their
satisfaction without any further delay. Those who would desire to
study further will have their wish also fulfilled. It is a pleasant time.

After 5th May till 15th June, Saturn will be in direct motion.
Thereafter it is retrograde and is in the same sub of Saturn till 27th
July. In this period, all worries will come to an end. Health of all the
members will be satisfactory. Unnecessary expenses and waste will
be reduced. Financially one will be economical and will save, unlike in
the previous sub-period when for prestige, much money would have
been spent. Many short journeys may be made and trips will prove to
be fruitful. Editing, publishing or taking up any agency in this sub will
be advantageous. Generally Saturn transiting in the third house is
considered to be beneficial. It will certainly be beneficial when it
transits in its own sub. Therefore those born in Sagittarius have to
make the best use of this period.
The following one is also favourable, as between 27-7-64 and
21-8-64 it will be under the sway of Jupiter. Even certain matters which
would not have been finished earlier within 27th July will be completed
now. Those who have been erecting any building during the past few
months will complete it. Few may get married though
betrothal alone could have taken place during the past sub period.
Thus one may note that the native will enjoy material welfare in this
period and the future will appear to be bright.
One's Karma never allows one to be ever happy or feel dejected.
So it gives a break now and then, when Saturn by retrograde motion
enters into the sub of Rahu, which will not be agreeable. In the coming
months, the results that one may enjoy will be similar to what he had
in certain periods in the previous sub as follows. Whatever results one
had between 2-3-64 and 12-4-64 will again repeat between 21-8-64
and 18-9-64. Results between 13-3-64 and 23-3-64 will again be felt
between 18-9-64 and 9-10-64. Saturn produces the same effect from
of the year shows some worry similar to what you had between
23-3-64 and 12-4-64. The New Year will be a pleasant and prosperous
one.

CAPRICORN (MAKARA)
This refers to people born in Capricorn as Ascendant in (i.e.,
Makaram as lagna), Uthrashada star 2nd, 3rd and 4th padas,
Sravanam star and Dhanishta 1st and 2nd padas when Sun would be
in Capricorn and also those people who are born between 14th
January and 13th February any year.
Saturn was in Mars' star and Mercury sub between 26-1-64 and
11-2-64. Mars is lord of 4 and 11; Mercury is the lord of 6 and 9;
Saturn is the lord of 1 and 2. This would have been a favourable time,
to own a car, to repair any conveyance, to make a journey, to come in
contact with strangers and also to have sudden gains through them.
New friendship could have been formed. Partner's health might have
been affected.
Between 1 1-2-64 and 18-2-64 Saturn was in the sub of Kethu. So
one might have visited holy places, had initiation of mantra by meeting
sages. One would have booked larger profits if Kethu at birth occupied
favourable houses. But, if it was in an evil house, loss, worry,
confusion, dispute, separation, irritation and relapse of chronic ailment
are threatened.
Saturn was in the sub of Venus between 18-2-64 and 7-3-64. it is
a lucky time to have satisfactory success in enterprises. Celebration of
marriage or appointment of children will be offered by Venus, lord of 5
and 10 in the constellation lord owning 11th house. Always pleasant
functions or marriage to children will take place whenever the
conjoined period of lord of 5 and 11, operate. Reunion with family is
also shown.
Between 7-3-64 and 13-4-64, the sub transited by Saturn is ruled
by Sun. It shows purchases to partner, opening fixed deposit account
in a bank (lord of 2 in the sub of lord of 8) , to have advantages
through Government officials. A few may get into service in Insurance
Corporation, Land Mortgage Bank, Housing, Planning or in any
Surgical or Military Department. Saturn is under the sub of Moon

A period of ailment to wife or husband. The person may go on a
journey, break it on the way and make substantial gains. A few
Capricorn - boms may have their marriage fixed up. Litigation will end
favourably. A new partner may be taken in, to improve the business.
Overdraft facilities may be arranged.
Now Saturn enters into Sathabisha and it is Rahu's sub
between 23-3-64 and 12-4-64. Note in the birth chart of the person
where Rahu was. If it is occupying beneficial sign, it will offer good
results. If it were to be in evil sign, loss of an elder member or
dangerous ailment, loss of money, ill-repute and scandal are
threatened. But if it were in the beneficial house, one can expect such
favourable results as Rahu indicates. If Rahu is in the 5th or 11th
house, one will purchase property, gain by speculation and
lottery, make new friends and become more and more popular.
Rahu in 10 indicates promotion and prosperity. Rahu in 9 or 12
will give long journey, contact with foreigners and life in foreign land. It
may allow one to have higher studies.
From 12-4-64 to 5-5-64, Saturn will be in the sub of Jupiter. It
indicates journey, expense, investment or publications, availability of
phone, repayment of loan, increase in one's popularity, assistance
from elders and frequent visit to hospital to see friends, etc.,
From 5-5-64 to 15-6-64, Saturn will be in the sub of Saturn.
Health will be normal. Bank position will improve. Business will
expand. Those who suffer from cataract, may have it operated. Those
who suffer from tooth-ache will have it removed and have relief. Those
members who had been away will return and lead a pleasant life.
Physicians will have good opportunity to establish a good name.
Engineering contractors will have a large number of big contracts. The
predictions of astrologers (lord of 2, Sani, in the second house) will
come true, especially when they predict the longevity of a person.
From 15-6-64 to 27-7-64, Saturn will be retrograde in the same
position and similar results will be repeated. One will have enough

of comforts and convenience. Unavoidable and necessary expenses
will be uncontrollable. A few may have a change in their vocation.
Musicians can have larger income and unexpected investment on
property, on an impulse. There can be no labour trouble. Materials for
construction will be had whenever needed. There will be no loss, nor
deception.
Between 27-7-64 and 21 -8-64, the results will be similar to what
one had between 12-4-64 and 5-5-64. Long journey, higher
education, repayment of loan, respect from elders, greater popularity
and lack of understanding with brother are indicated. Brother may
shift his place of residence. He will have peace and prosperity which
would have been denied till July.
From 21-8-64 to 18-9-64, the results will be similar to what one
had between 23-3-64 and 12-4-64. Those who had Saturn retrograde
at the time of birth and Rahu in a favourable sign will come by
fortunate results. Providential help is promised. Visit to holy places
and enjoyment of peace of mind are indicated.
The period between 18-9-64 and 9-10-64 is similar to the one
between 13-3-64 and 23-3-64. Long journey, separation from kith and
kin, popularity and prosperity in the places of visit and substantial
gains are shown.
From 9-10-64 to 25-11-64. The results will be similar to what one
would have enjoyed between 8-3-64 and 13-3-64. The sub is ruled by
Sun. Raising loan to meet unavoidable expenses, delay in realising
the locked-up money and labour trouble are indicated.
25-11-64 to 15-1 2-64. The results are similar to those enjoyed
between 13-3-64 and 23-3-64 and again between 18-9-64 and 910-64. Ailments to partners, hospitalisation and medical expenses
unusually will be great. Waste of money is also threatened.

After 15-12-64, the end of the year will be pleasant and
smooth.
For people born in Capricorn, (Moon sign) the so-called, Sade
Sathi, 714 years' Saturn is in the third and the last phase. Fortunately,
the lords of the constellation in Aquarius are Mars, Rahu and Jupiter.
To whomsoever these 3 planets occupied favourable position at birth,
they will surely enjoy beneficial results. If they occupied such houses
which are disadvantageous, this transit portends evil. All results
depend on the position of these three lords ruling the Nakshathras
Dhanishta, Sathabhisha and Poorvapadhrapada. (I am born in
Capricorn, I am appointed as visiting Professor of astrology, Baratiya
Vidya Bhavan, I started magazine, I received honour, title, gold medal,
brought out books, celebrated the marriage of daughter etc., what has
Sade-sati done. Please note.)
AQUARIUS (KUMBHA)
This refers to people born in the 1 1 thsign of the Zodiac with
Ascendant - Lagna, in Aquairus.
Saturn entered this sign on 26-1-64. It has to transit ii Aquarius,
the three stars Dhanishta, Sathabisha and Poorvapathrapada. In
1964, Saturn does not reach Poorvapathrapada. It passes through
Dhanishta and transits in Sathabisha about 5°, retrogrades and again
enters Sathabisha on 15-12-64.
Between 26-1 -64 and 1 1 -2-64, Saturn was in the constellation of
Mars, lord of 3 and 10 and In the sub of lord of 5 and 8. Hence the
native will have a transfer. He may be posted as a touring officer.
Those in the film line will have larger income from the distributors.
Both will gain. Musicians can have good fortune and popularity.
Those dealing in stationery and publication will have the chance to
take a partner or to have satisfactory financial assistance.

Between 11-2-64 and 18-2-64, the sub is ruled by Kethu.
Industrialists may face the non-co-operation of the subordinates. They
may cause trouble and create confusion. Enmity with brothers,
cousins and neighbours, loss of money by pick-pocketing, anonymous
petition against the native and thereby both fear and irritation are
threatened.
Venus sub is transited by Saturn between 18-2-64 and 7-3-64.
Though the period is short, one will have grand success. This
compensates for the previous undesirable experiences. A few may
invest on lands. Some may get married as Venus is the chief governor
for marriage and Mars is to fix up urgently and celebrate. Some may
go overseas for higher studies or for foreign collaboration. Separation
from kith and kin is also shown. From 7-3-64 to 13-3-64, Saturn was in
the sub of Sun. It shows short journey; pleasant life; purchases of
partner; minor ailments to husband or wife, settlement of accounts and
favour from Government. Contractors can have new tenders
accepted. Agency of foreign concerns may be taken up, especially
drugs, chemicals, etc.,
13-3-64 to 23-3-64, Extravagant expenses, Separation among
partners under pleasant circumstances, Ill-health to the native and
medical expenses, etc., are indicated. The children of a few Aquarius
boms will gain money or come out successful in any competition.
They will come out victorious in litigation. Thus Saturn passes the end
of Dhanishta star. From 13-3-64 to 12-4- 64, Saturn transits in
Satabhisha. The first sub of Rahu will be transited in this period.
Depending on the position of Rahu, one will experience the results. If
Rahu were to be in the beneficial signs, one can expect good luck. If
Rahu is ill-placed, loss, difficulty, secret inimical activity and worry will
be the result. If Rahu would have been in Venus, Mars or Jupiter's
sign, the person will enjoy his life, even though the astrologers may
say Janma Sani, Thritipa Brahaspathi and so on. Actually people can
verify and satisfy themselves how the gocharapalan given by Hindu
sages

does not agree with the practical experience of those people. But, if
you adopt KRISHNAMURTI PADHDHATI, i.e., to divide a star and to
read the result modified by the lord of the sub of the star, the results
expected, alone, will actually come to pass.
Between 12-4-64 and 5-5-64, the native may take a new post. A
new cycle of life will start. He can have larger income. A few may have
the birth of a child. Both the financial position and the family
circumstances will be satisfactory, offering peace of mind. New
friendships will be formed. Partner also may get into service. A few
may start a new business. Overdraft facilities will be had easily.
Popularity increases.
From 5-5-64 to 15-5-64, Saturn is in direct motion and then upto
27-7-64 it is in retrograde in the same area. This indicates that the
person may invest more money on business, or change the residence
or make purchases more for comfort and convenience. If Rahu would
have occupied an evil sign, ill-health, enmity, separation, agony, loss
of friends and also money are threatened. The servants will not
cooperate. Rheumatic pains may cause worry. Heart-patients have to
be careful. They should not neglect even when the trouble appears to
be bearable.
From 27-7-64 to 21-8-64, again Saturn is in Jupiter's sub.
These persons can go ahead with any programme. Providential help
is promised. Rahu in the 11th house promises sudden unexpected
gains. Children come by fortune. Even if a child could not have had
admission in the college at the first selection, in this period he is sure
to get. Those who would have been interviewed for appointment in
between May and July will receive appointment order. Licences from
the Government can be had, Permit and pass will be received. A
successful period, indeed I
21 -8-64 to 18-9-64. One may go on long journey or change
residence. One may spend money on land, building, conveyance
furniture etc., Change of car is also indicated. Pleasant functions at
home, speedy turn-over in business, larger returns from

investments and satisfactory yield from lands are also indicated. The
results between 18-9-64 and 9-10-64 will be similar to those which
would have been enjoyed when Saturn was transiting in the same sub
of Moon in between 13-3-64 and 23-3-64.
Similarly results between 9-10-64 and 25-11 -64 will be more or
less the same enjoyed between 8-3-64 and 13-3-64. The results given
between 25-11 -64 and 15-12-64. After 15-12-64, Saturn enters into
the sub of Rahu. Depending on the position of Rahu, one can expect
either favourable or unfavourable results.
Note to Students : Suppose two people were born on the
New Moon day in the later half of February and the first half of
March, at the time of sunrise; and the year of birth was different. So
that they may have their ascendant in Aquarius, Sun in
Aquarius and Moon in Aquarius. But, the position of Rahu and
Sani at the time of their birth were different.
Suppose to one, Rahu was in Sagittarius in Poorvashada star.
And to the other, Rahu was in Virgo in Hastham star. To the former,
Rahu at first promises peace, pleasure, Permanent tie of friendship,
prosperity, etc., To the latter, Rahu threatens ill-health, accident,
danger, pressure for money, trouble through creditors, payment of
taxes (most in advance), etc., Therefore when Saturn transits in
Sathabhisha - Rahu's star - to the former it brings fortune and to the
latter misfortune. If both play cards, the former wins invariably, the
latter loses. If both stand for election, the latter faces miserable
defeat.
Similarly, suppose one had Saturn in Taurus in Rohini star and the
other had Saturn in Libra in Chithrai Star. When Saturn transits in
Aquarius, it will square its original position at the time of birth for the
former, whereas it forms the favourable trine aspect with the Saturn in
Libra. As Saturn rules the Ascendant, the former will fall ill.
Hospitalisation is portended. He may worry himself much, as there are
none to carry out his work. So he may incur

loss. For the latter, health will be excellent and he will have grand
success in all his enterprises and will gain much.
Thus, it will be seen that the results enjoyed by people born in the
same sign Aquarius differ widely and they are diametrically opposite.
Therefore the general predictions offered are only the trends indicated
by them according to their nature, without taking into consideration the
strength and occupation of the planets in the horoscopes of the
individuals. That is why, a few experience such results as are indicated
by the transiting planets and a few just opposite ones.
PISCES -MEENA
This refers to people born in Pisces as Ascendant in
Poorvapathrapada fourth pada, Uthrapathra pada or Revathi stars.
Saturn was in Mars' star Mercury sub between 26-1 -64 and 11
-2-64. Mars is lord of 2 and 9. Saturn is lord of 11 and 12. It is
transiting in the 12th house. Therefore one may invest on landed
properties or purchase some conveyance. He is likely to take partner
and start a new business. He may dispose of a property with good
profit. One can have chances to accumulate black money. The partner
may go on a short journey. Children may be transferred on promotion.
Separation from the members of the family is indicated.
Between 11 -2-64 and 18-2-64, Saturn was in the sub of Kethu. If
Kethu would have occupied an unfavourable house, the results will be
most undesirable. Loss of money, prestige, and honour are
threatened. Friends will hesitate to lend their assistance. All matters
will be in a liquid state. Nothing will be completed. It is a period of
either suspense or undue delay causing anxiety. It is likely that one's
health is affected and hospitalisation may be needed. One may make
a trip to his native place or to a holy place. One cannot attend to his
routine work.

Between 18-2-64, and 7-3-64, Saturn was in Venus sub. It is a
pleasant time to one's wife, as he will buy costly jewels and dress for
her. Or one may purchase a car and give it to the partner in business
for his use. Bank position will be deteriorating. Creditors may bring
pressure and the native has to repay the loans. It is not unlikely that
the conveyance gives trouble to him when he goes a long distance. It
is an unhealthy time to the younger brother.
Between 7-3-64 and 13-3-64, Saturn was in the sub of Sun.
People, suffering from heart attack, have to take complete rest and
avoid the relapse of the same. Unnecessary misunderstandings with
officials and also strangers is threatened. Enemies will increase in
number and cause anxiety. Litigations should be avoided. Too much
exertion would be harmful. Everything should be taken lightly.
Saturn is under the sub of Moon between 13-3-64 and 23-3-64. It
is a dangerous time for children. Their attempts will fail. They will
have much opposition. The native will be much depressed. He will
lose confidence and be carrying on his duties without any
enthusiasm. The younger brother will have transfer or will go on a
long journey. Father will change his residence.
Between 23-3-64 and 12-4-64, Saturn will be in the star
Sathabisha ruled by Rahu and in the sub of Rahu. If Rahu would
have occupied a favourable house at the time of birth, the person will
sell away his personal permanent possession or clear off the debts
and purchase peace of mind. If he is to sit for any examination,
immediately after he leaves the hall, the various points which he
omitted to write (which he knows very well) will come to his memory
and depress him. Loss of money through the matters indicated by
Rahu is portended. Rahu occupying an evil sign threatens one with
litigation. One may even be taken into custody and it is indeed a very
bad time.

Chronic disease will flare up and cause anxiety and the native
may be forced to take rest.
From 12-4-64 to 5-5-64, Saturn will be in the sub of Jupiter who
is lord of 1 and 10. Just like a life-boat, Jupiter will offer assistance at
least at the last moment. It is a welcome period to tide over difficulties
and be relieved. It will be similar to the bright Sun shining for a few
days in between two occasions when one gets dejected with the
continuous rain. One who would have had difficulties with his officer
till 12-4-64 will be free from worries till 5-5-64 as the officer may go on
leave. It is not a transfer because, if he is transferred, the worry will be
once for all over. But it has to repeat itself after 5-5-64. Therefore, the
officer or the person may go on leave and join duty to give the same
trouble again for some weeks. If one has litigation, he may entertain
hopes in these days. If one runs Jupiter's period, the judgement will
be passed in favour of the native. But if he runs Saturn's period, the
judgement will be reserved and it will be announced against him after
5-5-64. That is one of the reasons why a few persons born in the
same sign are successful and a few driven away by fate repeat the
slogan "What am I to do? It is 7.5 years Saturn - Sade Sati - which is
very powerful".
Between 5-5-64 and 15-6-64, Saturn will be in the sub of Saturn.
The person has to be tackling an unbalanced budget. Even his diet
will be unbalanced and he may have rheumatic pains or suffer from
flatulence or blood pressure. His friend will misbehave and give
trouble to him. Uncommon expenses will follow, one after another
speedily, and the person will have much pressure for money. A few
may change residence. Either the son-in-law or daughter-in-law will
cause worry, and it will be a problem to maintain peace at home.
Children have to exercise much care, and it is likely that they meet
with an accident or get injured. A few may have expert medical aid,
even if the ailment may appear to be simple. Due to laziness, the
native may lose some good opportunities and feel sorry for his
lethargic tendency.

From 15-6-64 to 27-7-64, Saturn is in retrograde motion in the
same sub. Those who used to get money to show favour to any person
by doing his duty, will be trapped and taken to task. One should avoid
one's evil habits. Bribery will land him in trouble. He may lose his job
when Saturn again transits in the same position, after enquiry. This is a
period of suspense, causing much anxiety. The 7th house to Pisces
(Meena) is Virgo (Kanni). It is ruled by Mercury and lord of 10 to Virgo
is also Mercury. To the 7th house, Saturn is transiting in the favourable
house 6 - Upachayasthana and hence, such people will even be
visiting astrologer's house to know their fate. Why all these? Knowing
that 7,5 year Saturn to those born in Pisces is very evil, one has to
abide by law and try to be friendly with all. A few will invest on landed
properties. Construct house slowly due to the dearth of men and
materials especially when Rahu was in the 4th house or in Mercury's
constellation.
From 27-7-64 to 21-8-64 it is a pleasant period, Success in
one's enterprises, long journey, higher education, life in a hostel,
thorough change in surrounding and environments are indicated. The
sub lord Jupiter indicates that one may change his job, and serve in
another institution. A few may dispose of their ancestral property and
convert it on to liquid cash. Money that had been locked up may be
realised. Any risk in money matters in this period will amply reward
him to tide ever the earlier difficulties and to keep a reserve to meet
the demand in the immediate future, contractors who had been
suffering all along due to the non-payment of bills, will have an
arbitration and gain money by effecting a compromise. Children will
maintain health and prosecute further studies. If their names were to
be in the reserve list for college admission, they will be able to secure
a seat in this period. Some clerks, who suffer in their office due to
heat wave would pray that their officers would call them and discuss
pleasantly on some issues and allow them to remain in his airconditioned room, and thus stay for a longer duration. The moment
the business is over, the clerk comes out and feels the heat of the
sun much more.

Similarly between 21-8-64 and 18-9-64, the native of Pisces will
have troubles. The nature of the difficulties will be more or less the
same experienced between 23-3-64 and 12-4-64.
On 18-9-64, Saturn enters into Dhanishta star ruled by Mars and
in the sub of Moon. The effect of Saturn in between 18-9-64 and
9-10-64 will be similar to what he had between 13-3-64 and 23-3-64.
Results enjoyed between 8-3-64 and 13-3-64 will repeat
themselves between 9-10-64 and 25-11 -64, as the area transited by
Saturn is the same.
Between 25-11 -64 and 15-12-64, it is an unhealthy period for
children. Partners may draw more money. Wife may make costly
purchases. Father may be transferred, or he may change his
residence.
After 15-12-64, Saturn enters Sathabhisha. Depending on
Rahu's position, one can have fortune. 1964 will prove to be much
better as days pass on.
(This is the method, which we have to follow for each planet
and then sum up all).

When does Saturn leave Aquarius? Which
Ayanamsa are we to follow?
Questions:
Sir,
Regarding the sex of the child to be born, one may fail when
one predicts. We can excuse because the child is in the womb of the
mother and one cannot see it. One can try to predict and may fail.
But the movement of Saturn from one sign to the other is a matter
which anybody can see, and can mention when it actually enters into
a particular constellation or sign. There are many modern
equipments and instruments to aid our vision, yet how is it that each
person gives his own date for the transit of Saturn to Pisces.
Prediction may vary. But how can the transit of a planet from one
sign to the other differ so widely? When Raphael Ephemeris is a
correct one, why should not we follow the correct Ayanamsa and use
Raphael's Ephemeris?
Answer:
Dear Sir,
Generally the date on which Saturn enters into any sign is
worked out by referring to the Raphael's Ephemeris and deducting
Krishnamurti Ayanamsa therefrom. Each person follows his own
Ayanamsa and claims that his alone is correct. Each wants to
establish that it is correct by taking instances and then applying only
the Western system of prediction. That is, they take the relative
position between the cusp and the planet or between one planet and
the other and offer the prediction. They should note that whatever be
the Ayanamsa, the relative position will be the same. The readers are
aware of this fact and such an argument is meaningless.
If the difference in age between husband and wife is 6 years, at
all ages the difference will be six. Similarly the relative position
between two planets will be the same whatever be the Ayanamsa.

Therefore, to establish that a particular Ayanamsa is correct by
taking only the relative position is not the proper method.
Therefore, one has to follow Stellar Astrology and especially the
"sub" propounded by Krishnamurti. Then let one note down,
when a person is running A' dasa, 'B' bhukthi and ‘C' anthra; on
which day in which star and in which rasi and lagna, he has got a
child. The significators must agree. Again note the dasa and bukthi
at the time of marriage and find out the ruling planets of the
partner. They also must agree. If you find that there is some
disagreement, immediately note down the lord of the constellation in
which the planet was. If the lord of the constellation would be stronger
than the planet itself, then the lord of the constellation, will rule the star
or lagna in which the partner ought to have been born.
If one were to note down the results according to Stellar
Astrology, using various Ayanamsa (which gives different periods of
dasa at the time of birth), one will find that Newcomb is correct.
I follow only Newcomb. The Ayanamsa which I follow and which
is followed by Mr. Lahiri, or late C G Rajan and Madathu Panchangam
are all more or less the same. The difference is negligible. There is no
meaning in finding fault with others but we have to do good by
following the correct one. We should not do any disservice by being
adamant. Let me say that Saturn enters into Pisces Meena only on
7th April, 1966.
There is a Holly place called Thirunallar in South India in
Tamilnadu. People visit the place, saying that the Emperor Nalan
completed his 7.5 years Saturn period and his sins were washed off
and he was freed from such evil results of Saturn by visiting Tirunallar.
Most of the people do not want to find out on which date actually
Saturn moves from one sign to the other but they simply follow a
particular calculation which needs correction.
Whatever be the day when Saturn transits from one sign to the
other, for one to pray to God, it does not matter whether he does it
exactly on the same day or a few months earlier or later.

Anyhow the prayer will give mental solace and therefore, those who
would like to visit Tirunallar can very well visit the place according to
the timings given by Madathu Panchang or C G Rajan's one. Vakya
Panchang and any other statement by the Astrologers using incorrect
Ayanamsas may be ignored for our advantage.
Traditional Transit system - meaningless
Most of the traditional astrologers are not aware that the
GocharaTransit System advocated by various sages, saints and
scholars in different text books are useless, meaningless and not
universally applicable.
Present authors reproducing those dicta in their own words and
publishing in different languages, actually do harm to those who keep
their horoscopes side by side with such books without mentioning
that these rules fail miserably in majority of the individuals.
According to Prof. Krishnamurti, only those who suffer due to
Grahachara (bad time) will follow this Gochara.
Of all the lagnas according to Tradition, it is only the Moon
lagna that is most important for ascertaining the Gocharapala. One
ought to calculate and from the Moon's place predict the effects due
to transits of planets through the signs counted from that of the
Moon, sign by sign.
During transit, the Sun gives good results when he is in 3 or 6
or 10 or 11 counted from Moon; the Moon in 1,3 6, 7, 10, 11 Jupiter
in 2, 5, 7,9 andll; Mars and Saturn 3,6,11 and so on.
Then they mention about Vedha. (Refer to previous chapter).
Let me give the Gochara position of planets at the time of one's
marriage. So also study the horoscope of people at the time of their
appointment, at the time when one receives President award, at the
time when one wins in races, one gains in lottery

etc. as per traditional system and KP you yourself will find the truth.
Let us ignore those who continue to give as per tradition even though
they know that it is useless and meaningless or they continue to give
lame excuses for every failure. They have to live, they know only this
system. Anyhow, they are committing sin.
The following is the horoscope of Mr. K B Jagadish; Rapid
maritimes Shipping and Clearing Agent, 308, Thambu Chetty Street,
Madras-1.
Sun Dasa balance 1 year 10 months 12 days. He was married on
The position of the planets then, at the time of marriage was as
follows. As per Dasa, Bhukthi System he got married during Rahu Dasa,
Rahu Bhukthi, Rahu Anthra.

In the birth chart Moon was in Virgo. In the chart erected for
the moment of marriage -
(a) Moon was in - Ashtama - Chandrashtama.
(b) Kethu and Mercury in Janma( in 1).
(c) Mars in 2.
(d) No Gurubalam - Guru in 6.
(e) Rahu in 7.
(f) Sade-Sati - 7.5 years Saturn - Saturn in 12.
(g) Sun in 12.
What will an honest, traditional astrologer with these rules say?
A very bad time! Is it not? That is what is said in the books, including
Phala Deepika by Mantreswara.
(a) When Sun transits in 12; sorrow, loss of wealth, quarrel, fever.

(b) Moon in 8; fear, worry, anxiety, avoid good.
(c) Mars in 2: fear, hot words, loss of wealth.
(d) Mercury in 1: loss of wealth.
(e) Jupiter in 6: trouble from enemies, cousins and sufferings
from disease.
(f) Venus in 1 1 - Safety.
(g) Saturn in 12: worthless and fruitless business, robbed of
one's money by enemies: wife and children suffer.
(h) Rahu in 7: loss.
(i) Kethu in 1: sickness and death.
Persons learning palmistry, refer the book and at once look to
their palm. They get terrified; similarly if one refers these rules and
apply to the Virgo rasi born, what is his finding? Fear, disease, sorrow,
ill-health, loss, enemy, etc. Oh God! How long are we to put up with
such readings? How quickly the astrologer disposes of one saying that
Gurubalam has not come! The Gochara is bad. But the above is a fact.
Is the traditional method useful? Meaningless.
Apply Krishnamurti System
This person got married on 1-9-1950. Judge house 2, 7 and 11:
Saturn owns the second. Only Rahu is in Saturn star; 7th is occupied
by Jupiter. Mars is in Jupiter star and sub of Saturn. 11th house is
owned by Mars and Venus is in its star. Hence Rahu, Mars and Venus
are the strongest significators. Rahu is in the constellation of lord of 2
and 12. Venus is in the constellation of lord of 11 in the sub of
Mercury. Rahu is the strongest. Rahu Dasa gave marriage the
moment it started.
By transit Jupiter was in Rahu star Rahu sub. Rahu was in
Jupiter sign, Saturn star Mercury sub.

Moon was in Kethu star Rahu Sub (Kethu represents Moon and
Mercury); Mars in Jupiter star and Jupiter sub. Sun who is to indicate
the month of marriage was in Venus star Venus sub. Saturn was in
Moon sub. Kethu in Mercury sub. Mercury in Venus sub.
Thus all planets were transiting in the constellation of the
significators and sub of the significators.
Let a planet transit in any sign, or in any house. As per KP you
never bother about it. What you should find out is, the transit of the
significators in the constellation and sub of the significators of a
particular matter. This rule is applicable to one and all. No other rule
to confuse; no alternative - No contradiction; full of clarity. The
simplicity of the system and the scientific approach are useful to
make one and all give the correct date of event which come to pass
and the argument is convincing and scientific.
Forget tradition - follow KP
Luck by lottery - another example
The gentleman born in Cancer sign as Janma rasi - having
Moon in Cancer at the moment of birth had.
(a) Jupiter in Janma, i.e. first rasi which is according to Hindus
bad.
(b) Saturn in 4 to Moon - bad.
(c) Moon in 5 - bad.
(d) Kethu in 12- bad.
Again the same gentleman had fortune in March 1968. Then
also transit results were adverse according to Hindus, whereas all
the questions are answered by my system.
