READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_houses_8_and_3_in_advanced_astrology_kp_horary_chatterjee.json
Dataset number: 226 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 701,906 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_Houses 8 and 3 in advanced astrology_KP Horary_Chatterjee
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_Houses 8 and 3 in advanced astrology_KP Horary_Chatterjee
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 404
  • total_words: 120955
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.98
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Times
Houses 8th & 3rd
In Advanced Astrology
(Mysteries Revealed in Predictive Astrology)
by
Dr. S.S. Chatterjee
M.Sc, Ph.D. (B.H.U.)
The contents of this book need a
thorough and deep knowledge of the Vedic
concepts and other related classical texts of
Astrology. Tf some reader, without having
understood completely the principles
underlying within this book, tries the same
and does not benefit as suggested or rather
gets hurt on account of his faulty
interpretation/ understanding of the
subject, it will be against the intent and good
wishes oftheauthor as well as publishers.
May god Bless the readers!

Index
The Art of Prediction +■ " • 19
PART- 1,
MYSTERIOUS 8™ HOUSE

PREFACE
Mother nature has presented our beautiful planet earth
with numberless living species, these different species have
different shapes and size, nature, livelihood, Animals,
insects, birds, aquatics and so on, of them human species
are the most powerful of them all because mother nature
has bestowed them with the third eye, which other species
have been deprived off. Other living things see the objects,
as they are but human beings possessed with the third eye
which is other way is intuition can see an object with a
new vision. But this vision also varies from person to person.
All men visualize the same object but not equally with the
same perspective. One cannot understand the same object
equally. Hence lies the novelty of life which is a dome of
myriad colored glass. Different levels of intelligence discerns
different outcome of thoughts and ideas. So the great things
or deeds in the world is not but static, but revolves through
accordingly as the situation demands. Through researches
and development into different fields of movements and
through the actions and interactions between the thoughts,
ideas, facts will help the inhabitants of modern earth to the
radiant way to prosperity.
From the advent of civilization, man has made numerous
attempts to unravel the mystery of life. Seer, saints and
savants have discovered the truth that different planets and
stars through their various cosmic rays and electro -
magnetic waves steers the past present and future of human
being, may be also others species on earth. The mystery of
birth and death depends as how these planets influence by
showering varied cosmic rays in various ways on different
living being. Herein ushers the study of astrology. Vedic
astrology is very ancient, but from then on till the present
era vedic astrology has taken firm foothold.
It has become very popular everywhere on this globe by 2000
AD, but unfortunately we do not have many authentic text
books in English for mastering this art. Most of the literature

the all astrologers of the world without paying much attention to
other dasa. A good astrologer should learn 3-4 dasas tor the
forecast (KCD, Chakra Dasa, Yogini Dasa and Vimsottori Dasa).
A deep knowledge of fundamentals of Vedic Astrology is needed
for this purpose. Tliere are many contradictions in the slokas. All
the sages expressed their own views. So it is the duty of the modem
astrologers to find out the truth.
Very recently a French psychologist - Dr. Michel Gaugulin
wanted to condemn or denounce astrology as a science.
However in the second thought he felt that this could be
done after collecting the requisite data and to find out
whether his presumptions and assumptions are correct or
otherwise. He collected more than 50,000 horoscopes of the
distinguished persons in various fields and analyzed them
systematically, and concurrently gathered the data of
common men and women. Later on, he found that there is
much truth in the science of astrology for understanding
ourselves rather by any other method, including psychology.
His findings are indeed, superb and based on modern
statistics and concrete facts. The paragraph from his book,
'Spheres of Destiny' will help to know his approach in the
following words, " It is the institution that the life on earth,
and human being themselves, are forever dependant on the
forces of the universe. Man as depicted in old teachings is a
small universe, a microcosm, modeled after the cosmos,
which is microcosm. It is difficult perhaps romantic idea
but also implies that between microcosm macrocosm, then
perpetual contacts and influence universe cannot but affect
the human being more profoundly. The meta galaxy (the
part of the universe we know) is containing 10 particles.
At the point of gravitational collapse, the stars will not even
become a 'blackhole', but will simply dissolve in vacuum
form and disappear. The transmission energy of the
blackhole get utilized in formation of "worhole" as in the
case of a quasar which grows after absorbing energy and
finally breaks up into separate stars. Thus in a galaxy of
collapsing stars can become a source of energy for new
cosmological centre of powerful emissions. "The
development of a unified and invariable picture of the world

is the aim that science strives for" - MAX PLANCK. According
to Bhagavatgita.
rid <454 dqi I I
When one realizes that the state of diversity of living things
is rooted to one, that their manifestation is also from that,
there one becomes identified with rooted to one, that their
manifestation is also from that, there one becomes identified
with Brahman (Lord of the endless cycles of rhythmic
process of creation and destruction). Thus the evolution and
involution occur at one and the same in the system of
universe. We can visualize fixed objects due to movement
and moving objects from the outward vision i.e. the pair of
our outer eyes and their changes of position. There are
animals (like frog) having fixed eye and hence not capable
to identify fixed objects. A poor frog sitting on the bank of a
pond cannot see water unless there are ripples but can
identify moving insects as its pray. We are equally helpless
in the micro-world to identify electrons of negative energy
in the "Dirac Sea" which is full of electrons up to an infinite
depth. These electrons co-exist with us for any length of
time. They do not interact with each other or with any
instrument. But as soon as a gamma photon enters into this
sea, electron of positive energy moves out of the sea and is
detectable. This does not happen in classical physics as
energy moves only continuously but in micro-world it is
discrete in which energy and mass continuously change.
All elementary particles, without exception, have its oceans
and these oceans are superimposed on one another and each
is bottomless. We cannot realize micro-world unless our
superimposed knowledge is completely reoriented in the
memory. Isavasyopanisad supports it as :
The Avidya (gross knowledge) and Vidya (absolute
knowledge) are to be understood together. After controlling
avidya with the help of vidya one has a chance both to
realize the Absolute. Both macro and micro worlds equally

submissively obey the imperial and omnipresent laws of
conservation of mass and energy which are unable to verify
at the instant of interaction lasting for 10 21 seconds or so in
the micro-world. When Vidya and Avidya mingles into one
and endless, one attains Nirvikalpa Samadhi and through
the third eye he/she can see the mysteries of the universe
and mingles with the Divine soul, in other words God
Almighty himself. Macro/micro, vidya, avidya science and
spirituality submerges into oneness sat - chit - anandya.
Psychologists and Psychiatrists are able to understand the
defects and behaviour of the human being only when certain
manifestations are observed and made known to them. A
competent astrologer can predict what type of
manifestations that may occur and at what stage. This is
being done through the planets at the time of birth (i.e. from
horoscope), and their transits in the subsequent period of
their life. For this purpose westerners turn to the progressed
horoscope whereas Indian astrologers study meticulously
Dasa mechanism of various planets. This is the only Indian
system which can help to indicate the events on broader
lines of life and also longevity. These types of facilities and
methods are not available with the scientists, psychiatrists
and physicians. They go on presuming certain things by
tracing previous history, but they do not understand the
cause of the mental diseases. When Moon, Mercury, 4,ll/5'h
houses and their lords are afflicted mental melody surfaces
out. Moon is the mother of all planets. It's influence on
forming he nature of mundane journey was conceived by
our sages of yore. Almost all Raja Yogas are counted from
Chandra Lagna. The Moon and Sun should always be
hemmed between benefics for better results in life. Saturn
or Rahu behind Moon energizes. It is well known fact that
large movement of water on earth, that is the flow of tides,
is caused by the Moon. Human body too, which consists of
70% water, falls within the arch of lunar influence.
Periodical cycle of women correspond to the lunar month,
the human period of pregnancy is 273 days . Many a mental
illness, suicides etc. have been noted to increase during
periods of lunar activity. Agriculturists have established that

the Moon has a distinct influence on crops which explains
why for centuries people have planted according to the
movement of Moon. Migratory birds depart only at or near
the full moon, just as certain fish, seals in particulars, move
in accordance with certain phase of the moon. Predictive
astrology is an immense catalogue of cause and effects of
the various positions, combination of the planets and
constellations that have been found to influence all aspects
of life and civilizations through the ages. The various planets
have different roles and generally govern that behaviour in
the human too.
Planet Behaviour
Moon - Mind, wealth, mother, education
Sun- Soul, success in life, father
Mercury- Communication, lord of intelligence, business
skill.
Venus- Desire, body luster noble character, controls
married life of males.
Mars - Action, controls married life of women, ego.
Jupiter- Wisdom, wealth. It is the most benevolentplanet. Its weakness produces sorrows in life.
Saturn- Renunciation, longevity, Weak Saturn forces
the native to behave like an animal.
Astrology is a novel process which unearths successfully and
accurately the past, present and future of a person invented by
the seers of India, thousands of years ago andhave been modified
by sages till upto Varahamihir era (50AD). The sage Varahamihir
composed many slokas in the one of mundane astrology, and it
is difficult to find such an astrologer. The astrology deals with
the influence of stars and planets on the universe and on human
being, animals, and on this earth India has gone through the
period of slavery for the last two thousand years, and the
astrology lost its past glory. Dr. B.V Raman, the father of modern
Indian Astrology, almost single handedly tried his best to recover
the lost glory (1912 - 1999). Late R. Santhanam, Bipin Behari,
Prof. P.S. Shastry, K.K. Pathak, K.N. Rao, Mridula Trivedi etc
other eminent astrologers also contributed significantly for the
development of astrology in the late 20 century. From 1985
onwards thousands of educated persons started learning _

Astrology and from 1990 AD, this subject got some
reorganization in the west. After much hue and cry, the
Astrology Was introduced in 2001 in around 14 Indian
Universities as a subject to award a degree in graduate and
post-graduate level. PhDs are also awarded by them (such as
Lai Bahadur Shastri University in Delhi). Many private
organizations are teaching astrology in India in 2008. Until or
unless a certificate is issued by a western country, nobody gets
recognition in India. So whether astrology is a science or not is
still a matter of debate. Though many educated persons are
learning astrology, Govt, of India has not come forward to
recognize this neglected branch of science at par with other
branches of science. Still all the politicians are consulting
astrologers under the cover of darkness and curtains. Being a
scientist the author learnt astrology in a college in Kolkata as a
regular student fa' three years and found the principles of
astrology stand on a sound foundation. It provides a
comprehensive look at the sorrows and joys, the mysteries,
happiness, tragedies and the comedies of life and help one to
accept the doctrines of divine life. It can easily identify radiant
and gloomy periods of life. There are two extremes - denigration
and exaggeration. It is upto the individual to find the levels of
reality between the two, astrology can help.
Almost all questions in real life can be answered through a
horoscope. There are 12 Bhavas.For any prediction one has
to first look at the Ascendant lord, 8th lord, 9* lord, Karaka
planets of 9* Bhava Jupiter and Sun, and then other Bhavas.
When the ascendant lord occupies Kendra and Trikona and
is aspected by other natural benefics the native receives wide
fame. 8th house is known as the hidden house and therefore
rulinghidden urges and instincts (id). Freud a great German
psychoanalyst who made significant contribution in mind
sciences identified, two instincts in the id - sexual and
aggressive. By the sexual he has not only meant the creative
urge but also what goes under the generic terms of love
and affection in everyday life. By the aggressive, Freud meant
hate, hostility and destruction. The mind is the just one part,
of the brain which perform these functions of thinking,
knowing, feeling, willing etc. Mind is divided into four major

divisions : Super conscious mind (91*1 house), unconscious
mind (6th house), sub-conscious mind (8th house) and
conscious mind (lsl house) or alert mind. Just opposite to
super conscious mind stands lower mind. Much of the work
of psychoanalysis is concerned with the sub-conscious mind,
because by studying the sub-conscious mind, they are able
to get behind the reason's of their patient's behaviour. While
the study of the subconscious mind (dream analysis provides
vital clues of the sub-conscious mind) is still a relatively new
field of research, there are strong indications to suggest that
in future, a man's action and behaviours can be detected
and improved by having a better knowledge of the subconscious. The author has written two important chapters
on 8* house (the 8th to 8* i.e. 3ri house is also a mysterious
house) for the benefit of astrological fraternity.
In part - lthe author has described the 8th house in total XVI
sections. 8th house is known as randhrasthan (means hole or
sins). Malefics in 8* house of females provide a disturbed
married life. Whereas in case of males it raises his obstacles in
the path of earning money. When Moon and Mars are afflicted,
malefics in 8* can swindle the native in the crime line. Malefic
8th house can cut short one's mundane journey without any
notice. 2nd house stands for our accumulated wealth, 8th house
stands opposite to 2nd house. Benefics in the 8th/or2nJ help
anybody to earn money easily. The author has found that 8th
lord in 8'1 provides chequered career (does not form Raja Yoga
as written in the literature). God controls him through wireless
system. Afflicted 8* lord iri8,h may bring bankruptcy (example55). Our longevity is also controlled from these two houses.
Strong 2nd /8th lords provide long innings of life, 3rd /10th house
also have some role on the longevity. The two major instincts,
identified by Freud are the sexual (Venus) and the
aggressiveness (Mars). Venus is the planet of love and
friendship and empathy while Mars rules anger, hate hostility
and destruction. Freud was a great thinker and his theory
revolving round the id is the basic theory of Hindu Philosophy
where raga shown by Venus and dwesha shown by Mars are
the sole motivators of all human thought and consequently, of
all human activity. These two emotions are also the root of all

relationships and as well as the endless problems they generate.
Mars -Venus combination in 7th/or8t,y or 12th makes a person
master in the knowledge (theory and practice) of love, romance
and all matters related thereto. It gives an aptitude or inclination
for more than one relationship with opposite sex. Venus -Rahu
in 8th makes the inclination for ruthless in personal quarrels
and fights, fond of developing (platonic or other kind of)
friendship. Venus - Ketu in 81*1 produce diseases in the private
parts . Readers will ponder over on the fact that celebrities do
not take birth with Mercury alone in the 8th house. This has
emanated from the research diary of the author.. Though
Saravali has praised Mercury in the 8* house, R. Santhanam
disagrees with his views and says that a person born with
Mercury in 8th will have many defects. 8* lord plays a crucial
role in earning money, longevity, deep research caliber, and
for a good happy married life. The author has invented that
when the 8* lord of spouse, occupies Yogavanga houses (2, 3,
6,7,8,11,12) i.e. when the 8lh lord is placed in a weak house,
he/she dies earlier or causes divorce, or separation etc. Will
anybody believe that 8* lord of his/her spouse can decrease
his/her life span? It is a severe dosha (blemishes) and this point
should be considered at the time of recommendations of
marriage. The author has used almost 100 horoscopes from
his own research diary for uncovering many mysteries of life.
When 8th lord and Saturn are strong even dreaded Kal Sarpa
Yoga has little impact in life. When 8L'1 lord is afflicted,
debilitated, retrograde, is placed in a sworn enemy's camp,
terrible financial set backs come in life. Let us scan the following
horoscope:
It is an example of financial setbacks : DOB 21.2.1958,
7=15 AM, Delhi, Deha = Scorpio, Jeeva - Pisces, Aquarius -
Lagna, Sun, Mercury; Pisces - Moon 5-6, Aries - Ketu;
Cancer - Uranus, Leo - Pluto; Libra - Jupiter(R), Rahu,
Neptune, Sagittarius - Saturn, Mars; Capricorn - Venus.
Placement of Rahu, Ketu, Saturn, Mars, 6th/8*h lords in Deha
Jeeva houses crop up severe set backs in life. Failures and
downturns in life are as true as sun rises in the east. When
Deha and Jeeva signs are occupied by lords. Goddess
Lakshmi never visits this soul. The native will be beggar when

retrograde 8th lord occupies Deha or Jeeva sign. In the present
case both Deha and Jeeva signs are hemmed between inalif ics
which indicates ugly trends in life. Placement of 6th lord in
Jeeva sign added feel to the fue. He was bom with 1st cycle
of 47 yrs. Leo, Gemini, Taurus, Aries, Pisces went peacefully.
Dasa was switched over to Scorpio generating Simhavalokan
Gathi in Feb, 2005. This is a lion's violent jump on its prey
portray the period's intensity. He is bom in Savya group B 1st
quarter. The Gathi or movement is capable of creating danger
through weapons, poison, fire etc apart from other many
unknown evils. The practical bent in general as such is danger
to one's well being. As soon as Scorpio dasa started a tantrik
duped him of crores of rupees, leaving him bewildered. In
Vimsottori system, he lost huge money during Venus - Rahu
dasa. Dasa of two planets in square position brings always
financial set backs (Advanced Predictive Astrology Dr. S. S.
Chatterjee Vol. 2). His 8th lord is a combust planet placed in
Lagna in direct aspect Mars. So weak 8th lord, weak Saturn,
weak Deha and Jeeva signs brought huge financial set backs
for him. In January 06 the author found him half-mad, for
the massive financial loss. Just as the 2nd house rules over
savings, tjje 12 house rules over draining away accumulated
wealth. 9 lord Venus is placed in the 12th house and is
squared by Rahu-Ketu axis. Saturn is directly aspecting it.
So in the main period of 9* lord in the sub-period of Rahu,
God snatched away much accumulated wealth. Dasa of any
afflicted planet brings set backs in life. h h
Kama Trikona is controlled by 3r -7‘ -111 houses and
Mokshya Trikpna is controlled by 4th -8th -12th houses.
Malefics in 4l , 8th, 12lh bring scandals, downfalls, infamy
etc. Benefics in 8 increase the prospects of good married
life and also makes the ladies sexually principled. Desire to
participate ip, ev() deeds increases by the placement of
malefics in 4 -8l -12th houses. Now we shall discuss the
unhappy married life of a Young man , who is the only son
of his parents, DOB 18.5.69, 11-50PM, Delhi. Capricorn -
Lagna 11-52 Pisces-Rahu, Venus, Aries - Saturn, Taurus -
Sun, Mercury (R), Gemini - Moon Virgo - Jupiter (R), Ketu,
Scorpio - Mars (R). Balance Mars 2yr 11m 18 d.

This young man is the only son ofhis parents and working
as a executive level in private company in Delhi in the Sales
department. His first marriage lasted between February
1999 - April 1999. In December 2001 he married a widow
again, but she also left his house just after one yr. in
December 2002. in both the cases divorce took place through
court with mutual agreements. Why he is unhappy in
married life? Will he get a wife who will produce children
in the family? Can any scientist answer these questions?
When dual signs, particularly Gemini are heavily afflicted
- such natives marry on number of occasions. This aphorism
is as true as the Sun rises in the east. His all dual signs are
afflicted. Rahu Ketu passes though Pisces-Virgo axis. His
Deha Rasi is Capricorn, Jeeva Rasi is Gemini. Jeeva Rasi is
occupied by Moon (7th lord), is afflicted by thejoint aspects
Saturn and mars. 7 1)1 lord in 6th, aspected by Saturn and
Mars, squared by Rahu-Ketu axis, did not produce stable
marriage. 6/8 relationships of Deha and Jeeva signs, which
is highly dangerous and is harmful for health, freedom from
litigations and the like. Jeeva sign (Jeeva = Life's force) is
heavily afflicted - so he is destined to suffer mentally
thought his life. Debilitated Saturn in the 4,h house hemmed
between malefics denied him mental pleasures in life.
Debilitated and retrograde planet bring some deficiency of
the houses wherever they are located. Debilitated Saturn
has damaged his fourth house, retrograde Mercury has
damaged his 5th house, retrograde Jupiter has damaged his
9th house, retrograde Mars in ll"1 has damaged his 11th
house. 2nd marriage is controlled from the 1 1 ^ house/ 11*
lord and Venus. This house is weak, so the 2nd marriage is
also broke down. He is born in Apasavya Group - B 3rd
quarter. Is' cycle consists of 59.5 yrs. He started his life with
Cancer das of 9yrs. 6m Od then Virgo dasa for 9 yrs was
imposed on him, generating Mandooka Gathi. Gathis are
actually brakes in life. With reference to Apasavya Diagram
the family members may have serious health problems and
there will be affliction to spouse and to children, victim of
violence, change of residence and ill health. His lord of
Lagna and 7th lords generated 3/11 relationships, such a

native carries a seed of separation (it is also true in 6th /8th or
2l'd/12,h relationships of 1st and 7th lords). Afflicted 6th house
spoils the 5th (Son), 7th (Wife) 12th (bed pleasures) house
indications (Fortune and Finance by Dr. S.S. C-JiatterjeeP
89). So he was destined to have problems in married life.
Libra dasa ruled him between November 1987 to November
2003. Dasa lord is placed in the 6th house from its natal
position and is afflicted by nodal axis. Libra is hemmed
between malefics. Such a dasa cannot yield good results for
the native. Both the marriages broke down during Libra
dasa. Karaka for wife is Venus. 7th house ofVenus is occupied
by Uranus, Ketu and retrograde Jupiter. Debilitated Saturn
occupy the 8th house from Jupiter. So Jupiter is weak. God
only writes sad episodes about a person whose Jupiter
(significator of happiness wealth, wisdom etc.) is found to
be weak in his horoscope. Saturn is also weak, because Mars
(R) occupies 8lh house from Saturn. Weak Saturn tailors only
tragedies in life. First marriage was ruined in Jupiter -Venus
dasa, 21*1 marriage was ruined in Jupiter - Moon as per
Vimsottori dasa. First half of Jupiter dasa behaved well with
him. He passed BA, acquired post graduate diploma in
marketing and got an excellent job. Moon- Venus- Jupiter in
mutual angles have generated the famous Mudrika Yoga,
exchange of aspects between 9th lord Mercury and 4l!’ lord
Mars have produced a class - 1 Raja Yoga for him. The lord
of Lagan is posted in an angle generating Neechvanga Raja
Yoga, if1 Lord is posited in his own house. So the beautiful
a Dhana Yogas and Raja Yogas provided him an excellent
career. Exalted Venus, Jupiter in 9lh house provided him
higher standard of living. Afflicted 7th Lord, afflicted 6* house,
afflicted Jeeva sign, Pluto in the 8* house of Janma Lagna,
afflicted Gemini (3ld house of Zodiac), afflicted 7th house of
Venus, three retrograde planets in 5’h/9tl1/ 11 1,1 house, weak
Jupiter, weak Saturn, weak 12th lord - all these evil Yogas
denied him happiness in married life. Dasa sequences of his
life also precipitated the evils for him. As per Yogini Dasa he
enjoyed siddha dasa between 9-10-1993 to 9-10-2000,
Sankata Dasa between 9-10-200 to 9-10-2008. so the Venus
dasa and Rahu dasa as per Yogini Clithis apple cart. In any

horoscope if Moon (signifying mind) and also Venus
(signifying sex) are afflicted by Saturn and / or Mars, it will
be concluded that the marital life of the native would be
anything but smooth and harmonious. Discontent,
disenchantment and frustration would dog the native
throughout life. Variation could only be in degree depending
upon the kind of other strength. The number of times a native
marries is determined by the strength of the 7th lord and the
malefic influence of powerful planet on the 7th lord, the native
marries as many wives as the number of plants connected
with the 7th lord. As per Vimsottori dasa system, he enjoyed
Jupiter's dasa between 6-5-1989 to 6-5-2005. retrograde 3rd/
12tfl lord dasa for Capricorn natives is always bad. He will
enjoy Neechvanga Saturn's dasa for 19 yrs. Beyond May
2005. In 2006, he will find his better half, ultimately who
will produce children for him. Jupiter will transit Scorpio and
will aspect his 7lh house and Venus, favouring his 3rd and
final marriage.
The author has deftly handled the beautiful and mysterious
3rJ house in part - 2 ofthis book. It has been sub-divided into
IX sections. Both these houses are like a coin having two sides
both benefic and malefic. Music and criminal mind is judged
from the 3rd house. We know those who do not like music can
be a murderer. So a benefic 3rd house produces, musicians, a
malefic 3rd house provide criminal tendencies. A malefic in 3rd
provides valour, whereas a benefic in 3rJ makes the person
miser and timid. For a good luck in the competitive exams are
should have both malefic and benefic planets in the 3rd house.
A malefic in 3rd helps the native to have necessary guts to face
the challenges in life. A good 3rd house produces class one
writers. 9^ house stands opposite to 3rd house. 9^ house is the
house of super intelligences, whereas weak 3rd house flourishes
criminal tendencies in a man. Our all motivations, desire to
do laborious work, hard work etc. are controlled horn this 3rd
house. Without desire nothing could be achieved. Remote
control of marriage is buried in the 3^ house for males,
whereas remote control of marriage is buried in the 8th house
in the case of females. A malefic 3rd house (12th from 4*) does

not provide a good house to the native. He changes his dwelling
place too often. It also provides stiff resistances in higher
education. 3rJ house represents the thirst for life, that is the
other aspects of prowess and courage. The 2nd house provides
the basic impulse of death and so does the 8th house. A fortified
and strong 3rJ house imparting powerful current of thirst for
life will very much reduce the impulse of ill health and death.
So any weakness of the 3,d. house couples with weakness of
the ascendant and the 8th house and their lords does not augur
well for the longevity of the native. Death is a very cruel sting
in a native's fate. Nobody can overcome death. Some die young
and some die old. "Death is here, death is there, Death is busy
everywhere" by Shelly (1820). The greatest responsibility of
an astrologer is the proper forecastings of death. Here again
the author has accurately depicted the moment of death. He
has cited invaluable examples of untimely death - why and
when this unnatural death occurs. Unnatural death is like a
cruel reaper who with his keen sickle reaps the bearded grain
at a breadth, even the flowers that grow between them.
Adversity cause some man to break others to break records.
Students and athletes should be kept under stress so that they
can break records. These types of many unknown theories
and their practical applications have been recorded in this
book for the benefit of students, savants and for senior
astrologers. Astrology really ofFers an insight into the meaning
and purpose of life and its predictable pattern of events and
destiny. This book is very brilliant, very stimulating. It is a
sumptuous meal that will whet the appetites of many and
help some hard working astrologers with a gift of synthesis to
become a brilliant predictor. The author welcomes with
stretched hands any suggestion for improvement. The author
expresses his deep gratitude to Mr. Daya Shanker, IRS; Mrs.
Rajeswari Shanker, Editor and owner of The Times of Astrology,
for taking great pains and keen interest in bringing out this
Book. So the mysteries revealed through this book should be
converted to mansions in advanced predictive astrology by
the future astrologers i.e. the author expects many more tools
for predictions from the young Astrologers of India.
Suggestions for improvements are welcome.

DEDICATION
31fTRfafk3psrcq W\ 5f3FI I
^vj*4)^ia »T dt*l *PT: II
. Hence this book dedicated to all the Astrology
teachers of IIA/ Kolkata from where the author received
Jyotirvid degree. The author is very grateful to Late
Prof Arun Kumar Goswami(Bhaskaraya), Present
Principal Prof Arun Kumar Sengupta and to his senior
colleage of PDIL,Sindri Sri Arun Kumar Chakraborty,
M.Sc (Physics).
1st January, 2008
-Dr. SS. Chatterjee,

The Art of Prediction
Astrology is the only science which helps one to foresee events
before its actual occurrence. A good astrologer can foresee the present,
past and future of a native through the Map of heavens at the time of
birth, called the horoscope. A predictive astrologer gains astounding
popularity by prod ucing a psychological effect on his clientele if his
predictions are marked with precision as to the time of occurrence.
No other agency is required for increasing his reputation and
efficiencyexcept the satisfied customers.
It is generally admitted that under human intelligent endeavour
is backed by Divine Grace nothing could be achieved. Sahadeva, the
youngest brother Yudisthira (One of the Pandava Brothers of
Mahabharta era) was noted for his profundity and acumen in fixing
auspicious time. To his surprise, one day he received a guest from
the Kaurava's side who wanted to know the auspicious time for the
commencement of the battle against Pandavas obeying the rules of
moral values and Ethics, he concentrated and selected the favourable
time to the Kauravas to win the battle. Lord Krishna with his disc
created the illusion that the time fixed had come. Kauravas in their
ignorance were jubilant that victory was theirs and mistook the
fictitious for the natural phenomena. They thus began the battle in
an auspicious hour (in modern days the auspicious time is fixed by
the electional astrology) which spelt disaster and annihilation of
the Kauravas. Vasistha, the wise sage and counsellor chose the hour
for the coronation of Sri Rama which ultimately proved to be the
hour of Sri Rama's banishment from the kingdom of suffer untold
misery. Sri B.V.Raman and Smt.Gayatrideva Vasudeva failed
miserably for the last 8 years about their predictions on the selection
of American Presidents.
So it is our final conviction that however elaborately human
intelligence is applied to fixing the time for an event to happen, the
result is entirely dependent on Divine Grace. Thus astrology of over
human intelligence and Divine Sanction to carry man in his life
journey to the destined and purposeful destination.
Nature does not wantto unveil its secrets. She keeps everything
under a cover of total secrecy. According to greatest scientist Einstein,
human intelligence cannot penetrate through the core of matters.
Inspite of all these restrictions astrologers are trying their best in

forecasting mundane affairs. Another very important matter is to
note that a difference of four minutes in the birth time will precipitate
or postpone the time of occurrence by one year or so. Therefore,
rightly or wrongly we consider rectified birth time by examining the
various incidents in real life. Unless the birthtime is true, it does not
give guarantee of smooth sailing to the astrologer.
Astrology is indeed a great human guide giving an idea of the
possibilities of human life. The ups and downs of an individual's
progress in his lifetime are indicated so that he may be prepared to
meet his life with equanimity and also to take full advantage ofhis
prosperous periods. The object of astrology is to enable an individual
to achieve the ideals implied in the four fold Purushartha - Dharnta
(to follow the right path), Artha (money), Kama (lust) and Moksha
(emancipation) in order to attain Moksha- release from human
bondage. To achieve this, it is necessary to develop calmness of mind
and destroy all carnal desires. Astrology helps one to note the pitfalls
in his progress through various phases of life (childhood, youth,
middle ages and the old age consisting of approximately only 80 yrs
or so) and get over them with least mental perturbation and thus
maintain mental equillibrium. *
We have observed that when four or more planets occupy trines
and quadrants, the native does well in life. Sine-qua-non of a strong
horoscope is that the Quadrants (Kendras) should not be occupied
by malefic planets. Benefics, particularly Jupiter in a kendra has
been praised by our seers. Benefics in Kendras increase the intrinsic
strength of the horoscope and grants boon to the native. Malefics in
Lagna spells trouble for the native. Through the entire planetary
disposition in any chart results from the karmic forces of the
individual, yet the disposition of Rahu-Ketu axis in a horoscope
shows the basic fulcrum around which all the planets pour out
their influences in order to work out the various karmic forces
generated by the individual So as to give to the ego a better
understanding of its struggles at different levels of its existence. In
this process, Saturn and Mars have a special role to play, they are
the agents for energising the impulses by Rahu-Ketu axis. If the
native has done some bad work in his previous life he will find
either Saturn or Mars in his 7th house. The life of the native becomes
a hell when either of these planets •• icupy the 7th house.
Having assessed the potentialities of a native's horoscope, it is
essential to know when welcome and unwelcome events ofhis life

will happen and the method of predicting these is called "Timing of
Events". We shall discuss three methods of prediction a) Hindu, b)
Western and c) Tajik.
HINDU SYSTEM
The coming events cast their shadows which can be gleaned
through one's birth chart. The results are enumerated to finer cycles
like dasa,bhukti - antara -pratyantar- prana and sookshama periods.
Further special treatises dealing with what are called Nadi-Systems
have been in vogue since ancient times. These Nadi Granthas are
speciality of Hindu Astrology and they are related to cover the
interval of time of4 sec arc with all planetary permutations and
combinations for a cycle of sixty years. These are many of them like
Bhrigu, Suka, Chandrakala, Saptarishi etc and many have also been
found to be spurious one, creating trouble for the real students of
this unique systems of timing of events.
Experience has shown that nodes may save one from downfall or
restore one to power only when nodes are combined with or aspected
by Jupiter or Venus.
According to Muhurtha Chintamani, malefics in 8th causes death
of a king (actually scandals surface out if 8th has too much of malefic
influence, it also provides stiff resistances in financial fronts and
also in marital fronts) whereas malefics in 4th or 7th give fall from
power (particularly 7th should not have Saturn or Mars), and
malefics in 12th give poverty. One benefic either in 8th/or 12th
counterbalance the evil forces of malefics either in 8th or 12th.
Presence ofbenefic and malefic planets in the 12th house makes the
native invariably rich. Too many malefics in the 12thcauses severe
problems for the native.
Stigma of combustion of Lagnalord and 10th lord is not ordinary.
It is no less evil doer.
In astrology, the most difficult part is predicting the time of
occurrence of an event. 1 have been a keen student of astrology for
about 30 years, and have tried to forecast events of thousands of my
clients using eastern and western Astrology. Primary and Secondary
direction methods developed by the Western Scholars are much
inferior to our well established eastern methods. Whether to be
primary or secondary directions or those based on Frankland's
measures, one can demonstrate their efficacy only after the event
has occurred. Same directions between any two planets may recur
more than once in the course of a normal span of life. The delineation

of events correctly is rather difficult according to these directional
systems. 1 am amazed at some astrologers in India making a hotchpotch of the Western and Indian systems unmindful of the harm
that may be caused to astrology in trying to fit into frame of a
developed and self contained Indian System, principles whose
validity is still doubtful. Secondary directions are mixed up with
the Vimshottari and Transit (Gochara) is mixed up with progressions
and the illusion is created that even could be predicted almost to the
exact day by this unscientific and obnoxious conglomeration of
methods, which have neither the sanction of authority nor of
experimentation.
Indian astrological methods oftiming events, even in theirpresent
form, are substantially correct. Personally I have nothing to say
against either Primary or Secondary systems which are said to be
astronomical, but they are not worth the labour required to calculate
them: The symbolic methods, which are arbitrary assumptions are
equally unreliable. The main criteria for the reliability of a system
are: its ability to predict (i) the nature of an event and (b) the probable
time of its occurrence. These criteria are answered by the Hindu
Directional Methods - especially Vimshotthari and Kalachakra
Dasas and they are based on sound and simple principles. The
students may match other dasas like Yogini, Chara dasa etc. for
further confirmations.
The division of Dasas into Bhuktis, Antara and Pratyantars which
are calculated to narrow the time range of theoccurrence of an event.
The Gochara (transit), Navamsa, Ashtaka Varga and Shadvarga
through apparently lay prime emphasis on the strength of planets
simultaneously indicate the probable time of occurrence of an event.
Movement of planets give rise to the stimulation of radioactive
disintegration which are falling on the individual can produce
psychological changes in his character and disposition in making
forecasts, therefore apart from Dasas and Bhuktis (major period and
sub period) ruling at any specific period due consideration should
be pa id to the movement of planets to ensure greater accuracy in the
results. Studies revealed that the position of planets in transit has a
close relationship with pronouncing the results oftheplanets during
their main and subperiods. Transit influence is one of the most
important factors in timing events.
By observing the movement of Slow planets like Saturn, Jupiter,
Rahu and Ketu many events of life can be forecasted with 90%

accuracy, of course one must be familiar with at least two dasa
Systems (Vimshottari, Kalachakra, Yogini, Chara dasa). A single
dasa system itself cannot prognosticate the nature and time of events
unless it is checked up and supplemented by the prevailing transit
effects. The events concerning different departments of life of the
native manifest largely during the Dasa Bhukti periods, but actual
results are modified by transits.
To predict an event is really a challenging task for the astrologers.
The astrologer should be a very learned person and should have
thorough knowledge of the various departments of astrology (such
as Predictive astrology, Electional astrology, Medical astrology,
Jaimini astrology, Tajik system etc.). If the dasa antar lords are in 2/
12 or 6/8 positions, unfavourable results are indicated. Lords of
6tb/8th/12th houses also do not yield auspicious results,
particularly if they are retrograde, the maximum damage is done in
these dasas to the individual i.e. dasa of retrograde 6th lord will
promote enemies, cause health problems, troubles through
litigations and the like. Dasa of retrograde 8th lord brings financial
losses and obstacles in life, dasa of retrograde 12th lord may bring
confinement, illness etc., the dasas of lords of 6th/8th/12th will be
a source offather's death. Either of parents may die during VenusSaturn or Satum-Venus dasa.
Events are created in heaven when a planet (see the lord of
Ascendant, 10th lord and dasa bhukti lords) combusts, rises,
retrogrades, changes a sign. Surprising results are achieved through
transit studies.
The results of a retrograde planet are definitely felt on the health
and generally these results are adverse. One of the Parasara's dictum
is that benefics in Kendras promote sound health. But experience
suggests that a retrograde beneftc is not capable of doing so. In fact,
it should certainly cause some health problems appropriate to its
significations during its dasa. If a benefic Lagna lord is in the Lagna
and is retrograde, it cannot protect the native from the disease
peculiar to the planet. Malefic retrograde planets areof course worse.
A native who has retrograde 6th lord in Lagna, may suffer repeatedly
in his work of environment when this planet is retrograde in transit.
His problems will evoporate like a magic as soon as this planet
assumes direct motion.
Often the promotion or transfers are stayed for sometimes. Once
the retrogression is over, the concerned event moves ahead of its

logical conclusion.
Dasas of retrograde planets are never good to anybody. Retrograde
and debilitated planets do cause some deficiency of the house
wherever they are located in the horoscope. A retrograde planet in
the 8th curtails longevity. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, the Royal
Bengal Tiger of Bengal died prematurely in Kashmir Prison for the
presence of Retrograde Jupiter and Retrograde Saturn in Sagittarius
(he had Taurus Lagna).
Planets in general are strong when they are not in debilitation,
eclipsed by Sun or in inimical signs or retrograde.
If there are natural malefic planets in the 6th, 8th or 12th from the
Ascendant and the lords of these are natural benefics, these benefics
donot give much good results.
Strong Jupiter, Venus, well associated Mercury and waxing Moon
cause pleasure, happiness, success and good health, elevation and
financial success and achievement. God writes only sad episodes
about a person whose Jupiter is found weak in the horoscope. 6th
lord's aspect on Jupiter is a grisly combination and is to be feared.
Weak Saturn, Rahu and Ketu are extremely mischievous. They
cause mental and physical diseases, sorrows and other troubles.
We are all subjected to miseries and evils in life. Misfortunes are
of various kinds - loss of health, loss ofwealth, loss ofhonour, loss
of children, loss of wife or spouse, litigations of various types,
continuous failure, an unhappy marriage, deep depression of mind,
anxieties in business and career, drowning in the ocean of poverty,
failures in competitions and in examinations, poor results in
examinations, unable to land in goals, rejection ofvisas, debttrap
etc. In assessing the nature of misfortune that may hit one, a careful
study of the position of Moon is necessary. According to Sage
Mantreshwara, Moon has the seeds of strengths of all other planets.
In other words, if Moon is not sufficiently strong, the other planets
of the horoscope would also become weak. Moon is clearly
linked to life especially in infancy and most of the Balarishta
Yogas are caused due to specific placement and affliction to
Moon. If all the Kendras of Moon are vacant, one suffers
immensely in the early years of his life.
Until or unless trine lords make relationships with
quadrant lords, financial solvency can never be achieved.
Papakartari Yoga, Kal Sarpa Yoga, Shakata Yoga, weak Sun
and weak Moon can never make a person happy in life. There

are many inauspicious yogas which bring too much myseries
in life.
God made human beings in such a way thateven twins, though
resembling each other very much, are not identical. Even so, no two
horoscopes are exactly alive. Only vast practical experience with
palms and horoscopes and God given intution besides erudition
can help correct interpretation of a chart to predict accurate results.
Hindus have used transits of Saturn and Jupiter to predict
important events in the life of an individual. Trine aspects and
conjunctions play an important role. Phaladeepika is a veritable
gold mine in this respect and has been left untouched by almost all
the astrologers. Rules are given to indicate the year, month, day and
time ofevents especially death of an individual.
Hindu Astrology containing gems of rules for the timing ofevents.
Some of them are uncut and require polishing. If systematic research
is carried out many wonderful rules can be evolved in a simplified
manner.
Some Case Histories
1 shall provide from my own research diary.
Example 1: Death in infancy
Bom on 26-03-2003 at 634 hrs in Delhi and died on 16-8-2003.
She was born in Venus-Satum-Sun dasa, died in Venus-SaturnMars dasa, as per Vimshottari System.
Here the dispositorof Sun, Moon is Jupiter who is incidently her
Lagnalord. Her Jupiter is exalted, but retrograde and aspected by
Saturn and Mars. When the dispositor of Moon is weak.one does
not live beyond 32 yrs. Her both Moon and Sun are posited in the
12th house in Navamsa.
She was born with Venus Saturn dasa. Saturn is her llth/1 2th
lord, a highly malefic planet, Venus is her 8th lord squared by RahuKetu axis and aspected by Saturn. 8th lord in 12th, heavily afflicted
cut short her mundane journey. Saturn -Venus dasa is peculiar to
99% persons on this earth. Even Lord Kuber (the lord of wealth) has
to beg for alms during this dasa.
She died on 16-8-2003, when Venus was in rapt conjunction with
Sun in Cancer in transit.
According to KCD (Kala-chakra Dasa) principles her Deha is
Taurus and Jeeva is Gemini, Combustion of either Deha or Jeeva
lord causes early death ofthe native. Her Jeeva lord is debilitated in
the Ascendant and is a combust planet.

Dangers and downfalls are as sure as sunrise when both the
Deha and JeevaRasis are ill placed. Here Saturn and Rahu occupy
her Deha Rasi and Mars aspects her Jeeva Rasi Gemini . Both Deha
and Jeeva lords are ill placed in her birth-chart.
When a Deha Rasi is occupied by a malefic (Saturn, Rahu, Ketu
or Mars) there will be disease, bodily afflictions etc. When Jeeva
Rasi is afflicted likewise, calamity, mental anguish, extreme fear,
apprehensions, great rises etc are indicated. Natives having no
planets in these signs have normal life.
She developed breathing trouble soon after her birth and spent
her entire life in the intensive care units of various hospitals in Delhi.
Her Saturn is in 29°, Saturn was very malefic for her. Longevity is
also calculated from the 8th house of Saturn. Mars in the 8th house
of Saturn added fuel to the fire.
She was born with Virgo - Libra dasa and died during Virgo -
Scorpio dasa (Mercury - Mars dasa) in agreement with astrological
principles.
As per Yogini System she was bom in Sidha Dasa with a balance
of 1 year I0m20 days. Sidha is ruled by Venus her 8th lord. When a
native starts her/his life with the dasa of the 8th lord - she/he faces
insurmountable resistances in life. She was born in Sidha-BhadrikaUlka dasa and died in Sidha-Ulka dasa (Venus-Saturn). Surprisingly
she was born in Venus-Saturn as per Vimshottari Dasa and also
died in this dasa for the reasons already explained.
Ulka dasa is usually a difficultperiod, full of obstacles and delays.
If Saturn is well placed the native is able to overcome the obstacles.
Her Saturn is in 29 degree and is conjoined with Rahu. So no wonder
that she died during Sidha-Ulka dasa.
This girl died as per my forecasts. I successfully predicted her
death of demise. Her parents metme for they were losing huge money
for her in the form of medical bills.
So we have learnt, if the astrologer is ecjuiped with atleast 3 dasa
systems out of 45 advocated by Sage Parasar - it is really possible to
forecast the various events of life.
How did I forecast her death?
According to the author (Read Cosmic Influences on Mind and
IQ by author P.105) we get death point by adding the longitudes of
Lagna, Moon, Sunand Jupiter. When Saturn aspects this death point
in transit, and also the dasa of Markesh lords (2nd, 7th or 8th)
prevails, one dies. Her Lagna is I1515°4', Moon is 8' 23°4', Sun is 11s

Death In Infancy
Date 26/03/2003 Time 06.34:00 Day Wednesday Lat 28:39 00 North Long 77:13:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:38:27
Balance of Dasa : Venus 5 Years 0 Months 3 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspai
ire', Jupiter is 3s 14° 17'. By adding all these we get SSslS^S'.
Subtracting 24s we get the death point as 11 sl3"28' i.e. her death
point was in Pisces - in her Ascendant.
She was born with Saturn 29°949" in Taurus. Saturn moved to
Gemini on 84-2003 and started aspecting her death point in Pisces.
I have observed that Venus and Mars in transit become the killer
planet (Venus - 2nd, 7th lord of Zodiac and Mars is the 8th lord of
Zodiac). I anticipated her death during Venus-Saturn-Mars dasa.
Now Venus-Saturn-Mars dasa started on 18-7-2003. End should
come when Venus is deep combust in Transit (Venus is also her
Deha lord). Let us study the transit on 16-8-2003 at 5.30 A.M.
On 16th August 2003, Venus acquired the same degree ofSun.

On J 5th Aug. Sun was in 27°52', Venus was in 26"50', therefore I
anticipated her death on 16-8-03, which stunningly came
true, (because Venus is the dasa lord).
Earlier, I forecasted that George Bush will be the President of USA
and Sri Atal Bihari Vajpayee will become the Prime Minister of lnd ia
for Hill five years in the columns of Times of Astrology.
Sri Suresh Tanwar, basically an engineer applied the above death
formula invented by the author in justifying the premature deaths of
VVLP's like Sri Rajesh Pilot and Sri P.R .Kumar Mangalam in Jyotish
Sagar in Jan 2001 issue of PIO, published from Jaipur.
Readers are requested to read The Times of Astrology Aug. and
Sept.1995 issues for mastering the art of prediction using dasa systems.
Western Astrology
In timing events the westerners adopt primary and secondary
directions assisted by transits. In directions the method of taking one day
equal to one year of life is of natural order. In respect of the other method
the Convention is to take one degree as representing one year of life and
progress in the clockwise direction a II the planets, Ascendant, Midheaven
and Fortuna at the rate of one degree from the natal positions. This system
is known as primary direction method.
Secondary Direction Method
Accord ing to this system one day after birth is equivalent to one year
of life. Therefore if we want to know the indications, say for the 55th
year of life, we must look to the planetary positions on the 55th day after
birth. According to this theory all the directions to be formed within the
life span of a person who may live, say for 75 yrs, are formed within 2 A
months from the date of birth. Then there are those who ta ke converse
or pre-natal Secondary directions because they think such directions
are powerful factors in producing events . Suppose a person is born at
12 Noon in Delhi on 1-10-1940, wants to know the directions for2003.
Therefore a map must be cast for 12 noon on 63rd day after birth. The
aspects between the progressed positions of theplanets, M.C etc. and
the radical ones are then interpreted.
In the West, the secondarydirections are the most common one
while the primary directions are employed by those who have the
patience to employ cumbersome trigonometrical methods. These
directions primary and secondary are further supplemented by the
transit influences to arrive at a probable period when an event is
likely to happen.

Yeluripati Krishna Rao used only progressed M.C to find some
events of some, eminent persons (vide TO A, Jan 1993, P50). A great
singer named Ghantasala was born on 4.12.1922 at 10:35 AM in
Choutapali village of Andhra Pradesh with M.C 26°36' Libra. He
was a great playback singer of 1945. In 1942, when he was only 20,
he was sentenced to 18 months of rigorous imprisonment in Quit
India Movement. As per principles of Western Astrology M.C
progressed at the rate of one degree per year. For 20 years M.C will
have progressed 20 degree. The progressed M.C (16°36' Scorpio) in
1942 was in conjunction with radical Mercury (17° in Scorpio) and
radical Sun (18026' Scorpio). It may be noted that Mercury is the 6th
lord and Sun is the 8th lord from Janma Lagna. Further the
progressed M.C was in square aspect to natal Uranus in his 20th
year. This is an unfortunate direction in Western Astrology, which
signifies strange vicissitudes, impediments in career and persuits,
estrangement from kith and kin, reversals and incarceration etc.
over which the native has little or no control . Contact of progressed
M.C with 6th/8th or 12th lords will bring some sad moments in the
life of thenative. For instance Nathuram Vinayak Godse (bom on
19.05.1910 at 18.25hrs in Pune) was imprisoned in 1948 when the
progressed M.C was in rapt conjunction with debilitated Saturn
who is the lord of the 8th house. He was bom with Gemini Ascendant.
The title Padmashree was conferred to Ghantasala in 1970 when
the progressed M.C (14° 36' Sagittarius) was in sextile aspect with
radical Jupiter. Usually this direction will last 2 or 3 years during
which period the native will have great success in his persuits,
prosperity and fame. Under the same directions he wents Europe
and America where he was honoured.
V.Thiruvenkatacharya (vide AM, Sep 1967, P843), and B.Surya
Prakash (vide AM, Sep 1967, P815) have critisized Western Primary
and Secondary Methods. These primary and secondary directions
appear quite attractive: due to the mathematical gloss which they
are covered. But these appear to be certain fundamental flaws in the
whole system of directions that the sooner they are ignored and
substituted for by most trustworthy methods, the better it would be
for the science of astrology at large.
Tajik Systems
It is the father of Western System but Tajik books available in Sanskrit
in India show important traces of Hindu Influence. In this system,
timing of events is done with the help of Muntha Rasi which is

calculated for every year of life of an Individ ual. Muntha in association
with benefics and in benefic house - positions will confer comforts to
the native in that year, otherwise malefic effects will have to be predicted.
J udgement should be provided by examining Muntha rasi and also the
Muntha lord. Muntha and its lord give inauspicious results when they
are posited in 4,6,7 ,8 and 12in the solarretum chart.
Add to the Lagna sign in the birth chart of the completed years of
life. Divide the total by 12. The remainder gives the rasi or sign
where Muntha is located in the Solar return chart. When the
remainder is zero, Vindicates Pisces, l=Aries, 2=Taums and soon.
To know the events of a particular year is the system of Solar
Return Charts. Suppose a man has Sun in Virgo 26°33'43" on 14-101941. Calculate the horary chart ofthenative at any year when Sun
becomes exactly 26°33'43" (it maybeeitber on 14th or!5th). This is
known as the Varshakundali or the Solar Return Chart. Suppose
Moon in Aries 15°, the star of Moon will be Venus. So the dasa balance
ofthenative will be as follows: Venus 61 days, Sun 18 days, Moon
30 days, Mars 21 days, Rahu 55 days, Jupiter 49 days, Saturn 58
days. Mercury 52 days and then Ketu 21 days. Dasa balance actually
follows tlie Vimshottari cycles.
Annual Solar Return Chart reveals many interesting clues. In
any Varsha Chakra if the lord of the 4th house is in association with
any malefic in any house, the transfer is sure to take place. This is
stunninglytrue to the knowledge oftheauthor.
Promotion with transfer may be anticipated when the Lagna and
ninth lords are placed in one house. One may get a job when the
10th house is occupied by a benefic planet.
The transfer generally takes place during the dasa of a malefic
and sub-period of the lord of the 4th house.
The author entered USA as a postdoctoral fellow in June 1974,
when Muntha was placed in his 10th house. He joined PD1L, Noida
on 14-10-1992, where we find Jupiter and Venus in his 10th house,
and Muntha is the 5th house in Pisces, opposite to Sun.
When Muntha is under the influence of Sun, ensures favour from
the ruler, elevation of Status, monetary gains, gainful journey etc.
It is a common knowledge that Solar Return charts contribute
qti ite in successfulpredictionof future events of any nativity. 1 request
the research minded students to do more research on Solar Return
Charts and Muntha and publish their findings. To my knowledge,
great astrologers should come forward in developing Tajik Systems
- which are not even 60% reliable.

The author hopes that in the aquarian age which started in 1904
(as per American Author Carol Righter), "Astrology will attain the
status of science at par with other controvertial science like medical
science within 2050. Talented Astrologers will be born in India only.
British Astrologer R.H. Naylor has said, "The Lore of Stars is an
underlying and facinating thing. It is one cult in the world which
haas survived all other cults and all other beliefs. Einstein's Theory
of Realitivity is a comparatively simple thing by the side of ancient
theories of astrological determination."
It is impossible for an astrologer to master this divine
science in his life time. Both the Yogi (a person with
spiritual development) and the astroloer, the educated
and trained ones can see through different methods, the
results ofthe Karma of the psast lives (5th/ 9th houses)
whether one has to enjoy or suffer, physical, mental and
spiriitual tendencies arising out of the actions, thoughts,
needs and speech of an individual. In doing so the
aastroloer is sometimes spectacular but mostly a failure
because ofthe great experience needed with high Yogilike discipline in his life. Most of the astrologers are busy
worldy men with their material demands, writing, editing,
talking and promoting themselves like anyone else in other
professional fields. They are men with limited vision but
big reputations, shallow, arrogant, pompous even, in their
feigned humiligy. An astroloer is an inferior soul compared
to a Yogi.
There is a time for everything, birth, infancy, youth,
middle age, sickness, old age troubles, disease, death,
achievements, failures, gains and losses and the sense
of happiness or unhappiness. We attach to them,
according to our own individual, family, social, nation,
even racial, value system Dasa Antardasa systems
developed by our Sages can easily identify the above
periods of life. One should master at least three Dasas
for forecasting mundane affairs of any individual. Destiny
pattern of any individual can bde assessed from his
horoscope. 80% of our predictions come true. Vedic
astrology, though badly fragmented, with many of its
techniques lost, or applied, without statistical replicable
testing, continues and will survive as the easiest super
science available to man, providing a holistic attitude
towards his own personality.

PART -I,
MYSTERIOUS 8th HOUSE
Chapter - I.
Definition of The 8th House.
According to Vedic Astrology, every one while taking
birth brings with him all the happenings during the course
of his life time till Death. It means any happening during
our lifetime is destined and cannot be avoided or postponed.
The happenings are not accidental or sudden or unexpected.
It is because we are in dark about the same and not aware;
we think and come to confusion or decision that the
happenings are sudden, accidental or unexpected.
There is absolutely no doubt about the authenticity of
the principles of Vedic Astrology as laid down by the ancient
Indian seers thousands of years ago. The application of
those principles to horoscopes however is not an easy matter.
It requires a profound study with a far greater dedication
than the dedication of the modern man to the pursuit of
physical sciences aimed primarily at enhancing worldly
pleasures. There has, however, been one major advantage
of the modem scientific development, the openness of mind
to test the validity of ancient wisdom. It is this open
scientific attitude of today that provides the hope for
retrieval of knowledge otherwise lost to us in the millennia
gone by The Vedic Astrology aims to propagate a system of
open sharing and scientific study of this sacred knowledge
with a purely scientific outlook, the present article h as been
written for the benefit of learned astrologers and other
serious minded students of astrology in the 21s' century.
6"'/8lh/12l1' houses and their lords are responsible for all

the sufferings in life. A strong 6* lord promotes litigations
in life (example - 22). A strong 8* lord grants longevity,
but it creates many death like situations in life. If a strong
malefic owning 6th or 8"' house and is in the 1 2lh the native
is likely to lose his land and money. When a planet in the
1 2,h is benefic and is associated by a benefic and the weak
lord of 12 occupies an inimical sign or depression sign, the
person will not generally waste his wealth.
If the 12"' has Saturn and Rahu or Ketu and there is
conjunction of the lord of 8,h or the aspect of the lord of 6"'
the native is said to have sinful tendencies. 1 2,l! house is a
cadent (apoklims) house. A planet here tends to keep the
affairs of the house in darkness and insignification. It is a
constricting, confining house. Emotion and intuition are
the two important characteristics of 12* house. The distant
and lofty aspirations are present here and explains one's
ability to adopt to the changing circumstances and
environment. Subversity, dangerous under currents in one's"
life are buried here.
In a female horoscope 8th house serves the twin purpose
of deciding her own life and that of her husband. In a female
horoscope, not only the 8th house of ascendant, but also
the 8th house from Moon should be free from affliction so
that early widowhood does not occur. If the 8'" house from
Moon is badly damaged, marriage instead ofbreaking will
end in widowhood, which is a very painful experience in
life. Too much affliction of the 8"' house of Moon wipes out
the family tree. So it is dangerous to marry a lady with too
much affliction of the 8'" house form the Moon.
Miseries and widowhood of a female is buried in the 8"
house, her marriage is controlled from the 7!" house.
Whenever an afflicted planet is placed in the 1 T" house of
the horoscope which has got other inherent afflictions like
Kuja Dosha, it is sure sign that the first marriage ending in
tragedy, paving the way for the 2nd marriage soon or later
(3ra, 7"', and 11 "'is the Kama Trikona). For the protection
of widowhood the 8"' lord should avoid association of the
7th lord or Venus. Anybody bom in the Navamsa Lagna of

Mars, Saturn or Sun will never enjoy the married life. This
in stunningly true to the knowledge of the author. Remote
control of a marriage is buried in the 3"' house. According
to the famous astrologer of early forties (R. Lalkshmanan
AM Jan 1966 P 41), the worst yoga would be when lords of
!’ '/5,l79'li are in bad houses like 6’l,/81,'/or 12'", .the native
may become a beggar.
If 5"'/ 9l!' houses are not rendered strong, the horoscope
is considerably weakened. The native in whose horoscope,
these houses are afflicted, is to drift in this life helplessly
pulled by the current of destiny. A native suffers immensely
when lsl/5,h/9,h houses have any contact with 6"' / 8’1' lords,
and their dasas run in the life of the native. All auspicious
yogas will bear less fruits when 6/8/12 lords make any
relationship with T'/IO'1' lords. Such a native will suffer
tremendously in the general scheme of life. Planets posited
in the angle of 9"' lord provide relief to the native. Mahatma
Gandhi had majority of planets in the angle of 9"' lord.
Saturn-Rahii combination is the worst and most baneful
combination. This combination jolts the entire horoscope
and is baneful even if Saturn is a Yogakaraka, except perhaps
when the combination takes place in 3r<l/6"'. This worstcombination is known to curtail longevity in trin.es/
quadrants. Saturn, Rahu, Mars in 8"' brings accidental deaths
to male natives and ruined married life to female natives.
12"' house has traditionally been given rulership over
Sayana - Sukha or comforts of the bed. Malefics in the 12“
can cause widowhood or divorce. Benefic influence on 8"'
can balance malefic influence in the 1 2"' or vice-versa. Mars
in Libra or Pisces in 12' house causes poverty, injury
through secret enemies and one becomes evil minded. Too
many malefics in the 12"! house causes poverty and kills
the first child. (12"' is 8"' from 5"j The 4,!l 8’" and 12"'
houses fonn a Trine, called Sukha Trikona. The 12"' house
in its lower octave, signifies Asana, Sayana Bhogya Bhagya
i.e. food, bed and comforts of thr coach, and the eight kinds
of enjoyment in its higher octave. 12"' signifies Moksha or
Salvation of the soul. So it is best 1, 8 and 12 are not

occupied by malefics. The 8"' and 12"’ are best unoccupied,
if occupied by benefics are good therein as benefics in 8"1 is
conductive to longevity and freedom from scandals and
disgrace, while benefics in 12“' causes expenditure on good
items, help conservation of wealth by frugal and prudent
expenses and make one pious late in life and Moksha
minded. When Jupiter is placed in 12"' one gets help from
heaven at the hours of need through appeal to God. Now
we shall study the literature.
The horoscope is like a musical instrument. Even an
inexpensive instrument like a flute, can be made to stir the
depths of the hearts of millions and hold them spell bound
depending on how skillfully the flutist harnesses the flute.
So an astrologer, who understands the game plan of the
planets, can well decipher even the mutually contradictory
phases of a given life. Trends in life of an individual can be
foreseen with 100% accuracy from a horoscope. It is within
the parameters of these trends that a man must act to
maximize the latent opportunities and minimize the impact
of adverse periods of life. And well qualified astrologer can
bring out a man in the open air from his dooms days. It is
the moral duty of the astrologer to guide a man when he is
passing the torrential parts of his life.
Parasara in Brihat Parasara Hora shastra mentioned evil
houses in the following words:
'•'TTTTTcI, ^wtew<SH
It means three houses viz, the 6th, 8th, and 12"’ are evil
house in a horoscope. These are also known as Trika houses.
Mantreswara has given a clear demarcation between evil
houses and good houses when he says:-
■JWTTOFi ftg ora W ^ejT'JTRl |
(Plana Dipika, Ch.l, Sloka 17)
i,e, the 8"’, 6"1 and 12'" houses are known as Dusthanas
or evil houses. Rests are good houses which give good
effects. The evil houses are arranged here in the descending
order. The eighth is the highest evil-influencing house, the

sixth is the second and the twelfth is the third. A question
naturally arises: Why is the eight house at the top of evil
houses? A partial answer is available in the following dictum
of Parasara:-
TTFfr ill'll q^cirii I
Because eighth is the Vyaya (12lh) of theBhagya (9th), so
it is bad or evil. This explanation is good but does not satisfy
fully. All houses are Vyaya of the succeeding houses
respectively. Then, why the Vyaya (12th) of three houses,
viz, the 9lh, 7* and 1M be considered as evil? All this suggests
that there are other factors, which make these houses so
bad. These are in significations of these houses, which are
evil in nature. The eighth house tops the list because it
signifies death. It also denotes sins (Randhra), defeat, bad
names, obstacles etc. In the female horoscope this house
indicates Mangalyastliana - longevity of the husband. The
sixth house denotes enemies, debt, diseases, theft, litigation,
imprisonment etc. The twelfth house denotes loss,
expenditure, insomnia and bed comforts, salvation etc. A
• malefic in the l2hhouse of Sun causes insomnia which is a
dangerous disease ofthe21S| century. l2h lord with Saturn
also causes insomnia.
A doubt arises here there are 12 houses in a horoscope.
As death is the end of Ufe. It should be denoted by the last
one (12,h)/ but it is not so. Why? The answer is available in
Rudra's Comentary on Sloka 1 5 of Chapter of Brihat Jataka
by Varaha Mihira, in this verse has given the name of
Marana to 8th house. According to Rudra, Varaha Mihira
has classified the twelve houses into three groups: (i) First
eight houses, (ii) houses from 9*10 1 1th, and (iii) 12lh house.
The first eight houses are Aihika i.e. of this world and the
eighth being the terminal house of this group is naturally
the house of death. The three houses from 9th to 11* are
Paratra i.e. belonging to the other would. The 12th is
Mosklia the dissolution of all .- of good/bad deeds - the
Vyaya of every thing and salvation in which the individual's
soul merges in the Almighty and becomes free from the
cycle of rebirth.

These houses have a positive side also. The eighth house,
inter alia, denotes longevity. So this house has two sides
like a rupee coin. It has longevity on the positive side and
death on the negative side. Next we see the sixth house. It
is one ofthefour (3,6,10,11) Upachaya (i.e. gowing) houses,
which are considered beneficial. Benefic influence on these
houses make it Upachayas, and malefic influence on these
houses makes them Dusthana or trika. Thus, the 6* house
is both a Trika and Upachaya house. The 6'" house becomes
Upachaya when it is accepted or occupied by a benefic.
The 12'" house donates Moksha i.e salvation of the soul on
positive side. Thus, all the three houses have both sides -
positive and a negative side - to keep the light on.
There are many yogas (which are considered auspicious
in nature) involving the 6Ul, 8"' and the 12"'houses. These
houses also from Adhi Yoga, Vasuman Yoga and Poomayu
Yoga involving, interalia, the 6lh 8th and 12 houses
simultaneously, which are very auspicious yogas.
Millionaire Yoga
If the lord of the first is in the 2nd, benefics in Kendras
(1,4,7,10) and the lord of the4lh in the 6th, the 8"’ or the 12"'
the native is a multi-millionaire.
fcl ri“ TWgcf ?
(Daivjnabharanam, page 92)
The 21st century has brought in a new era, which is the
era of global consumerisom. It has engulfed the entire
universe; even spiritualism is also being sold in the market
for the consumers. Swami Ramdeo of Haridwar became
billionaire with in the last two years (2004 - 2006) by selling
his yoga techniques and ayurvedic medicines. In ancient
days saint and seers showered their blessings to uplift the
soul, now spiritual teachers are earning money by selling
spiritual dictums, to shake off tensions, to gain health,
success in practical affairs. The Shrines and Temples are
becoming a source of earning money. The authorities of

the famous Tirupati Temple earn billions annually. In Jan
2006, the great bolywood artist Ainitabha Bacchhan
donated 100 million worth of diamond Jewellery there for
the speedy recovery ofhis health disorder. People are in rat
race to become a millionaire by any means fair or foul.
Teachers also are guiding the students how to earn more
and more money. Syllaby are also based as such. Moral
education claims only the 2,ul place. So in astrology millionaire
yoga is also very important (read Fortune and Finance by
Dr. S. S. Chatterjee) Almost 90% people consults on astrloger
about their moneyprospect as how to earn abundant money
to buy luxury articles, big houses costly modern accessories.
So interpretation of millionaire yoga is very necessary for
the 21s' century inhabitants of this earth.
Astrology is based on the various permutations and
combinations of AinR twelve rasis c-polf?,’ twelve bhavas
and nine planets. The effects produced by these
combinations (yogas) are experienced in the Dasa/Bhukti
of Yoga producing planets. According to Parasara Dasa -
effects are of two types viz general and special. Special
effects are those which a planet gives by virtue of his
ownership of one or two bhavas in the horoscope.
Ownership of Bhavas depends on the ascending sign and
will differ in different cases.
Very good effects are predicted for planets in exaltation,
good effects in own signs, fair results in friend's sign, evil
effects in enemy's sign and beneficial effects in debilitation
sign and in combustion, identical with trines /quadrants.
Location of a planet is to be counted from the Lagna
(Ascending sign). If a planet is situated in houses other
than Trika (6,8,12) he gives good results. On the other hand
if a planet is situated in Trika house he gives bad results.
The strength in Navamsa of a planet is the deciding factor
in bestowing results. Ifa planet is exalted in the rasi chart,
but is debilitated in Navamas it fails to bestow good results.
Two/three planets debilitated in Navamsa robs the merits
of the general horoscope found at the time of birth.

Mahatama Gandhi had a bad horoscope at a first glance
but is unique with him was that almost all the planets were
in the angle of 9'1' lord. All the planets become benefic when
they are in Kendra of the 9'" lord. They also become benefic
when they are influenced by 5 "7 9lh lords or are aspected by
Kendra lords.
Now we come to special effects of planets, which they
give due to their ownership of different bhavas in a
horoscope. This is termed as “H |cj cq flRtfTcl by Parasara. Here
the Bhavas (signs) are classified into the following categories:
1. Trines i.e. first, fifth and ninth houses. Their lords are
treated as benefics. They produce the fruits of past karmas.
Should a man start the life with the dasa of first lord it will
produce worst results, The scribe suffered in infancy because
he started his life with Saturn's dasa (Laganpati dasa).
2. Kendras i.e. first, fourth, seventh and tenth houses.
As the first house is both a kendra and kona, its lord is termed
as benefic. These four cardinal houses stand in an entirely
different category from rest of the houses. This is because
these houses relate activities regarding important aspects of
one's life. As a result of these houses's effect, one generates
fresh karma and earns merit for the next life as well as in
this life. They are action oriented houses. So usually they are
auspicious houses.
3. Lords of 3rd, sixth and eleventh are treated as malefic.
But lords of sixth houses in case of Taurus and Scorpio
ascendants are exceptions to this rule.
4. Lords of second and twelfth areneutrals. But all planets
except the Sun and the Moon own two signs. If these planets
own a second house other than the 2"J and 12'" their benefic/
malefic nature is determined by the lordship of that house.
5. Eight House: The lord oftheeighth house is a malefic.
But there are exceptions to this rule. The lords of eighth houses
in case of Aries and Libra Lagnas are not treated as malefic
because they own the Lagna also. Hence they are treated as
benefics. The Sun in case of Capricorn ascendant and the
Moon in case of Sagittarius ascendant are also exception to
this rule.

Adverse planets in kendras only check the accrual of good
effects (as for example, precipitating much anguish). The
adverse effects relating to these houses arise because the
individual is not able to derive advantages of these houses.
Malefic and adversely afflicted planets in 5m/9,h houses
indicate that the fruits of the past action have not been very
pleasant. Sun in 9* indicate that the native has done
meritorious work in his previous life. Jupiter, Mercury, Venus
full Moon in 5°'/9'Jlhouses remind us about the Purva Puny a
of the native in his previous birth Lucky people come to this
earth only for harnessing best results from their beautiful
planetary configurations. Sorrows and suffering (fix children,
parents, foreign journeys, pilgrimage, disciples, nephews, bad
results in examinations, set backs in higher educational
pursuits etc.) produced by trines are not by any Karma of
the present life. Whenever any individual generates any fresh
action, becomes creative (which includes bad and good
actions) these forces are indicated by the 5"' house. As a result
of those forces there is reaction. The environment reacts to
these forces. These reactions are shown in the 6* house which
releases certain forces inherent in the person. When we notice
our symptoms of disease, animosity, litigations etc they are
merely external expressions of the process by which certain
qualities inside the individual are released. It is for such
reasons that the individual after the experience is over; feels
strong, the qualities acquired during the turmoil are related
to the planet involved. Similarly, the 8th house and the 12"'
house produce their visible and invisible results. According
to sage pa rasa r
^zrafOcffo vom ! d d fa ■ jiktovt; i
(Sick 5, Brihat Parasara Hora Vol. 1, by R. Santhanam)
This we have to infer that the lords of 12"’, 2"" and 8"'
will prove favourable if they are related to angular/trinal
lords. They are deadly if related to 3"J, 6"' and 11"'.
3' 6"' and 11"' are Upachaya lords. But in bestowing
dasa results 6* lord is more harmful than the 3r,i lord, while
the 11"' lord is the most harmful (by R. Santhanam, TOA
Aug 1996 P 3) of the three .

2ni lord with a favourable planet will be more favourable
as against the 12*1 lord with the same favourable planet.
2nd lord with an unfavourable planet will be more harmful
as against the 12,h lord with the same unfavouarableplanet.
8th will be more favourable as against the 2'"1 lord the same
unfavourable and vice versa. Among these three planets
(2,8,12) does less good or less harm as the case may be as
against the 2lu1 / 8* lords.
The worst of 6 planets is the 11* lord as per Santharam
(2,6,8,12,3,11), however as per sage Parasar 8* lord is the
worst planet, 8L'1 and 11* houses are the worst planets in
the two particulars groups 3,6 and 11* and 12U1, 2“* and
S1*1 on the other hand. Mercury is the lord of the S1*1 and
11* for Scorpio and Jupiter is the lord of 8* and 11* for
Taurus. These two are accordingly severely harmful for
the ascendants concerned.
Parasar gives some relief through the 8th lord being in
simultaneous ownership of a trine (Saturn for Gemini,
Jupiter for Leo, Mercury for Aquarius) while he condemns
the 8rtl lord in simultaneous ownership of 3,7,11. Actually
dasa of 11th lord will cause gains, obstacles and diseases.
elPJlfs)V3f?lPf>Jol cJpilRlt.'ii 3T4|'('l<pft I
Mansagari (with R.N. Jha's Hindi Translation) states
above the 11"' house.
oTFTWT UgJTff ^KajenWoTSf^T:' I
Tp5TTW#PfRl' qyPrt I I
The said saloka means "All planets in the 1 1th house cause
gain of Kingdom. Particularly benefic planets in the ll11
surely grant lordship with elephants and horses. The learned
teachers of HA, Kolkata believe this aphorism by their heart.
The author was fortunate to learn astrology under a dozen
of dedicated and disciplined astrologers of 11 A, Kolkata. The
author has Venus in the 11th house (see example 14). He lost
his father during Saturn - Venus das, lost his mother during
Venus - Saturn dasa lost his 1st wife during Venus-Sun dasa,
and also suffered very heavy financial losses. He worked in
West Germeny during the above dasa. He was lucky to enjoy
the yogakaraka Venus's dasa between 38-58 years of life.

According to Santhanam; dasa of planets in the 11* house
produce both good and bad results.
Planets in 1 1 * will bestow good results if they are strong
in vargobal. A planet hemmed between malefics defeated
in a planetary war, retrograde, combusted or aspected by
deadly malefics like 6"', 8"' 12,hlord, Mars, Saturn, Rahu or
Ketu fails to bring any prosperity. Dasa results entirely
depend on the overall strength of the horoscope. Strong
Lord of Lagna, strong Ascendant, strong Jupiter (it is the
ruler of happiness and success), strong Sun (name fame and
success). The native with fail to prosper in life if there is no
Raja Yoga (relationship between trine and Kendra lords) or
other strong yogas like Pancha Mabapursh yoga, Adhi Yoga,
Laxmi Yoga, Vasumati Yoga etc. If the lord ofLagna is strong
9111 lord weak or ill placed in 6,h / 8*1' / 1 2th such a native
though long lived may not be fortunate, mere strength of
the 9“ lord or the 10* lord of ascendant is of no use.
Great success in career depends on the strength of the
10* lord. When this planet is conjoined with a natural
benefic and aspected by Jupiter - such a native flourishes
well in life. A benefic 10"' lord in 2"<l/7,l'/or 8'" house can
boost the prospects of the 10* house (2inl house is 5"' from
10lh, 7"' house is 10* from 10'", 8lh house is the 11,hhouseof
10'1', which represents current income from profession).
When 8'" house has powerful Venus as the 10'" lord, it will
not only boost the prospects of the 10'" house but also sooth
the evils of the 8* house. The more the affliction of Sun,
Moon, Lagna, Lagna lord, 8* house and 12"' house, less
and less will the fame and success. For a scandal free life,
gtii /1211' house should be vacant. Even if one benefic
(natural) occupy the 6/8/12 produces poverty and there
will be frequent ups and downs in career. Lords of2I",/Jl11'
in 6/8/12 make a man poor. A malefic lord as IT1' lord in
6ll'/8,h/1211' houses will produce good results. The life does
not flourish well when the planet forming Pancha
Mahapurush Yoga is debilitated in Navamsa. Prosperity
never comes in life when two or three planets are debilitated
in Navamasa.
It goes without saying that if the ascendant lord and

Jupiter are together in a quadrant, it is a blessing and a
tower of strength to the native. But Kapilanadi puts the
ascendant lord in 5th or 9th, especially in 9h (Bhogyasthan)
as even more indicative of a grater luck and good fortune
than the ascendant lord in a quadrant. This is because a
quadrant though representing pillars supporting a
horoscope structure indicates success and wealth with
effort, when benefics in the 9th and a powerful 9* lord
indicate effort less gains like fruits fallen from a tree (i.e.
windfalls) or a kingdom inherited. Benefics in the 9* are
very good and the lord of Acendant and the dispositor Moon
are always benefic to the native. When the lord of Ascendant
is in a trine/quadrant, not in the enemy camp, and aspectd
by a another malefic and if dispositer of Moon occupies a
quadrant place - the native does very well.in life. The evil
forces of 6,1,/S,h/ 1 2lh will not disturb him much. For a poor
man, every dasa is same. So a common man (a horoscope
without any mentionable Rajayoga, and the Kendras are
occupied by malefics) should be afraid of evils of 611' / 811'/
12ll,houses. There is a shock absorbing capacity in a good
horoscope (9‘ii lord should be very strong) Lord of
Ascendant promotes the Bhava wherever it is posited and
promotes the Bhava where it aspects. May it be Saturn or
Mars, if lord of Ascendant, it does not harm the 9"1 house.
There is a sloka:
eF^femfcf SoFTR I
^5 Rrsrofeejrfcr ^ i
TTTaf ' Vifold tM elfF-JJT I I
Which means, if the lord of Lagna is very strong, not
aspected by natural malefics but aspected by benefices,
preferably benefics posited in a quadrant (see examples 1 5),
the native averts premature death, lives long with
permanent prosperity. If Jupiter or Mercury or Full Moon
or Venus be in the 9" bright and radiant (that is uncombust
and uneclipsed by Rahu or Ketu) and with or aspected by
a friendly planet, the native is even deified by people. A

fundamental rule is astrology is that if lord of ascendant
or Jupiter or Venus is in a quadrant (1,4,7 or 10), the native
is long-lived, wealthy and enjoys the favour of king or ruler.
When Saturn becomes the lord of the 9111 and is either
debilitated or associated with other malefics - the life of
the native become most miserable. Saturn or Rahu in the
9"' house generally indicates an irreligious nature and
insurmountable difficulties for the native.
Should the 9th lord be in close company of Rahu, being
not related to a benefic dishonourable events will come to
pass. Ketu is a malefic not conductive to material pleasures.
His combination with 9th lord or debilitated Saturn kills
the roots of a happy life. When the 9* house/and its lord
are strong, its significators Sun and Jupiter are strong -
happy events in life should be foretold.
When The Malefic Planets Bestow
Good Results?
3r,t, 6"', 8"', IT1' & 12"' lords are all trika lords and are
highly malefic planets. If the above planets are posited in
the above houses, they bestow good results. Morebetter
results are expected when they are debilitated in the above
houses. This is as per Kalidasa in Uttarkalamrita. If these
lords are placed in the 6,h/8,h/12'h in Navamsa, evil effects
are greatly reduced. In Kendra/Triha in Navamsa, 8"' lord
intensifies evil results. Let us study 6 horoscopes (all from
the research diary of the learned author).
Exp. 1. Prosperous lady who lives in Switzerland with
husband and kids. (DOB : 23. 10. 1959/1 6=45/Bareilly). Her
3rd lord is placed in 6th, 6*/8* lords have exchanged places
and have generated a powerful Lagnadhi Yoga. Since 6th
lord Sun is debilitated in the 8"' house - it has generated a
strong Raja Yoga for her. She has lord of Lagna in the 9'1'
house. 12r lord is in a Kendra and hence very strong.
Mercury - Moon dasa took her to Europe. Mercury has
precipitated in the Adhi Yoga formation and hence its dasa
brought prosperity in her life from the blue. Fortunate
persons are born when Deha & Jeeva signs make 5/9

Example No.1
Date 23/10/1959 Time 16:45:00 Day Friday Lat 28:20:00 North Long 79:24:00 East
Zone 82:30.00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23.02.06
Balance ofDasa : Jupiter 14 Years 11 Months 26 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
rasi. In KCD also she enjoyed Mercury dasa between
29.2.2000 to 29.2.2009. (Virgo Dasa), Natural benefics in
4,h/ 6th, Sp , and 9"' houses shaped her destiny in a very nice
manner. Libra dasa between 2009 - 2025 is' also prosperous
for her tor the Vipareeth Raja Yoga.
Example : 2 Prosperous Mechanical Engineer from Dayal
College, Agra.
DOB 15.12.1956, 18=30 hrs, Pathankot
Tliis is the success story of a prosperous mechanical
engineer from Dayal College, Agra. He passed out in 1977.

Example No. 2
Date 15/12/1956 Time 18.30.00 Day Saturday Lat32 16 00 North Long 75.43:00 East
Zone 82.30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22 59:42
Balance of Dasa : Sun J Years 3 Months 5 Days
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspai
God has designed his horoscope in a very favourable
manner. 6"’/12,h lords have generated Vipareeth Raja Yoga
in the 6th house - the house of career (it is the 9lh of 10th
house) Exchange of 4"V7,h lords formed a formidable Maha
Yoga (a special Dhana Yoga formation). His 6I,'/H"1 lord
Mars is placed in the 10"'house with directional strength.
When 6 lord is placed in the 10'1' one becomes lamp of the
family. He has Chandradhi and Lagnadhi Yogas Venus and
Mercury are found in the 7lh/8!h houses from Moon; 6th/
7 houses of Janma Lagna are occupied by Venus and
Mercury. Two successive Kendras are occupied by benfics
forming Gada Yoga. Lord of Lagna is placed in 7'h, whose

dispositer is placed in 4"', who's dispositer in 7"' forming
this unique Parijata Yoga. All immortals of this planet earth
generally are bom with this rare Yoga. Though he passed
out from a 3"1 class engineering college (Top Class - !lTs,
Second Class - all RECs) he is very fortunate, securing a
very top position of the society. 10"' lord in a Kendra
generated Khetra Simhansan Yoga, which grants easy
success in life. For the directional strength and aspect of
ldh lord Jupiter on 6ll,/ni1' lord Mars generated beautiful
results for him during Mars Mahadasa. So a very malefic
planet shaped his dusting in a very nice manner. He
enjoyed Mars Mahadasa (6,l’/11'1' lords) between 55.1971
to 5.5.1978, during his college days of life, which actually
shaped his destiny in a dignified manner. He is enjoying
Jupiter Mahadasa. Between 55.1996 - 5.52012. He landed
in Europe in March 2000 and is employed in a Power
Engineering corporation (like NTPC, BHEL of India) during
the fag end of Virgo dasa (in March 2000). His Cancer dasa
started from 30.04.2000, which will run for 21 yrs. Since
Moon is exalted in Taurus in the 12th house, we expect that
he will continue to remain in foreign countries till the end
of Cancer dasa
Jupiter is placed in its own Navamsa in Pisces - hence
the gate of fortune opened before him during Jupiter
Mahadasa as per Vimsottori dasa. His Kendradhipati Dosha
of Jupiter was eliminated for the Paribartan Yoga and the
beautiful placement of Jupiter in Navamsa. Rahu in 6'1' and
Ketu 12th is the best placement of Rahu - Ketu axis. Big
person are bom with Rahu in the 6'1' house. These people
are intensely concentrated in material pursuits. Often
dreams, psychic experience and spiritual contacts affect
them at deeper levels, producing radical transformations
in their mental attitude. They feel unhappy about social
differences (this prophecy of sages came true in his life in
Switzerland) but they confront them with courages and
confidence and final outcome works in their favour. The
experience gained during these confrontations gives them
inner confidence. The perception of higher realities

becomes more meaningful to them than the enjoyment of
physical comforts and social acclaim. This is also true in
real life. His wife is having Mars in the 8lh house (example
- I) and hence a very Mangleek lady. It is very difficult for
him to adjust his angry wife. His 8lh lord Saturn has
generated Vipareeth Raja Yoga in the 6th house andis placed
in the lO*1 house in Navamsa strong 8th lord made him
successful in life.
Example 3 : A prosperious young boy. DOB 17.10.1987/
9=13AM/Delhi. This is the son of the above couple. He
completed XII from an international school at Zurich,
Switzerland in July 2005. He came to India with an ambition
to study engineering either at DCE or Pillani. He failed in
both the entrance tests. He is destined to go back to
Switzarland again in the end of July 2005 as per my
forecasts on 5.7.2005. His 8th lord is placed in 12th, 6th, lord
is placed in 11th, 12,lllordis placed in 12"'. 12lhlord Venus
and 8th lord Mercury has generated a Vipareeth Raja Yoga
in his 12“' house. Placement of 6"'/8ll'/12lh lords in trika
houses shaped his destiny in a very favourable manner.
He was born with retrograde 8"' lord Mercury’s dasa. This
dasa failed to bring any setback in his infant days of life.
He enjoyed Ketu Mahadasa upto 24.04.2000. At the fag
end of Ketu's Mahadasa. He entered Switzeland. Ketu's
union with 10th lord Sun and Lagnesh Mars forced Ketu
to bestow excellent results for him. He will enjoy 7"’/12,h
lord Venus's dasa between 28.4.2000 to 28.4.2020, forming
famous Mudrika Yoga (Moon — Jupiter - Venus - Mercury
are in mutual angles. When all the benefics are in mutual
angles, they generate super Raja Yoga, which elevates the
status of the native in the society) which neutralised the
evil results of planets during their Mahadasas. His 9* lord
is placed in 9a, Lord of Lagna Mars is palaced in the 11
house with 10"' lord Sun with Ketu. Strong 9th lord, strong
1 2"' lord favoured his studies in a foreign land from March
2000. In KCD he has Taurus as Deha Rasi and Gemini as
the Jeeva Rasi. He opened his life with 6lh lord Mars dasa
Aries. Since 6"' lord is placed in the 11th (6"' from 6") this

Example No.3
Date 17/10/1907 Time 09:13:00 Day Saturday Lat 28'39:00 Noru. Long 77:13:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East SrlSanatan Ayanamsa 23 25:31
Balance of Dasa : Mercury 5 Years 2 Months 17 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chaiit-Cuspal
dasa did not produce any evil to him. He is enjoying Taurus
dasa (dasanth = Venus) between 25.102003 to 24.10.2012.
Since Venus is placed in the 12"' house - he is destined to
live faraway from homeland. Observing all the astrological
facts 1 advised his father to take him back to Switzerland
on 5.72005 and his illustrious father oeyed me. He is now
studying enginnering in Switzerland.
Example - 4 : Story of a Middleclass housewife
DOB : 14.06.1945, at 15=45 brs, wartime, Kolkata. She
was bom in a upper middle class family, her father was a
very intellectual person holding a very lucrative job in a
private company at Kolkata. She was bom in Mercury's

Example No. 4
Date 14/06/1945 Time 15:15:00 Day Thursday Lat 22:30:00 North Long 88 20:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22 50:04
Balance of Dasa : Mercury 8 Years 7 Montlis 22 Days
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
Mahadasa (9m/12,n lord). Her father flourished in life after
her birth. She was the only daughter of her parents with
charismatic outlook (very beautiful lady), her Venus is
placed in the 8th house in Navamsa and is with Ketu. She
enjoyed Mahadasa of Venus during 26.1.1961 - 26.1.1981.
Venus - Ketu dasa ruined her. Both these planets are in the
8lh house and hence became a liability for her. The family
had to face grave pecuniary condition. Her father's lifelong
savings were drained out by a cheating organization
named Sachayita Investments For the great financial
hardships her father failed to arrange her marriage in her
marriageable period of life.

Her 6,h lord is placed in 11 fl' (Upachayapati in a
Upachaya house gives good results), 8m lord is placed in
7", 12th lord is placed in 8lh. For Libra Lagna Venus does
not suffer from 8 111 lord Dosha (blemishes) 6'1' lord in 1 1 *
brings litigations in life (as per Santhanam, TOA Aug 1996
P 6). She had to face obstacles marriage did not take place
during Venus dasa. Usually one gets married in Rahu or
Venus Mahadasa. According to S. Ganesh (Ganesh Hora
P 558, Alpha Publications, New Diehi) a malefic ll"1 lord
in trika bouses generate excellent results. Sun (her 11 lh
lord in 81*) - Saturn dasa brought relief in her life. A widower
(a highly qualified and well placed man of the society)
married her in May 1984. Saturn is a Yogakarka for her
Lagna placed in the house of fortune with Rahu.
Yogakarka Saturn brought the relief in her life. She got
married, got a very beautiful son (handsome with very
fair complexion), and got relief from financial downturn
during highly malefic 11* lord's Mahadasa. 11th lord in 8th
(a malefic planet in malefic house) neutralised the evils of
lllh lordship. Her son is a highly intelligent boy (passed
out Xll from DPS, Delhi with flying colours) and currently
is studding computer engineering. Highly malefic 11"’ lord
in 8th (f is the house of legacy, inheritances etc) opened
the door of prosperity to her in middle ages. Her father
passed away in April 1994, (Moon - Ketu dasa), mother
expired in Sept. 2004 (Rahu - Kent dasa). Ketu in the 8th
house in navamsa became instrumental in framing all the
setbacks in life. Since Rahu is conjoined with Yogakaraka
Saturn - Rahu dasa will be extremely good for her. God
will shower his blessings on her during Rahu dasa placed
in a trine (where money falls from the blues) with
Yogakarka Saturn. In April 2006 she is visiting Canada
for her astorological missions there. Her highly malefic
Jupiter dasa may terminate her life beyond 2022 or so.
In KCD she has Capricorn as Deha Rasi and Gemini
as Jeeva Rasi Deha/Jeeva Rasis in 6/8 relationships
bring ups and down in life. She opened her life with
Gemini Dasa (Balance 2 yrs 4 m 15 d). Capricorn,

Aquarius, Pisces, Scorpio dasa were spent peacefully.
Libra dasa started on 29.10.1972. She passed MA
English in 1973 and started career as a School teacher
in 1974 (Libra - Libra dasa) Libra - Virgo, Libra -
Cancer, Libra - Leo, Libra - Gemini ruined her
completely. She got relief in Libra - Capricorn dasa,
which ruled her between 14.2. 84 - 15.11.1984. Venus
debilitated in Navamsa and is place in the 8tb house in
Navamsa Lagna). Anybody who has a malefic
Navamsa Lagna (the house of Sun, Saturn and Mars)
suffer in the general scheme of life in the early days of
life. This is the observation of author for the last 30 yrs
in the field of astrology. Weak Venus helped her during
Venus - Sat dasa as per KCD. Strong Venus - Saturn
dasa ruins any body. She recovered magnificently in
the financial fronts during Virgo dasa (between
29.10.1986 - 29.10.1997). Currently she is passing
Cancer Mahadasa between 29.10.1997- 29.10.2018.
Since Moon is in a Kendra in its own sign and in thelOth
house, Cancer dasa is behaving extremely well with
her. She completed a three storey building in Kolkata
with marble on the floors and decorated her drawing
room with teakwood furniture in 2001. Hope that she
will be blessed by God during the entire Cancer dasa.
Cancer dasa will take her to foreign countries. Her son
may help her to take her to USA for fulfilling her
ambitions in life. Jupiter in lllh house (any benefic in
the llthhouseis a gift of God) saves a native from many
litigations in life. Planets in Kendra/trikons and
benefics in the 11'" house make anybody almost
litigation free. 5th lord in 9th will open the gate of more
prosperity in life in a foreign land in her Rahu dasa.
Example - 5 : Story of a Chartered Accountant DOB :
10/11-6 - 1971, 1=17 hrs, Kolkata. His scientist father
married a very wealthy lady and he is the bye-product of this
wed-lock. Moon in the 10,h house speaks about the wealth of
his mother. Since 4"' house is hemmed between malefics and
4"' lord is afflicted by 6th /8th/ 12’1' lords, he lost his mother on

Example No.5
Date 10/06/1971 Time 01:17.00 Day Thursday Lat 22 30 00 North Long 88:20:00 East
Zone 82 30:00 East SriSanatan Ayanamsa 23:1 1:50
Balance of Dasa : Ketu 4 Years 3 Months 16 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspai
20.10.1983 (Venus - Ketu dasa, chidra dasa). This was a set
back for him. Earlier he visited USA with his mother, in March
1975. He completed his education nicely, and became a
Chartered Accountant but preferred to stay away from the
father. If a Yoga Karaka of any horoscope, (chandra Lagna, or
Janma Lagna) occupies the 8t!'/12l,,from lagna, such a planet
makes the native very rough and rude in behaviour. The naive
always entertains destructive thinking. His lord of Lagna is
placed in the 12th house from Moon in direct opposition to
highly malefics 3rd, 6th, 8th, 12th lords. These combinations made
him unrefined and he likes to speak with a loud voice. In any

horoscope, the combination of Sun and Saturn invariability
create rift between the native and his father wherever these
be. If these occupy or aspect the 9lh house, the native's father
suffers with humiliation and treachery. As this happens to be
in the 3rd house, not only there will be a danger to his father
but also the father will have to be a silent spectator of the
atrocities perpetuated by the native on paternal properties and
on his father's reputation. The statement of sages all came
true. This gentleman keeps a distance from the father. Should
9lh lord be in close company of Rahu, being not related to a
benefic, disharmonic events in family circles will come to pass
(Essentials of Hindu Predictive Astrology by R. Santhanam P
340). In any horoscope where neither Saturn nor Mars have
any contact with Moon forebodes failures and disappointments (AM (an 1995, P 82, by Oak). On account of
this reason he is living as a bachelor in a rented flat in Kolkata
keeping wide distance from all his kith and kin. By birth he is
an extremely intelligent and saint like person but unfortunately
due to adverse planetary disposition made by heaven, he is
keeping distance with his father and can't stand his sight. May
God by his magical wand unite father with his son.
THE INTERLINK
These three adverse houses, 6\ Sa and 1 2th familiarly
known as Trikas, are supposed to spoil any other house
that they get linked to. They destroy Raja Yogas and inflict
misery and misfortune upon the native. Any of these three
(also 2, 3, 7 and 1 1 as per the opinion of other savants of
astrology) above capable of spoiling benefic combinations,
when the three combine together, they only provide a
formidable malefic combination. Dasa of a Yogabhanga
planet is highly inauspicious. This we have found in life of
Rajeev Gandhi, Lai Bhadur Shastri, Richard Nixon etc.
In term of health, these houses and their lords are equally
detrimental. Their association with Lagna and its lord
wreaks havoc with the health of the native. These lords,
however, too can produce favourable results in certain
select situations (in 3,6,8,11 & 12). According to Uttar
Kalamrita of Kalidas, The three Vipareeth Raja Yogas, or

extra ordinary benefic combinations reset when.
1 . The lord of the 8'h in 6,!‘/or 12’" (see Example - 6)
The additional condition is that these planets should not at
the same time associate with other planets. The results of the
yoga are name, fame, prosperity and royal favours. Sage Parasar
mentions of a Raja yoga involving the lords ofTrika houses.
3TTcTT ftajcTT: I
That is a lords of 6th 8* and 12* when debilitated, combust
or located in inimical signs, produce a Raja Yoga when the
lord of the Lagna, occupying its own or exaltation sign also
aspects the Lagna. Does it mean that the lords of the Trika
houses produce favourable results when weak or
uncomfortably disposed? One condition for the fructification
of such a Raja - Yoga, however, is certain that lagna or its
lord must be very strong. Raja Yoga produced by Trika lords
would manifest better if such lords were not under additional
planetary influence. In the example 5 we have observed that
the all the malefic planets have accumulated in a bad house
(3rd house) and they are in aspect to divine Jupiter from the
9'h house which is his ascendant lord. Best position of Jupiter
is in the 9th house as per Kapila Nadi. Ascendant lord in the
5* /or 9th, especially in the 9th (house of destiny) as even more
indicative of a greater luck and good fortune than the
Ascendant lord in a quadrant. This is because a quadrant
though representing pillars supporting a boroscopic structure,
it indicates success and wealth with effort, where as benefics
in the 9th and a powerful 9th lord indicate effortless gains like
fruits fallen from a tree or a kingdom inherited. Benefics in 9th
are very good. The Lord Ascendant and the dispositor of Moon
are always benefic to native. In example chart 5 wefindJ lipiter
is the lagnalord and also the dispositor of Moon. Evil planets
in a malefic house, lord of Ascendant in 9h, dispositor of Moon
in 9"' -shaped the destiny pattern of the gentleman of the
horoscope - 5 in a very favourable manner. Generally aspect

of 6th lord on Jupiter is a grisly combination and is to be feared.
But a malefic 6'1’ lord in a malefic house loses its venom (this
emanated from the constant research effort of the learned
author). In such a case its aspect on Jupiter is not at all harmful.
This can be verified front the chart - 6 also.
Jupiter as the lord of T" and the 10th in the 9th is very
good, both for longevity and high position. It is idle to
stigmatise Jupiter as vitiated by Kendradhipatya dosha
(blemishes for dual angular lordships). When he is lord of
lagna, and when the dosha, due to ownership of quadrants,
becomes relevant only when considering maraka or death
on account of the planet occupying the 2 nd, or 7,h or the 3rd
or other marakasthansas. So we find only single Jupiter in
9th, pushed him very high in life. Aspect of malefics 6th /8th/
12th lords on his Jupiter failed to tarnish the image of natural
benevolent Jupiter, the most benign planet of the divine
cabinet. Though he lost his mother when he was a kid (class
VI student), he prospered in life at the appropriate age.
When 9th lord is strong, one has an early success in life. His
9lh lord is exalted and Jupiter occupies his 9"' house. He
became a chartered accountant in 1997.
Longevity of Mother
-Mother's blessings, love and guidance is the most
important factor in a person's life. Father and Mother are
called the guardian Angel. Passing away scares his/her child
from danger and distress. Mother's influence in a person's
life is considered even greater than heaven, so mother's
longeivity is an important issue in the study of astrology.
Mother protects her child from all distress. So it is
unfortunate incident in somebody's life to lose mother at a
very young age. There is no substitute of mother.
A. Long lived mother
1 . If the Moon and Venus are strong and are aspected
by benefics and are located in the navamsa of a benefic
planet in an angle and there is benefic planet in an angle in
the birth chart and there is benefic planet in the 4"' house,
mother of the native lives long (see Advanced Predictive
Astrology Vol 1, by Dr. Si!. Chatterjee P230)

2. 4* lord in 10"' shows one has long lived and
affectionate mother.
3. 4th lord exalted and benefics in the 4th gives long life
to mother.
When the 4th Bhava is being scrutinised about the
native's mother, the Moon and Venus are also to be
looked into (Venus is considered as the Karaka for
mother born during day time and the Moon is said to
rule over this aspect during birth at night) 4th Bhava of
natural zodiac is Cancer, which is ruled by the Moon.
Hence Moon becomes the main significator of Mother.
4th Bhava is afflicted, the native is not benefited through
mother, if the 4th lord is afflicted, it is not beneficial to
tb
the mother. Malefics posited in 2”d and 12 h causes
anxiety and fear to the native's mother. (lll house
controls the longevity of mother, 8"' from 4,h. So
malefics in 12th means, a malefic planet from the 2nd
house of 11th, a malefic in 2n<l means, a malefic in 4,h
from 11th house).
B .Short Lived Mother
1. When the 5l and 9 houses from weak Moon
(difference between Sun and Moon <72“) are occupied by
malefics, devoid of benefic influence, mother dies within
six months.
2. If the Moon is hemmed between malefic planets and
located in the 4 house, aspected by malefics, mother is
short-lived. This result also follows by the similar affliction
of the lord of 4'" house and Venus.
3. Aspect of three malefics on the Moon kills the
mother at the time of birth.
4. If Venus located in the 7,h from the Moon is
associated with malefics, the mother is short lived. If Saturn
located in the 4* house is aspected by malefics, the mother
dies very soon.
th
5. If Saturn is located on the 4 house is under aspect
ofbenefic planets, mother lives long. If, however, Saturn is
in the 4th house is in the sign of a malefic planet and is also

associated with a malefic, the mother is short-lived.
6. If the Moon and the 3rd lord occupy the 6"' /8lh/12l11
house, the native's mother is short lived.
7. If the quadrants are devoid ofbenefic influence and
a malefic planet occupies 4th house from the Moon in a
malefic sign, the native's mother is short lived.
8. 4th lord, 4th house. Moon or Venus conjoined and
hemmed between malefics, kill the mother very easily .
Now let us analyze the reasons of death of mother of chart
- 5. According to Bhrigu Jataka, a very famous Bengali
writer, if the Aries, Cancer, Gemini becomes the 41" Bhava,
where malefics are deposited, the native's mother becomes
sick. In this particular case 4th lord is posited in the 3rd house
(12lh from 4"') and conjoined with three trika lords (6/8/
12). The 4th house is hemmed between malefics and coincides
with Gemini. Quite naturally he had a sick mother.
Affliction of the Moon, Venus, 4th lord, 4lh house, 7th house
from Moon and Venus, Cancer sign kills the mother early.
His 4th house is hemmed between malefics. Venus is heavily
afflicted by Rahu carrying the deadly influence of Mars
with it, 4Jl lord is heavily afflicted by three trika lords. The
Cancer sign is afflicted by Rahu - Ketu axis, Mars and
Saturn. So his mother died early in agreement with the
astrological rules for short lived mother.
8“ lord from Moon play a significant role in causing the
death of mother. In his case 8L1 lord from Moon is Moon
itself. Subtract the longitude of the Sun from the longitude
of the 8,h lord counted from Moon. When Saturn arives at
the point or is posited in a trine house in transit, death of
mother occurs.
On 20.10.1983 at 4:35 AM his mother expired. In transit
Saturn was in 6S12°15'.
According to the author, add the longitudes of the 4th

cusp, the Sun, the Moon and Jupiter. When Saturn aspects
this point by its 3rd, 7*h or 10lh aspect oris directly posited
on this house or in trines, death of mother occurs. Here 4th
- 7s 5° 46'. On addition of these points we get death point
at 8s 9° 24'. This death point was clearly aspected by Saturn
in the transit from Libra.
Analysis of dwadasamsa (1/12)
This divisional chart is analyzed for the calculation of
longevity of parents. D - 12 chart : Sagittarius - A. SC,
Pisces - Sun, Ketu Cancer - Moon, Sat, Libra - Mars,
Mercury, Capricorn - Jupiter, Gemini - Venus,
4th lord Jupiter is debilitated = Negative
4"1 lord is in second = Negative
4'1' house is occupied by Sun and Ketu = Negative
4th lord is squared by Rahu - Ketu axis = Negative
Total = Negative
Affliction of 4th house and 4"’ lord in Dwadasamsa
confirm early death of mother. 9lh lord in D - 12 chart is
placed in a Kendra with Ketu in its own sign Pisces, whose
4th/ 10th house is influenced by Venus. His father is still alive.
Is not very surprising to observe that every incident in life
is predetermined? 8th lord of Janama Lagna, ^lord of Sun,
8th lord of Moon shape our Mundane journey . So how can
the 8th lord be inauspicious?
Let us study in transit on 20.10.1983. Moon was in
Pisces. Moon is the significator of mother. 8th house of
Moon was occupied by Saturn + Sun, whose lord Venus
was placed in Leo (6th house, house of disease), with Mars,
whose Kendra was occupied by Ketu (in Scorpio) 4* lord
of Moon, Mercury was hemmed between malefics. Dasa
of two planets in Mutual angles generate inauspicious
results. So she died in Venus - Ketu dasa. Clearly 6th/8,h/
12* house of Moon were afflicted. A bhava or a planet is
annihilated when its 6h /S11' /12th houses are occupied by
malefics. We should stoop down head in gratitude to our
sears who have designed the principles of astrology in
such a scientific manner.

Example No. 6
Date 18/06/1970 Tfme 04:33:00 Day Thursday Lat 22 28 00 North Long 70 06 00 East
Zone 82:30 00 East SriSanatan Ayanamsa 23 1 1 01
Balance of Dasa : Saturn 6 Years 3 Months 0 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
Chart 6 : Horoscope of a multi millionaire of Gujrat :
An Example of Vipareeth Raja Yoga. DOB - 18-6-1970/
4=33AM/lamnagar. This is the story of a very rich
industrialist of Gujrat. When he was born his
grandfather used to earn several lakhs rupees per day.
He was born with a golden spoon in his mouth. God
put his lord of Ascendant in a malefic house, 3rd house.
So his 6u'/lst lord is placed in the 3rd house - the house
of courage. It is aspecting his Bhagyasthan. Lord of
lagna flourishes those houses where it is posited and it
aspects. His Pada Lagna is Virgo. We find Venus in the
11 "'house from Pada Lagna. Benefic planets planets in

the 2lul/]l'h house of Pada Lagna shaped his destiny
pattern well. Cancer has Indu Lagna. Any planet in the
Indu Lagna generates excellent results for the native.
Megastar Amitibha Bacchan rose very high in life during
Saturn dasa posited in Indu Lagna (he has Aquarius
Lagna, Saturn is placed in Taurus containing in the Indu
Lagna). So surely he will also rise very high in life. 8th
lord Jupiter is placed in the 6"' forming Vipareeth Raja
Yoga. Hence this Jupiter lost the venom of 8,1'/1111'
lordships. Its aspect is not poisonous. Jupiter is aspecting
his 2"‘I/I0'I'/12'1' houses. Since 3ul/6l,l/10'h Upachaya
Sathans are influenced by benefic planets - he is earning
a very high figure.
Ketu ruled him during 29.1.1994 to 29.1.2001, during
this period his father took loan from the market/and
also from banks for his lavish life style. Ketu is in the 8'1'
house from his Pitru Lagna Capricorn. So his father was
forced to borrow money. As soon as Venus dasa started
this gentlemen worked very hard, fought against
enemies and cousins and feeling relaxed in June 2005.
He earned several crores of rupees in last 4 yrs. He may
wipeout the loan within a few months. Venus is behaving
well him for another reason. This is placed in the angle
to 9"' lord Saturn. Any planet in the angle of 9th lord
behaves well.
In the early ninety he went to USA for the completion
of his MBA degree, This degree taught him the basic
principles of business. The owner of this horoscope is a
God fearing man and is free Horn vices. Though there is
no Raja Yoga in his horoscope - he is still a very rich
man of the society. Yogakaraka Saturn has energized the
entire horoscope. Saturn is aspecting Mars, Sun, Jupiter
the dispositor of Venus, Moon is in the star of Saturn,
Venus is in the star of Saturn, Rahu is placed in the
Saturn's house, Sun is influencing Ketu. Mercury is in
the star of Moon, where Moon is again in the star of
Saturn. Only one Vipareeth Raja Yoga and the benefic
inluence of the Yogakaraka Saturn on every planet made
him a very strong and a dynamic man of the society.

Yogakaraka can reach any planet by its aspect, by in
sign, by its dispositer, through its star. As per KCD, he
has Gemini as the Jeeva Rasi and Capricorn on the Deha
Rasi. 6/8 relationships of Deha/]eeva signs indicate ups
and downs in life. 2/12 relationships of 9th/ 5th lords also
indicate the same thing. He is enjoying Gemini dasa
He is a very happy man. Aspect of Yogakaraka on 4th
lord Sun, and the aspect of malefic Jupiter turned benefic
on Saturn (Yogakaraka) made him a prosperous and
happy man of the society. He has a son and a daughter
(born in 2002, the author dictated the time of birth of
this baby). So from the discussions of the above six . harts
we learnt that the 6'V8,h/12,h/3ril/f 1 lords should
occupy these house only. Prof. Shivaji Bhattacharya
writes (vide TO A, Oct 1996 P 13) when the 6th/ 8th / 1 2,il
lords occupy their respective evil houses, Harsha, Sarala,
and Vimala Yogas are formed respectively. As per sages
these yogas give fortune and usually give wealth, power,
health and kingly disposition. This learned astrologer
has observed Harsha cousing 6lh lord should be weak or
debilitated or in an enemy camp or aspected by malefic
to give auspicious results. In that case the native will
enjoy good health, will be wealthy, vanquish his enemies
easily and will be free from debt. Further the native will
command power, status and position in his lifetime. The
above learned author also believes Vipareeth Raja Yogas
are for better than Harsa, Sarala and Vimala Yogas.
Rationale behind is that evil lords are more powerful in
evil houses other than their own evil houses according to
Uttara Kalamrita and Phala Deepika. An evil lord in own
evil house has its connection with that particular house
only but when the evil lord is in other evil house, then the
connection is made with the evil houses which constitute
two yogas at a time. Deva keralam, a classical text in
Jyotisha (in 3 volumes translated by R. Santhanam) states
that when the dispositer of a debilitated planet is itself
debilitated a very powerful Raja yoga is formed. When the
yoga is formed through an evil lord, then the Raja yoga

will be highly auspicious, since the yoga brings three
potential yogas in its single capacity.
Dandapani Panda believes (TOA Oct 1996 P 23) that
the Vipareeta Raja Yogas are very powerful befitting the
present Kaliyuga. These yogas give upliftment at the
beginning of life and then setbacks engulf the native.
According to Prof. Bhattacharya weak 6th lord gives
freedom from disease, debt and enemy that tally with
Phaladeepika and Uttarkalamirita, but not in agreement
with Parasari Hora on face value. The author endorses the
same view of Prof. Bhattacharya.
Summary of Benefic Results From Trika Lords
1 . If the lord of lagna is stronger in nature, the enormity
of evils may be minimum stronger 8th lord then Lagna lord
produces many evils in life.
2. If the lagna lord is stronger than 6* lord, enemies will
be defeated.
3 . If 8th lord is veiy strong, one has ancestral properties,
and will live long. S4 lord should be weaker than the Lagna
lord.
4. For the 12"' lord, if lagna lord is very strong, the native
may be magnanimous in charities. Otherwise the native
may lose money in bad/unethical ways.
5. Should the dusthana lord happen to own another
house of benefic nature, malefic results may be absent.
Benefic aspect on them will reduce their evil effects. When
dusthanlords be posited in other dusthana house, only good
results may be expected.
6. Aspect of 8,h/6,h lord on the 10lh house may bring
scandal. But if thes? planets are placed in another malefic
house (6th lord in 3 or 12, 8,hlordin 6th/ 1 2,h) will lose Venom
and will not be harmful. This is the observation of the
author. (See Exps. 5 and 6)
7. Worst yoga would be when lords of Ist, 5Ih and the 9,h
are in bad houses like 3/6/8/orl2 especially in 6/8/12.
During the dasa of evilly posited lsl/5,h/ 9th lords, the native
will be ruined (by R. Lakhsmanan, AM Jan 1966 P 41)
8. Saturn - Rahu combination is worst and most baneful

combination. This combination is baneful even if Saturn is
a yogakaraka. This combination is not bad in 3rcl/6,h house.
Rahu, Saturn in the angle of 6th lord brings many set backs
in life, even the native visits jail. 6tl,/8tl7 12th lords in Leo
Lagna hemmed between malefics eliminated Rajeev
Gandhi in a tragic incident when he was passing Rahu -
Mercury dasa.
9. When there are many good yogas in a horoscope
(Gajakeshari yoga, Raj Yoga, Adhi Yoga etc) will mitigate
the evil effects of planets posited in Dusthanas.
10. 8'1' lord in 8th provides a poor career (See Exampoles
The dasa bhukti of trika planets (6/8/12) will give bad
results to the native. These are the general rules in astrology.
Of the three houses 8th is the worst malefic. The 6th house
signifies nature of ill health, debt, enemy, theft, mental
anguishu, misunderstanding, litigation, vicious habits
untimely meals, injuries etc. (P house becomes Upachaya
when it is occupied or aspected by a benefic. Under this
condition unexpected gains are stored in the 6th house,
sound finical position, no apprehension of losses through
theft and fire. The diseases which this house signifies are
swellings, insanity, boils, phlegm, consumption, heat,
surgical operations and urinary troubles, diseases affecting
the naval and stomach regions of the body.
The 8"' house signifies death, disease (Piles, ailing kidney)
defeat, dishonour, crime, calamity, tendency of murder,
degradation, accident, undisclosed affairs, house of
mystery, occult sciences, loss of money from debts, bad
news, being frightened, separation from friends. In the
positive side this house controls longevity, inheritances of
property, sudden gains, gifts, unearned or hidden wealth,
career, income from the present occupation, Mangalya (for
ladies), martial bond, gains to the father. The 12th house
signifies expenses, loss, poverty, pain, banishment,
imprisonments/secret enemies etc. certain positive aspects
like settlement in a foreign soil, (4th /12th lords relationships
makes the thing easier) bed comforts, good sleep mokshya
etc are also known from this house.

Chapter - II
Raja Yoga And The Evil Houses
Each and every inhabitant of the earth is different from
one another in feature, nature, characteristics with different
fate. Even twins are not similar. Some are born great, some
are ordinary, some are downtrodden, sometimes greatness
is thrust upon the native (for example Devgaura of
Karnataka became the Prime Minister of India through the
help of other politicians of the country). It proves that every
individual is born with different destiny pattern, which
guides a person throughout one's life. From the time
immemorial there is a big question mark, why, this is such
where his the way of knowing the secret of this universal
truth, and how will of this life would this riddle be
explained. Our seers and savants from early ages tried to
seek the right way of defining the various cycles of a person's
life. They performed this miracle throughout the study of
stars & planets, which is termed as astrology. There are
several yogas - good or evil which governs a person's life.
There are Raja Yogas which makes a person enjoy king
like fate, on the other hand a person having influences of
evil houses is deprived of all the delicacies of life. Several
Raja Yogas (such as Dharma Karmadhipati yoga) and
Dhana yogas (adhi yoga, Akhanda Samrajya yoga, Amala
yoga (unsullied benefic in the 1,0^ house) Maha yoga
(exchange between 1,2,4,5,7,10 and ll6), Parijata Yoga,
Mudrika Yoga, Parcha Mahapurush Yogas, Vasumati Yoga,

Gaja Keshri Yoga, Lakshmi Yoga, Vipareeth Raja Yogas
etc) indicate high status in life. Raja Yogas as advocated
by sage Parasar occurs when lords of quadrants unite with
trine lords. Without Raja Yogas it is very difficult to
maintain financial solvency throughout life. An ordinary
horoscope is one, which does not have any class one Dhana
Yogas or Raja Yogas. The trines (1,5,9) are the abodes of
goddess Laxmi while the quadrants (1,4,7,10) are abodes
of lord Vishu. The mere Union of these lords produce a
class one Raja Yoga. It has been observed that people, who
are earning above rupees 1 lakh per month in 2006, are
owner of several Raja Yogas and Dhana Yogas. Without
grace of God everything evaporates in air. Money earned
during Rahu Mahadasa evaporates in air. Saturn - Venus,
Venus - Saturn Jupiter - Venus, Rahu - Saturn, Mars -
Rahu, Rahu - Mars dasa are bad for everybody on this
planet irrespective of Lagna. During Rahu - Mars dasa
one experiences extreme difficulty in the financial fronts.
For a good fortune 9th house/9'1' lord should be strong. One
"benefic in the 10* house will give guarantee of a happy
life. Exchange of 2lu1/ 11 lords and strong Lagna and its
lord assure glorious life. An ascendant is deemd strong
when it is aspected by benefics and Yogakarkas. Well
placed lord oflagna in a friend's house, aspected by benefics
assures financial solvency. Lord of lagna in an enemy
camp, aspected by other malefics brings setbacks in life.
Kal Sarpa Yoga, Kemadruma Yoga, Sakata Yoga (Moon in
6/8/12 from Jupiter - cycle of prosperity and adversity,
poverty stubborn, hated misery etc. Cancelled if Moon is
an angle from Lagna) etc. are the very inauspicious yogas
which bring set backs in life (loss ofjob, poverty, illness,
imprisonment, litigations and court cases, quarrels with
neighbours etc). For details of Dhana Yogas, Raja Yogas
setback period identification please read Fortune &
Finance, by Dr. S.S. Chatterjee. When Saturn and 8* lord
are strong one comes up in life. When Pancha Mahapurush
Yoga forming planet is debilitated in Navamsa, this yoga
will yield futile results. 2/3 planets debilitated in Navamsa

robs the merit of the horoscope. When at least one planet
is exalted or occupy own house in navamsa, the native
does well in life. One must examine Navamsa for
determining the strength of planets forming these Dhana
Yogas and Raja Yogas.
Jupiter and Sun are the significators of 9lh house. God
writes sad episodes about a person whose Jupiter is found
weak in a horoscope. When Lagna and its lord are strong,
we have rich persons. When Lagna, lorgalord and Moon
(it is a SampatKaraka planet) are strong we have very rich
persons. When Lagna, Lagnalord, Sun and Moon are strong,
and Jupiter occupies, a Kendra, we have the case of very
very rich persons. Benefics in kendras/Trikonas increase
the intrinsic strength of the horoscope. Malefics in Kendras
make the person suffer in every respect of life. When 6'h/
8,h/12,h houses are afflicted one does not live long and he is
a badly motivated person.
It is very important to realize that no two same Raja Yogas
would produce same results for different natives. Their
effects are modified vastly by their involvement in various
signs, their dilution factors in Navamsa and Dasamsa,
aspects from various evil orbenefic planets. The Raja Yogas
which form in the 8"' house or get influenced by the 8"'
lord acquires the qualities of the 8"1 house. These qualities
include suddenness, unexpectedness, obstacles, intrigues
and in extremely afflicted cases, death.
Chart - 7 : Horoscope of Lalbahadur Sastri DOB
9.10.1904, 11:51 hrs, Allahabad
If 9th, 10 & II11', houses are occupied by planets, such a
native may come up in life from an ordinary background.
Through sheer dint of labour, honesty and sincerity, he
acquired proximity to the portals of power and became a
minister in the central government. In Saturn - Jupiter dasa
(February 1962 to August 1964), quite suddenly and
unexpectedly he was chosen to be the Prime Minister of
India following the sudden demise of Jahwarlal Nehru. Both
Jupiter and Saturn were retrograde, instilling a further
element of uncertainty and suddenness. Dasa of a

Example No.7
Date 09/10/1904 Tim* 11:51:00 Day Sunday Lat 25.27:00 North Long 81:50:00 East
Zone 81:50:00 East SrISanatan Ayanamsa 22 16:01
Balance of Dasa : Mars 6 Years 8 Months 25 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit'Cuspal
malefic planet. Only Dharma Karmadhipati Yoga in the
10th house with 8th lord allowed to occupy the chair of the
Prime Minister through suddenness and death, because this
yoga is conjoined with the 8,h lord ruler of death. This raja
yoga in the Id*1 allowed him to function as the leader of the
country. Mercury is the badhaka lord. It is debilitated is
Navamsa and is further conjoined with the badhaka lord of
the Naramsa chart. 8"' had moor ' .etowed power to mercury
to kill him silently in a foreign land. Dasa of any planet in

relation to 8th lord is highly dangerous . Mercury - Mercury
dasa killed him suddenly in Tashkent in Russia where he
went for negotiation with Ayub Khan of Pakistan over the
fate of Indo-Pakistan war in 1965.
Wliy he died in end of 1966?
The author invented the death formula in 1990 and
published his findings in his famous book, "cosmic
influences on mind & IQ" in 1992. Lagna - 8S- 9-37, Sun
all these we get his death point at 9s 0-36. Death occurs
when this death point is aspected by Saturn in transit. Dasa
should a markesh / badhakalord. On 21-12-1966, Saturn
entered Pisces and started aspecting his death point. All
political leaders of this earth should know his death point
and probably time of death through the magic eyes of vedic
astrology. So whenever a Raja Yoga is destroyed by a
Yogavanga planet (2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12 lord) one should be
careful about a sad incident in life. If the dispositor of the
lagna lord is a malefic and occupies quandant / trine, the
native faces insurmountable resistances in life. His dispositor
a of Lagna lord is Mars (a killer planet) is further afflicted
by Rahu in his 9"' house. Foreign countries are denoted by
9lh house. One suffers in foreign land, when 9th house is
afflicted. So we are not surprised to observe his sudden death
in Russia. Dasa of two Kendra lords always generate peculiar
results.

Chapter - III
Astrologers & The 8th House
It has been observed by the astrologers of the modem
times that there is a great influence of the 8lh house or the
8"' lord on the profession of astrology besides 5111 house or
houses of intelligence. The 8* house is called "Guhya" or
the secret place. Thus it is obvious that in order to dive
deep into the secret vistas of the future and past of an
individual or an event, there should be some intimate
connection between the 8th and 10L'1 houses (all the
professions are controlled from the 10,hhouse). Further the
8,h house, stands opposite to 2nd house, so that any planet
placed there has a direct influence on the 2nd, the house
ruling "Vak" or speech. The Ascendant generally
represents the whole life of a native including profession
and interests. The karaka planets for astrology are Mercury
and Jupiter. Rahu and Venus are the occult planets (Demon
God is the Venus, his disciple is Rahu. Where Venus or Rahu
are bn the constellations of Rahu or Venus, their dasas
generally bring prosperity in life), a Yogi (spiritually elevated
man) can become a Trikalagga (who knows present past
and future of any body), but for an astrologer it is really
very difficult to become Trikalagga. Strong Sun, Saturn,
Moon, Jupiter and Ketu can make a man Vaksiddha or
Trikalagya whereas anybody can become a good astrologer,
when his Mercury, Jupiter, Saturn and Ketu are strong.
An Astrologer fails to link the past lives of an individual,
but a yogi can tell the past lives (reincarnation theory is

valid, as far the knowledge of theauthor), present life and
future life of an individual (from the 11"' house one can
assess the future life, from 10'", the present life, from 9"'
the previous life, death ofthepresent life from the 8"' house).
8th house of the zodiac is the Scorpio. When anybody
has Rahu, Venus or Jupiter in Scorpio (aspect or their
presence) or they are located in the 8'1' house of Janma
Lagna or Chandra Lagna, one becomes a genius astrologer.
Dr. B.V. Raman (the father of modern India Vedic Astrology)
had Jupiter in Scorpio (example - 8) Prof. B. Suryanarain
Rao has Venus in the 8'11 house of Janma Lagna, Taurus.
His 10,hlord Saturn and 2^* lord Mercury exchanged places
and that shows the native was a Vakgjeevi (one with
oratorical powers). N.C. Lahari, who developed modern
Ephemeris in 1956, under the guidelines of the
internationally famous scientist Meghnad Saha has Venus
in Scorpio, 8"' house from natal Moon hr Aries. 11 '''lord in
3rj made him Vaksiddha Astrologer. Rahu in the 2"d house,
provided him impetus to study astrology deeply. He was
Gold Medallist of Calcutta University in Mathematics in
his M.Sc. examination. In those days only Semi-learned
persons used to practice astrology. Learned persons and
intellectuals jumped into the arena of astrology from 1984
onwards.
What Astrology Can Offer To The Society
An astrologer is.a person who can guide a person in his
bad times. He acts as a mentor to the society. Sky is
represented by the 10,hhouse (any planet close to meridian
behaves wonderfully and lifts him to a dizzy height). 10th
of 5* lord is 2"d. So therefore in order to. master this divine
science one should have relationships between 2nd and 10"'
lords. N.C. Lahiri had 10'" lord in lagna and his 2nd lord
was placed in the 2Iui house from 10'" house i.e. in the 11 11
house.
Astrology deals with stars, planets, purvapunya
(represented by 5l,'/9'h houses), destiny pattern (9111 lord
and its dispositor), Karma Theory, curses in life for various
reasons, windfalls in someone's currency of life, marriage,

marital bond, prosperity of children, childlessness,
amount of name and fame (must have strong Moon,
strong 1 0th lord, strong Lagna lord aspected by benefics,
strong Sun) type of diseases that one will suffer (6Ul / 8th /
12th houses of thehoroscope), longevity, death, possibility
of occupying a very high chair in this life. In a nutshell,
we can claim it covers those compartments of life, which
present day scientists/doctors are unable to answer.
Astrological study is similar to the study ofmedicine. Only
in the case of astrology the variations in the application
of astrological principles are many more. This makes
daunting thejob of an astrologer. Only a strictly scientific
study with perseverance and sincerity can yield results.
There happen to be no short cuts. A dedicated astrologer
is capable of throwing bright light in somebody's life and
can possibly help the native to overcome his impending
dooms. Darkdays and hay days of life can easily be
forecast. It is also possible to know the quantum of
happiness/unhappiness in life. (God only writes sad
episodes about a person whose Jupiter is weak in a
horoscope. Aspect of 6lh lord on Jupiter is a grisly
combination and is to be feared). When Saturn is weak in
a horoscope or lord of Lagna occupies a malefic house
aspected by other malefics bring untold amount of
sufferings in life. The author has examined V2 million
horoscopes from the various sections of the society
throughout the globe (he stayed in USA in 1990 for four
months and had the opportunity to examine the
horoscopes of Latin Americans, Mexican, Chinese,
Japanese, Indians, West Indians, Africans, Europeans,
Canadians etc. He narrated his experience in USA in his
first book, Cosmic Influences on Mind & I Q in 1992).
If majority of planets occupy 6th /8'1'/ 12th house - the
native is far below the everage of 1IT standard and these
people shine in a field where intelligent boys of modern
India (in 2006) will like to avoid. Amitabha Bachan
flourished in film lines. He has several planets in the 8th

house. Everybody knows that he was never a good
student. Acharya Rajaneesh flourished in life by
propagating the sex-enjoyment ideas (governed by the
S41 house) to foreigners. He had also several planets in the
8th house. C.N. Annadurai, Ex-Chief Minister of
Tamilnadu had majority of planets in 6th /8’1' / 1 2th houses .
He used scheduled cast/Brahmin theory for his
sensational rise in life. Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, who
become the Vice-chancellor of Kolkata University at the
age of 30 (son of Bengal Tiger Sir Ashutosh Mukherjee)
died while he was very young because he had retrograde
Jupiter and retrograde Saturn in 8th house in Sagittarius.
A retrograde planet in 8lil invariably curtails the longevity.
Those who have afflicted 4,h/7lh houses, they lose the chair.
This aphorism is as true as the Sun rises in the east. Aspect
of Saturn on Moon and Sun curtails longevity. M.C.
Bhandari died in the early nineties (he was a famous
Charted accountant and promoter of astrological science)
because his Sun and Moon were aspected by Saturn.
When 3/6/9/12,h houses from Moon or Janma Lagna are
afflicted, the native suffers from old age travails.
These thousands of golden subtle rules provide a third
eye to the astrologer in India. Those who score 80% or
above in his XII examination, the author recognises them
as bright students. An ordinary astrologer will fail to
remember the thousands of astrological slokas at the time
of examination of a horoscope. A brilliant astrologer with
higher IQ value (read cosmic influences on mind & IQ by
Dr. S.S. Chatterjee) will study the map of heavens with
much better skills. So it is the intelligence level of the
astrologer which decides his astrological skill. The unlucky
person should also examine the academic achievements
of an astrologer, before approaching him for solutions to
his problems. Many astrologers with beard, and sandal
markings on their foreheads posing supernatural powers
are actually fake astrologers of India. They use tantra,
mantra and yantra for the solutions of problems and

charge an abnormal fee to their clients. Even a fake
astrologer with no academic background claims his
superiority in astrological lines. The author believes no
astrologer has super natural power. Only rajorsharped
intelligence and intuitive powers (sixth sense) can a make
one a successful astrologer. The author requests the IlTians
to study astrology for the rapid development of his
neglected branch of science. He is very glad to see a book
written by an HTian Prash Trivedi on Rahu Ketu.
People seek help from the divine science of astrology
when they are in suspense and distress and haunted by
the uncertainties in life (Rahu - Mars, Mars - Rahu,
Saturn - Venus, Venus - Saturn, Rahu - Mercury, Mercury
- Rahu, dasas of 6,h/8,l,/12'h lords, dasa of a planet
posited in the close proximity of the 11'" lord, dasa of
planets aspected by 8lh lord is very dangerous. Dasa of a
planet hemmed between malefics, Venus - Jupiter dasa
or Jupiter - Venus dasa, dasa of a combusted planet, dasa
ofplanet either in 30° or in 0° and so on). Dasa of a planet
debilitated other than Saturn in Navamsa will invariably
hurt the apple cart of the native). They not only want to
know about the duration and end result of the uncertainly
but also seek to redressal as well. Help seekers are from
all walks of life, crossing the barrier of caste, creed and
religion. Though this divine science was used by Indians
since times immemorial, it is not concerned with Hinduism
or for that matter any other religion. As the Sun gives
light and energy to one and all across the world so is its
influence is based on the position of plates drawn for a
person at the time of his/her birth. A man is troubled by
ill health, disputes, hospitalization, punishment by the
state, enmity, loss of job, quarrels with relatives, accidents,
greed for more money, anxiety forgoing abroad for seeking
more money, etc. Ajob change takes in the antardasa of
the 6"' lord or in the antardasa of a planet placed in the
6"' house. Accidents/hospitalization etc are the job of 8"7
I2,hhous es. 9,h/12’h hoses govern foreign travel. Based on

the simple techniques, not only the divine science can
foretell the incidence of the difficult times and the areas of
difficulties, but it can also suggest ways and means to
reduce the impact of the difficulties in a large extent. One
ends the cycle of difficulties when Jupiter in transit aspects
at his 6th house, Sun, Moon, 9th lord, lO'Mord or dasa/
antardasa lords. When Saturn is placed in the 4l!,/8lh from
Moon or near the vicinity of Moon in transit, the native
usually suffers in life. Dasa antardasa also increases or
decreases his amount of sufferings. A well versed astrologer
can really help a native to overcome his problems of life.
Enough research has been carried out and may wonderful
books written by well versed astrologers are available in
the market. Strong Moon is a blessings of God. An astrologer
has to shoulder a great moral responsibility because the
client has to base his important decisions on the astrologer's
advice. If the astrologer renders half baked advice, an
industrialist - may have to incur heavy losses due to wrong
investment. Successful prediction rests upon three factors,
viz a good command over astrology and palmistry, the luck
factor in the horoscope of the astrologer and the intuitive
capacity with which some is inborn and with others,
acquired by a certain disciplined and moral life.
Yogas For Astrologers
1 . The influence of Rahu/J up iter in the 2"l! house and
10th house.
2. Exchange of lords of 2nd and it),h
3. Presence of Mercury in Kendras particularly in the
10th house
4. Sun in the 5 th
5. Budhaditya yoga in 2lld/or5d' houses.
6. 8th house of Moon, Lagna should have influence of
Venus, Rahu or Jupiter.
7. Scorpio should have aspect or contact of Jupiter,
Venus or Rahu.
house/8"1 lord plays a major role in achieving
proficiency in astrology.

Example No.8
Date 08/08/1912 Time 19 36.00 Oay Thursday Lat 13 00 00 North Long 77:35:00 East
' Zone 82:3000 East Sri Sanatan Ayenamsa 22:22 34
Balance of Oasa : Mars 6 Years 8 Months 18 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
Example - 8 Horoscope of Dr. B.V Raman, the
father of modern Indian astrology. DOB - 8.8.1912 at
19 hr 36m at Banglore
The presence of Rahu ill 2nd and Jupiter in Scorpio
identical with his 10* house should be noted. 8th lord
Mercury joins 10,hlord Mars in the 7th along with Venus
and aspects the ascendant. His 2nd lord Jupiter is
powerfully aspected by 10th lord Mars. From the
Chandra Lagna also, the 10th lord Saturn is aspected
by a powerful Vargoltam 8th lord Jupiter. He died in

Example - 9 Horoscope of famous astrologer of
West, Alan Leo. DOB 7.8.1860 at 6 hrs at GMT
Birth chart - Leo Lagna, Saturn; Sagittarius - Mars
(R), Capricorn - Rahu; Pisces - Moon; Gemini -
Venus (R), Cancer - Ketu, Jup, Sun.
Scorpio is aspected by Jupiter (8th house of
Zodiac), the 10th lord Venus is in the asterism of
the 8th lord Jupiter. There is a conjunction of 8th
lord with lord of Lagna. From Moon Sign (Chandra
Lagna), 10"' is aspected by 8lh lord Venus.
Example Mo:9
Date 07/08/1880 Tlma07:00.00 Day Tuesday Lat51:13:00 Nonh Long -2 12.00 West
Zone 0 00:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 21:39:02
Balance of Dasa : Mercury 7 Years 3 Months 26 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

Example - 10 Dr. Gopendu Mukherjee of West Bengal
DOB 23.10.1946 at 11=50 PM, Hooghly
He is a triple MA, Ph.D. D.Lit from Kolkata University.
He is a master in the field of music, astrology , literature,
veda and ancient literature and scriptures. His Scorpio is
occupied by Venus. From Chandra Lagna his 8th lord Mars
and I0h lord Mercury have joined together in Libra, the
house of 2nJ lord Venus. There is an indirect connection
between 2nd/ 10th lords. His 2nd lord Sun and 10th lord Mars
have joined in Libra with Mercury and Jupiter. 4lh lord
Venus has exchanged places with 5th lord Venus. This is
a class I Raja Yoga. Conjunction of Jupiter-Mercury -
Example No. 10
Data 23/10/1946 Tima 23:50:00 Day Wednesday Lat 22:54:00 North Long 68:24:00 East
Zona 82:30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:51:13
Balance of Dasa : Moon 0 Years 8 Months 11 Pays
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chaiit-Cuspal

Sun and Yogakaraka Mars in 4lh made him an
intellectual genius and an astrologer.
Example- 11 Horoscope of Late K. Kelkar Shridhar.
Prof. Kelkar has written many research articles in the
field of astrology. The presence of Rahu in 10th along
with 10th lord Moon aspected by 51’ lord Saturn from
the Ascendant may be noted. From the Moon sign, the
8th lord Saturn who is exalted in the 4th aspects
tii
powerfully the 10 house, and also the ascendant.
Besides, 10th lord Mars also aspects the 8th lord Saturn.
11* lord in 3rd made him a rajor sharped intelligent man.
Example No. 11
Dale 1 1/01/1925 TimeOI 1800 Oay Sunday Lat 1:52 00 North Long 74 34 00 East
Zona 82:3000 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:32:58
Balance QfDasa : Saturn 16 Years 3 Months 9 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

Example No. 12
Date 28/06/1933 Time 09:00:00 Day Wednesday Lat 25:37:00 North Long 85:12:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sr) Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:40:03
Balance of Dasa : Ketu 1 Years 7 Months 25 Days
Planets
Ntrayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
Example -12 Horoscope ofKJC Pathak.(DOB 28.6.1933
at 9 AM, ■ Patna
He is a retired Civil servant of State Govt, of Bihar.
His 2nd lord Mercury and lOtrhlord Venus have conjoined
in Cancer. Venus and Saturn (2nd lord of the Zodiac and
the 10* lord of the Zodiac) are exchanging aspects. 8th
lord Jupiter from both Janma Lagna and Chandra lagna
is posited in Lagna. He has written many wonderful
articles in Various astrological magazines between 1975
- 2006, he has a mighty pen and is flooding all the
astrological magazines with his magnificent creations
in both Hindi - as well in English. He has written many
books in astrology (more than 30).

Example No. 13
Date 17/01/1954 Time 16 35 00 Day Sunday Lat 27 00:00 North Long 78:58:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:57:16
Balance of Dasa : Rahu 8 Years 4 Months 14 Days
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspai
Example - 13 Horoscope of Daya Shanker, IRS.; Hony.
Consultant Editor of The Times of Astrology.
DOB 17.1.1954 at 4=35 PM, Karhal Birth chart - Gemini
Lagna, Moon; Cancer - Ketu, Indu Lagna, Libra - Saturn,
Mars; Capricorn - Sun, Mercury, Venus, Rahu, Mercury,
Sun; Taurus - Jupiter.
With the blessing of Swami Sanatan Sree of Lucknow
from the age of 21 he is doing very well in life. He is a
Bureaucrat holding a very high chair of the Govt, of India
in Mumbai since 2005. Exchange of Saturn and Venus,
aspect of divine Jupiter in Scorpio, Jupiter in the 12th house

opened the gate of spiritualism, astrology when he was
hardly 21 yrs old. He is an M.Sc. (Pure Mathematics) from
Allahabad University and is an expert in all branches of
Astrology including Mundane Astrology. After the death
of R. Santhanam - his wife Smt. Rajeshwari Shanker
acquired legal rights to continue the prestigious magazine,
The Times of Astrology from Dec. 1997 in New Delhi that
has become now the numero uno in the field of Indian
Magazines of astrology, especially with the closure of the
publication of AM. He has organized many astrological free
consultation camps and conferences on many important
astrological issues in various states, where hundreds of
intelligent astrologers of modem India assisted him to serve
the public. His more than 100 predictions published well
in advance purely on astrological principles have come truetill now that include Carnage in Nepal, Attack on America,
Attack on Indian Parliament (2001), Millitary Rule in
Pakistan (1999), Emergency in Pakistan, assassination in
Pakistan (2007), A Dark Horse (Dr. Manmohan Singh)
Leading India (2004) etc. and Heavenly Departure of His
Holiness Parmacharya of Kaanchipuram (1994) which
bestowed Nostradamous Award for 1994 from his holiness
swami Jayendra Saraswati of Kaanchipuram on 5lh
September, 1995. He is trying hard to prove that astrology
is indeed a branch of science. In any seminar, we find him
in the company of many saints of India apart from the
hordes of Astrologers and Scholars. He has edited and got
published 50/60 books in Hindi/English in the field of
spiritualism and Astrology written by eminent astrologers.
Very learned astrologers of India look for his blessings for
the publication of their books from Nishkaam Peeth
Publication owned by Smt. Rajeshwari Shanker, his
illustrious wife. He is a very soft spoken person, and is
capable of bringing big personalities in his astrological
camps. The author was present in Delhi, Patiala and
Lucknow astrological camps in since 1998. He has written
a book on mundane astrology entitled "Sharing With
Paaraashar" alongwith his wife in 2005. Exchange of 8th

lord Saturn with 5lh lord Venus deeply pulled him in the
ocean of astrology. So the role of 8th lord in astrology can
easily be understood.
Example - 14 ; Horoscope of Dr. S.S. Chatterjee, DOB
14.10.1941, at 2=54 hrs Beagle Time at Kolkata.
Author studied in Beranas Hindu University, a spiritual
environment there, dept of astrology at BHU, Lord
Sankatmochan at Lanka near BHU gate provided him an
impetus in learning astrology. He took his Ph.D degree in
electro-chemistry in 1968 worked as a Post doctoral fellow
in USA, West and East Germany. Being invited by the
Example No. 14
Date 14/10/1941 Tim® 13 54 00 Day Tuesday Lat 22:30 00 North Long 88:20.00 East
Zon® 88.20:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22'47'00
Balance of Dasa : Saturn 13 Years 9 Months 29 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

American Federation of Astrologers, he delivered invaluable
and noteworthy lectures in Astrology and Palmistry in
Orlando, Florida in July 1990. He stayed for 4 months with
his friend in Long Island, and had the opportunity to cross
examine the horoscopes of global people. With his
American Experience, he published his first book, "Cosmic
Influence on Mind & IQ" in 1992, where he has published
a unique mathematical formula for determining the
moment of death of any individual. This formula has
proved beyond doubt that astrology is also is a science,
otherwise all the deaths could not have occurred in
compliance with the formula. His 2nd lord Saturn and 10th
lord Venus are exchanging aspects. 8111 lord is posited in 9'h
(8'Mord = occult matter, 9* =deep understandings), whose
dispositer is 10th, whose dispositer is ll*1 provided a
interlink between 8-9-10-1 1-2-1-3-12 lords. 11*
lord in 3rd provided him rajor sharp intelligence, and
Vaksiddhi in Astrology. Scorpio Rasi is aspected by Jupiter,
where Venus is situated. Strong 3rd lord is 5th with Lagnesh
aspected by the 5th / 10h lord Venus provided him guidelines
tor writing many magnificent research articles in the field
of divine science, astrology. This is the 7lh book from the
th th
author's pen. 8 lord when is placed in 9 and is strong
Navamsa, he can foresee the things. His 8' lord is a
Vargottom planet.

Chapter - IV
8th House And Longevity
Settling down in a family life in a traditional way, the
desire to have a long life enough to enjoy it is human nature.
The 8th house is the house of longevity. It is for this reason
that his house is examined for disease flee life. An afflicted
8"' house or lord is a major factor in predicting about fatal
events of life. If the Lagna lord is in the 12thhouse and the
12th lord is in Lagna conjoined with or aspected by a
maraka it causes min and death.
Death is not totally bad. Arthur Guiterman in Betel Nuts
has written
When life is woe,
And hope is dumb,
The world says, "Go!"
The Grave says, "Come!"
Lord Buddha has said, Life is ajourney. Death is a return
to the earth. The universe is like in inn. The passing years
are like dust.
Poet Milton has written, "Death is the golden key that
opens the palace of eternity. Our sages have written,
cnwifa ziwt iWro ■>je°rifrT RTis’rof&r i
rWT tnfmf&i ftFR <^ti i
A man casts off clothes and wears new ones in the
same way the soul leaves its old physical frame, and
enters new ones.
It is a very very difficult task for an astrologer to come

to a pertinent conclusion about the death of any individual.
According to Parasara Samhita it is however possible to
obtain a fust hand impression about the span of life of a
native from his horoscope through a careful study of the
nature of signs (cardinal, fixed and mutable) occupied by
his ascendant and the 8th are placed in cardinal sign - the
Man is supposed to play a long innings of life for details
see table - 1 .
Table- 1 Predicting Longevity at a glance
Category Nature of singes occupied by the
Benefic planets in Kendras assure long life to the native.
8'1' lord in Kendra grants short life. A powerful and
unblemished ascendant lord in a quadrant or a trine confers
long life on the native. Birth at night with powerful moon
will also bless the native with a long life. Thirdly, for a long
life the ascendant lord must be stronger than the 8th lord.
8,h lord if a natural malefic, it cut short one’s life in the 1 1"
house. 611 / 12’1' placement of 8lh lord is not good for
longevity, when it is associated with other benefics 8th lord
gains immense strength in 6* / 12'*1 houses when posited
alone (see example 6)

Barring the moon, natural benefics in the 8th generally
have been observed to exercise favourable influence on
longevity. Bhattanarayan speaks highly of mercury in the
8th house. If a man is credited with mercury in the 8* house
of his birth chart, so he says in the ChamatChintamani, he
will live 100 yrs. Yagneswar in his Kundali Kalpataru has
admitted that Venus in the 8* house despite its adverse effects
on other aspects of life nevertheless positively contributes to
longevity. It is surprising that both the authors have remained
silent on the effect of Jupiter in the 8th house on the longevity
of the naive. If ascendant lord and the dispositor of Moon
are enemies, there is a danger to Life
One easy method in assessing the longevity is to find out
the house occupied by 8*, I2'J1, and ascendant lords. The
more planets in the fixed sign indicate short life, if they are
in both fixed and movable signs indicate medium life. Apart
fom life span, 8th house also indicates diseases accidents,
calamities, and legal tangles, on the positive side legacies,
inherited property, gratuity, bonus, dowry etc. On medical
side it respects genetic organs, blader in males and uterus in
females' i.e. entire pelvic region and its condition is examined
through 8* house. As 8th house is considered bad, 8* lord is
also dreaded for which every house he aspects or occupies,
house results are ruined. On account of very reason 8th lord
in 8* provides a poor career (See examples. 22333255) 8th
also indicates sudden riches by lottery or prize, for instance
Uranus when aspected by the 8* lord favours sudden wealth.
In female charts, 8Ul represents husband's life span. While
selecting a muhurthas for any auspicious function or events,
8th house is kept vacant as a rule.
8th lord should never be retrograde. Retrograde 8th lord
brings painful financial setbacks in life, while Rahu passes
over this malefic planet in transit. A retrograde 8lh lord
curtails longevity also. Karaka for S'11 house is Saturn. His
presence in 8* or aspects on 8th ensures longevity but
sufferings will be there. This aphorism is 100% true to the
knowledge of the author.
A malefic 8th lord in 11* cuts short life. Jupiter in 8*

ensures good name and popularity. A disease coming out
during 8* lords' major period becomes chronic. If 8th lord
is afflicted by malefic, there will operations (surgical) at
pelvic region. If Rahu Saturn are in 8th, death will be after
prolonged illness and suffering. During the dasa of strong
8th lord, one can expect repaying of debts. Exchange of Tn
/ 8* or 8th / 9th lords is a Daridra Yoga (poverty), ups and
downs in life. However luminaries are exempted from this
exchange results. 8th lord in 5th makes one tell lies, cheating
habits, children will suffer, however benefic aspects will
help to some extent.
In some rare cases 2,ld lord in 8A brings fortunes through
partner. 12th lord in 8* gives riches through unexpected
sources. In female charts, malefics in 8* makes her lethargic,
dirty and quarrelsome. If Sun is in 8th/ eye problems, urinary
infections, general health conditions suffer. By Moon in 8*,
one lacks self confidence, eyesight suffers, in female chart
menses trouble are indicated. Mars in 8th indicates
accidents, surgical operations, mental phobia, misbehaves
with his own children (8 * is 4’,h from 5lh), uses children as
servants, and in female chart Mars in 8,h is dreadest. In
such a case widowhood or divorce occurs. A similar
affliction in sensitive houses (2nd, 4lh, 7th, 8th or 12th) of the
male partner should be there.
Mercury in 8th is good for prosperity (should be
vargottom or well placed in Navamsa), on health side there
will be nervous problems, in extreme cases paralysis. Venus
in 8* brings sugar complaints in blood, weak sex power,
diseases of urethra / bladder, etc. however financial matters
will be good. Jupiter is harmless in 8th, good for longevity
(but retrograde Jupiter is bad) though jaundice and
insomania are indicated. Saturn in 8* gives longevity but
prolonged illness, paralysis, cancer and other sure worst
diseases, are sure indications. Rahu in S1-11 gives intestinal
worms, piles etc. and in a female chart widowhood is to
be expected. Ketu. in 8lh provides problematic life,
accidents, ulcers, genetic organ problems, etc. So any planet
in 8th is not considered good for health and peaceful life.
For a scandal free life 8th / 12th houses should be vacant.

As per Maharshi Parasar 8Lh lord turnout to be harmless
if he own the lagna in Aries, Scorpio, Taurus and Libra (for
Aires and Taurus, there is no 8* lord blemishes). For Taurus
Jupiter will be placed in the enemy camp, hence will lose
venom, and so is the case of 8th lord Mercury in Scoprio. A
8th lord in a every camp or in bad houses (3, 6, 8, 12) is not
veiy harmful. Venus is Pisces Lagna also behav well. But a
8<h lord in lagna brings matrimonial disharmony and 60%
cases arranges two marriages. 8th lord in Lagna provides
thievish and an indication for the stunted life for the native.
8’Jl lord is a highly malefic planet, and hence will provide
bad ideas to the native. He will be highly sensitive.
8th lord in different houses.
8th lord in lagna, if associated with a combust planet or
eclipsed planet, will produce balarista and one will die
before 12 yrs. of age. Even if lagna lord is debilitated in 8th
house, it is not considered to be good, one may have stunted
life. If the 8* lord in lagna is well aspected, well associated
one will have peaceful life. 8th lord in presence of malefics
does not behave well with the native. A native becomes a
class I cheater when his 8* house is highly afflicted, even in
its own house. The Moon with malefics like Rahu in 5th /
gh / 12th promotes the tendency to be always scurrilous.
Theft or Robbery Yoga : A marbid compulsion to theft or
robbery is included when lords of 12 or 4 is posited in 3rd or
8th lord in 2nd.
8’h lord in 2nd will produce teeth problems and eye diseases,
family affairs will not be harmonious and always be in need
of money. Sri Jahwarlal Nehru had 8lh lord in 2nd
Dharmakarmadhipati and other good yogas neutralized the
evil effects. So in a bad horoscope (whose does not have any
Raja Yoga) evil lords produce the worst results. In some cases
2nd lord in 8th brings fortune through partners. 8th lord in 3rd
- misunderstanding with coboms, creditors will be pestering
in same case, ear problems will come out. 8^ lord in 4lh -
one will earn horn land and land associated matters. It gives
inclination to study and riches provided 8th lord is posited
in a friend's house, unmanageable service conditions will

suffer. In 5* house - children's affairs will suffer. 5th house
deals with Mantras, Tantras etc. why Dayashankar IRS took
astrology as his passion? (see chart 13). 5* house is ldh house
from 8*. So exchange of 5th/8lh lords in the case of Daya
Shanker, IRS provided him the idea not to allow The Tunes
of Astrology die, after the sudden and unexpected departure
of the great soul Late R. Santhanam who will remain the
source of inspiration to all astrologers for his original and
magnificent contributions. Spitutial soul of Daya Shanker
under the subtle and hidden guidance of great exalted souls
including Swami Sanatan Sree of Lucknow got a message
from heaven to do massive work for the development of
this neglected branch of science. He is looking after the
technical part of editing and publishing of The Times of
Astrology Magazine from December 1997 and helped her
wife Smt. Rajeshwari Shanker as a publisher to have
published more than 50 rare books on astrology and
spiritualisum. He is a great astrologer, with nostardamus
award 1994 from Express Star Teller, Chennai. Saturn and
Jupiter are the only two spritual planets. Exalted Saturn in
his 5th house and Retrograde Jupiter in the 12* house
flourished spiritualism. 12ft house of the Zodiac is Pisces.
Venus or Jupiter in this house opens the gate of spiritualism
very easily. Anybody gets help from heaven when Jupiter is
placed in the 12lh house because it aspects 4lh and 8th houses.
4"' - 8* - 12* is the mokshya trikona.
Rajeev Gandhi became Prime Minister after the death
of his mother. Since his Raja Yogas had the contact of 8*
lord Jupiter, he attained high position after the death of
his mother. When Raja Yogas from in the 8* house or get
influenced by 8* lord, acquire the qualities of 8* house. In
6th house - collision with low class people. The gentleman
of chart 6 had to fight very hard against low class people
and his evil minded cousins. He is a genius person. However
his finance's will not suffer. 8* lord in 6* accelerates cheating
and theft. Health problems are there. In 7* - family life is
affected, for Libra Lagna Venus and Mars will make the
female native very sensuous. In a female horoscope it could

mean separation from her husband, while in a male's
horoscope it could mean that the income of the spouse could
be affected. 8* lord in 8* - is good for longevity only and
other factors like family, finance suffer. 1 have seen a case
where 8th lord is in 8" afflicted by malefics. He is a very
rich person but cheating is his hobby. He is very unhappy
soul in real life. It also brings setbacks in life even
bankruptcy career suffers (example - 22, 35, 52,55) 8* lord
in 9th - the author (chart - 14) has 8* lord in 9th. His father
died while he was 3V5 yrs. old. They become materially
comfortable 8th lord in 9"‘ house indicates that the person
will be having intuitive powers and will be able to fore see
things. This planetary configuration converted a genuine
scientist to an astrologer in the early eighties (chart - 14).
8th lord in 10'1' - he struggles in career. If Saturn also aspects
this house he will remain poor throughout his life. His
morale will go down to any level and he stoops down to
gain ends. 8m lord in 1L* - it will be very difficult to earn
money. It causes ear problems and also trouble around
generative organs. For Taurus Lagna if 8* lord is placed in
Pisces it will not have any malefic influence. He will get help
from elders in overcoming his problem in life. Actually a
benefic in 11* (6* to 6*) saves a man from many litigations
in life. A native is usually a lucky person whenhehas a benefic
in 11*. 8* lord in 12* inferiority complexes regarding sex
matters, loss of sleep, while finances will not be affected. If
Rahu and Jupiter is there, it will lead to unexpected
expenditure and pecuniary losses. 8* lord or a malefic in the
12th house of Sun produces insomnia.
Paradoxically 8!h house is involved in formation of Adhi
Yoga i.e. when the best benefics Jupiter, Venus and Mercury
occupy the 6*/7*/8* house individually from Moon or
Lagna above yoga is formed which is considered the best,
conferring on the native name, fame and wealth (See
Astrology Nectar by Dr. S.S. Chatteerjee). In female charts
if Jupiter is placed in the 2I,d/or 4* will counteract the
mangalya dosha when malefics are placed in 8*. Any Raja
Yoga arising from the combinations of 9* and 10* lords

or 4* and 5th lords get polluted, if aspcted or joined by
8lh lord. According to PrashTrivedi (Rahu, Ketu
experience; P 275) Ketu in 21"1 and Rahu in 8* is said to
confer long life. This generally hold true unless there are
other overriding begative factors in the chart, the native
has to suffer substantial losses at least once in life. The
author lost everything during Venus - Sun dasa under
the influence of a tragic incident in his life and he has
Ketu in 2nd and Rahu in the 8th house (Exp. 14). Rahu in
th th
8 house boosts all the 8 house significations - legacies,
loss, separations, regeneration, transformation, mystery,
occulatism, metaplysics, profund thinking, research
exploration, overseas travel, strange adventures and
events. Scientists, researchers, explorers, adventurers,
insurance agents, writers of mystery stories, occultists and
all types of vocations that require dealing with old things
are favoured by this placement of Rahu in the 8th house.
Nodes behaves well in the presence of exaltftd planets.
Einstein had exalted Mars an4 Rahu in his 8 house in
Capricorn. Rahu alone in 81 (a negative planet in a
negative house brings prosperity), not aspectd by malefics
often confers prosperity or legacy (from a widow) and
afflicted or badly placed Rahu places havoc and the native's
death will take place under mysterious circumstances.
Rajiv Gandhi's 8th house was aspected by Rahu, Saturn
and Mars. Saturn and Venus together in 8lh housee in a
male chart may bring impotency. Mars and Saturn iij,
8th will invariably spoil marital happiness. Ketu in 8*
will make one humiliated by disgrace, clashes and
menials etc. Lord of 8 in 4* may force the native to
visit the jail or he may go abroad for higher studies.
Why in 8th hosue most hated? While we consider 9th as a
th th
house of fortune or luck, 8 isui 12 from 9* which turns
out to be expqjase side for the 9 Bhava indications. Again
we consider 7 as representing life partner, the 8 happens
to bej,2n from 7th, which again turns out to be marka place
for 7 house results i.e husband or wife as the case will be

Maharshi Parasara's view is that 8* lord turns out to be
harmless if he owns the lagna also (Mars in Aries, Venus in
Libra). In western system 8* considered as the wealth of
the partner. In female horoscope 8th is considered as
mangalyasthan, representing the longevity of thehusband.
Any malefic planet in the 8ll‘ house, in his major or subperiod will do immense harm to the life of the partner.
When 8* lord is in 8'1 and if Moon Mercury are afflicted,
the native may be prompted to resort to wrong things.
When the dispositer of the 8* lord is severely afflicted by
malefics - one may have a short life. 2,5,8,11 signs of the
zodiac are fixed sings. Therefore when Sun, Mars, Uranus
make any relationship with the 2lnV5,h/8th/ll'1’ house from
Janma Lagna, one may have unnatural death. When Mars
makes any relationship with l“/2r,ri/7"'hosuc or their lords,
one may have unnatural death.
The disposition of Mars in the 8* house (particularly near
8* cursp) in opposition to Uranus or in aspects to Uranus
causes serious accidents or accidental deaths. When ls*/2nd/
7*/8* houses are damaged through affliction, an abrupt end
of life is expected. Lagna under papakartari Yoga i,e,
hemmed between malefics and aspect or occupation of
malefics in the 8* house will cut short life. This aphorism is
stunningly true in the life of Rajiv Gandhi. When the second
house is receiving aspects of Saturn, Lagna Lord or benefics,
then the longevity of the person is assured. Malefics in 3rd
and 1 1 * assures long life to the native. 8lh lord in 6"’/ or 12th
makes a man short lived. 8* lord in 8* grants longevity, but
his profession will suffer. This is true for highly qualified
persons also. The author found this aphorism to be 100%
true in the case of well settled Indians in USA.
It is said that true is not much difference between the
condition of sleep and death. At the time of death, the
umbilical chord connecting the physical and the astral body
is snapped, whereas during sleep the two remains linked.
Other experiences of the soul during sleep are very much
the same or atleast similar. The general strength of the chart
is assessed in relation to the 1st house. Even longevity, the

general status of the individual, his potentialities, his elan
vital and everything connected with life - force are
examined firstly in relation to the T1 house. One must not
forget that the 1st house is the 5lh from 9* which implies
that the life of individual is the result, progeny, offspring
of his own punya - the past i.e. astrology begins by
assuming that the present of the individual is always in the
womb of the past. The quantum of prana, the force which
man lives and moves on this earth, is apportioned at the
time of his birth as a result of past deeds. In this way, the I91
house becomes meaningful. If the life force itself has been
very limited, no matter how other houses are, the life of this
individual would not be very long. The 8th house is where
the soul proceeds after death, the plaine of non physical
existence. This house can be viewed as the I5’ house for
considering the soul's journey in the astral world, which
means the nature of death and experiences therein.
The longevity of the person and his death depend upon
the balance between his material attachments, maya forces
(the2nd house) and his occult attainments (the 12“’ house).
On account of this reason highly elevated souls like
Troilangaswami, Baba Loknath lived more than 150 yrs
or so. Growth of spiritualism reduces sins, thus increases
longevity.

Example No.lSA
Date 18/10/1911 Time 12 00:00 Day Wednesday Lat 30 44:00 North Long 78:19:00 East
Zone 82.30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:21:53
Balance of Dasa : Ketu 0 Years 0 Months 21 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chaiil-Cuspal
Exp. 15A : Mahesh Yogi (DOB 18.10.1911, Uttarkashi,
12.00 Noon. This Yoga helped him to popularize
"Transcendental Meditation" in USA and earned millions
of dollars. He has left for heavenly abode in feb 2008 at the
brink of completing his Shardam Shatam (100 Years). His
8th lord Mercury is placed in the 1 1th house in Virgo and is
hemmed between benefics. Exalted 8th lord hemmed
between benefics granted him longlife. Jupiter - Ketu in
the 12"' may grant him Mokshya. Mars in Taurus is
aspecting his Lagna thus making a super-strong Lagna.
Aspect of Mars in Lagna and in the 10* house makes a

man highly ambitious. Moon Venus inhis 10* house added
long life and beauty of his horoscope. Amala Yoga made
him world famous.
Exp. 15B : Swami Sana tan Sliree Ji of Lucknow is another
Latitude), Mutual angles of Saturn - Moon - Jupiter
helps a man either to roll in money or to flood in
spiritualism. In May 2005 in Lucknow the author found
him hale and hearty, where he participated in the
astrological seminar organized by the "The Times of
Astrology", along with many well known persons of this
field. We are sure he will cross 100 yrs. He has Taurus
Example No.lSB
Data 12/05/1812 Tima 05:59:00 Day Sunday L»t 25:26:00 North Long 77:39:00 Easl
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamse 22:22:22
Balance of Dasa : Jupiter 8 Years 8 Months 21 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

Lagna, where the spiritual planet Saturn is facing Gaja
Keshri Yoga. He is a very learned man. Venus, Sun,
Mercury combination in the 12th made him genius. The
Saint is one of the spiritual Gurus of Sri Daya Shanker,
IRS, the honorary consultant editor of TOA.
Practical Cases of Longevity Yogas for longevity have
been written in "Cosmic Influence on mind and IQ" by
Dr. S. S. Chatterjee, 1992.
Exp. 15C Loss of life at an early age
DOB 6A-6&, 5=OOAM, Kolkota, died in July 2001 at Sat
- Jupiter dasa. He developed diabetes at a very young age
and died during Sat - Jup dasa in July 2001 . The maximum
Example No.15C
Date 06/04/1968 Time 05:00 00 Day Salurday Lat 22:30:00 North Long 88:20:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sr) Sanatan Ayanamse 23:09:10
Balance of Desa : Jupiter 14 Years 6 Months 22 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

life will be 32yrs when the lord of ascendant or the
dispositor of the ascendant lord is not aspectd by benefics.
His lord of Lagna is placed in the 6th house and is not
aspected by benefics. It is very difficult to get a long life,
Moon, Sun, Lord of Lagna are not aspected by divine
Jupiter. His both Sun and Moon are not aspectd by Jupiter.
When Sun, Moon, Venus, Jupiter, Virgo and sixth house
are afflicted, they may produce diabetes mellitus.
Venus is afflicted by Sun, Saturn and Rahu. Virgo Rasi
is afflicted by Ketu and is aspected by 6!h lord Sun, Saturn
and 8th lord Venus. Though Moon is not directly afflicted
its Kendras are occupied by malefics. Dispositor of Jupiter
Sun is heavily afflicted. Conjunction of 6th lord, 8th lord
and 12* lords produced, a highly malefic planetary
configuration in Lagna. Rajiv Gandhi had this yoga in his
Lagna too. A planet is very weak in 0 ° or in 30 °. his 8th
lord Venus is afflicted by 12,h/6th lords, Rahu. Weak and
afflicted 8lh lord cut short his mundane journey.

Example No. 16
Date 08/08/1937 Time 01 00 00 Day Sunday Lat 22:45 00 North Long 89:34:00 East
Zone 08:20:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22.43:30
Balance of Dasa : Ketu 2 Years 6 Months 7 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspaf
This is the horoscope of Dr. Roy, Ex-Professor of Kolkata
University in Physics, who died on 7.11.2005 due to brain
operation for cancer in Apollo Hospital, Delhi. Throughout
his life he maintained an excellent health. He was working
as an emeritus professor at Kolkata University. He has
produced many PhDs fiom the above university in Physics.
His 8"' lord is retrograde but is placed in the 8“ house in its
own house. This planet is aspected by natural benefic Venus
from the 2nd hosue. His Lagna is heavily afflicted by Ketu,
Saturn and Mars. So brain - Cancer is not ruled out. He

died during Jupiter - Mercury - Mercury dasa. Mercury is
2"d lord which is Markesh planet. All retrograde planets
in 8* cutails long life. Sunin 3d house, Saturn in ll*house
did not allow him to die earlier. He enjoyed Ketu, Venus,
Sun, Moon, Mars, Rahu Mahadasa very smoothly. His
cancer was detected in March 2005; brain operation took
place in Apollo Hospital in Oct. 2005, he died on account
of this unsuccessful operation. Dr. Roy was known to the
author since 1984.
Exp. 17 Suicide by hanging (DOB 22.1.1933, 6=00AM,
Kolkata, died on 19.8.95 at 12.00Noon)
He started his life as a sub-inspector of Police in kolkata.
Later on he joined Bata Shoe Factory as the Chief Security
Officer. He Retired from Usha Industries Ltd., Kolkata. He
had a tall and handsome personality. He was the Sr. officer
of my father-in-law Sri R.N. Lahiri at Bata Company. He
enjoyed drinking at Lahiri's money and from bribe he used
to receive from others. Rahu in the 2ml house - forced him
to develop taste in alcohol. It is not known why Mr. Lahiri
‘ used to pay his alcohol bills. Mars Ketu in 8* house made
him a very violent man. He sacrificed his life for his 11
brothers and sisters. He denied much comforts to his own
wife and children and used to donate his entire salary to
his kith and kin. On the fateful day 19.8.95 at 12.00 Noon
his 10* lord Venus was in deep combustion (both 1 degree
planet) in Leo which wiped out his Career and longevity.
Longevity is controlled from 8* house, 10* house and
Lagna. In his birth chart all the Kendras were not influenced
by a single benefic planet. This very factor did not allow
him to live long. Mars Ketu in 8* always brings a mysterious
death. He was totally unhappy with the progress of his
only son (he has two daughters. Son is the last child) 8"1 is
actually 401 from 5lh. Mars-Ketu in S'11 killed him in a very
cruel manner. Affliction of 8 * ford Sun with Lagnesh Saturn
added fuel to the fire. Weak 8"’ house and its lord forced
him to earn many though illegal ways. Weak Jupiter in
Navamsa denied hope for living 30° Jupiter in his 8,h house
did the maximum damage for his reputation and longevity.

Example No. 17
Date 22/0 V1933 Time 07 00.00 Day Sunday La! 22 30 00 North Long 88:20:00 East
Zone 88:20 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22 39 42
Balance of Dasa : Saturn 1 Years 0 Months 23 Days
Planets
Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspa)
Heavy affliction of 8lh house of Janma Lagna by Mars, Ketu
and Neptule killed thorugh unnatural ways. Saturn is the
significator of life. So its 8^ house should not be afflicted.
He died during Mars- Rahu dasa. This dasa is bad to almost
99% persons of the society.

Chapter - V
8th House And Honourable Life
It is not possible for every person to attain wealth,
position or fame. But, as the famous British Orator Edmund
Burke said even the humblest human being would like to
avoid and shun disgrace and dishonour, though one cannot
attain fame, position or wealth. It is better to have an
honourable life through humble walk through the arena
of life, from birth till death, than to have unenviable
vicissitudes either as a merchant rolling sometimes in lakhs
and sometimes in difficulties, or as a high potentate, now
at the top of power and then having a fall. According to
Milton, "Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise
(that last infirmity of noble mind) to scorn delights, and
live laborious days".
Honour comprises two aspects: - (1) a positive aspect
denoted by Lagna and the 10* house, and (2) a negative
aspect denoted by the 8* house. The first requisite, in a
horoscope, for freedom from disgrace and dishonour, is,
that the 8th house should be unoccupied or occupied only
by a natural benefic, and the 8* house lord should be weak
and indeed weaker than tire lord of Lagna or lord of the
10,h house. The lords of the 8th and 6th hou ses are
responsible for most of the intense miseries of life. No doubt,
the 8th house has got an aspect regarding longevity. We
should pay more attention about longevity given by Lagna
and the 10th house. Hie debility of the lords of the 8th and
6th houses is very necessary for die cancellation of evil effects.
Lord of the 8th house should preferably be in 3,6 or 12; or it

should be weakend by debilitation, etc. Lord of 8 in 3
cancels evil and preserves longevity too (vide Pulippani
Muni). Or when lord of 8 is also lord of a better house also,
either he'should occupy that better house, or he should by
a good Parivarthana, avoid the evil of the 8th house, lordship.
For example for Scorpio, Mercury lord of 8 and 11 may be
in 11 or Mercury may be in Lagna, with Mars in 11, when,
by one stroke, due to Parivartana of 1st and 11 lords, the
evil of 8th lordship of Mercury and 6th lordship of Mars is
almost cancelled.
The 8^ house being occupied or aspected by a benefic is
a great factor for the avoidance of all that is undesirable.
The Sloka is "Subha Grahanam Sembandho Randhre
Paribhavo Nahi"
In Kumaraswamiam, a small book in Tamil, it is said
that if the lord of 8 is uncombined with Jupiter or
unaspected by Jupiter and is in a Kendra or a trikona and
is stronger than lords of Lagna and 10, then the man suffers
disgrace or humiliation. So, it has to be seen that merely
because lord of 8 is strong or the 8lh house is occupied by a
malefic, one should not predict disgrace or dishonour;
because if lords of Lagna and the 10,hbouse happen to be
stronger than the 8,h house lord it means that the positive
factor more than counterbalances the negative factor, and
so the experience of the native will stop with the presence
of scandals, sometimes justified and sometimes unjustified.
Here 1 should like to place before the readers an important
yoga called Parvata Yoga defined in the Jataka Parijata.
The learned writer says that if the Kendras are occupied
by benefics and if 6ltl and 8'h are either unoccupied or
occupied by natural benefics the result is very good.
According to Jataka-Adhesa-Marga, 8th and 12th should
be vacant or, at any rate unoccupied by malefics, and the
fame of such a person will last very long till the end of the
Yuga literally, according to the Sanskrit sloka. According
to both, 8,h should not be occupied by natural malefics. 1
may state that, even high placed persons, with Saturn or

Rahu or Mars or other malefic in 8th do suffer scandals,
especially when there is no redeeming benefic aspects on
them (Jupiter's aspect, would make all the difference). But
when the 10:hhouse is strong and when Lagna is strong,
they never "go under" : and what they suffer is mere
scandal and never any disgrace or dishonour. So, the first
requistie for honour is the 8th house unspoilt by malefic
occupation unless there is the strong aspect of a strong
benefic, and the 8* house lord being weaker than the lords
of Lagna and 10th house. One benefic in 8th or 12'1'
countubalances the evil influences of S* or 12th.
Now, we come to the positive aspects, viz., Lagna and 10th.
10lh, everybody knows, is the house of profession and
achievement, of power, fame and honour. The I ()'h house
should be occupied preferably by a benefic. The 10'h should
be occupied at least by a serpent. The idea of that saying is
that a man must have some employment or some work to do
otherwise, he will be a louts eater, eating his head cff, in idleness
and since 10 is also in an upachyaya house, included in 3, 6,
10 and 1 1 , even malefics can occupy the 10* house. In fact,
there are dicta to the effect that the Sun or Mars in the 10*
house makes a man very powerful, energetic, and pioneering
with abundance of initiative and ability to achieve the
impossible, even. It is also said that a good Saturn in the 10*
house will make one a most powerful magistrate or sessions
judge. At the same time we are aware of the familiar dictum
that according to Phaladeepika Saturn, Rahu or Ketu in the
10th house will make a man do evil deeds. Saturn when in his
own house in the meridian; in these days of democracy, is a
strong Saturn, as lord of 10th in lCf1 would perhaps make for
better and more permanent success (Saturn being a slow
planet) than even the best benefic Jupiter. Saturn in the
merdian for a Libra subject is excellent unless there are other
bad features counteracting the effect of the pure Yogakaraka
lords of 4 and 5 in the 10* house. Sun and Mars, together, in
the 10'1' house, unless tempered by a benefic aspect or
conjunction, might make a man too energetic and cmel and
therefore rather unpopular. Our ex -prime minister Late

Narashima Rao had Mars and Sun in his 10* house in Gemini.
After sudden and un-expected demise of Rajiv Gandhi, he
just arranged to ascend the golden throne of Prime Minister
of India in 1991. It is better to have either a good Sim or a
good Mars, in he 10* house. Of course, Mars should not be
lord of 3 and 8 as fora Virgo subject, and the Sun should not
be lord of 6 or 8 as for a Pisces or Capricorn subject. Venus or
Jupiter in 10 always enables a person to command respect;
and 1 have found this to be true even in the case of a Capricorn
subject for whom Jupiter is the owner of 3 and 12 not very
good houses. According to Uttarakalamrita, Jupiter is good
for a Libra subject in 10, because he happens to be ford of 3
and 6, Upachaya houses. Upchaya lord in Upachaya house
gives better results.
But one thing; even when not very well disposed, Jupiter
being a natural benefic is slow to do harm and is rather
mild in doing harm. Full Moon in the ltf1 house has been
much praised by Saravali and by certain texts. A full Moon
in the 10* house, enjoying a good aspect, by Venus, or
preferably by Jupiter. Sun represents an "elephant" in
astrology, while Moon represents a "horse". So when we
are told that a good Sun in 10 achieves and impresses more,
we are not surprised; because an elephant has got its own
value much greater than a horse, at any time. At the same
time, however though according to Jaimini, the Sun is a
benefic according to accepted astrological canons, the Sun
is a mild malefic by nature; though, of course, Sun is the
living and Pratyaksha Deity, that we see every day, and is
the source of all energy in this universe. Full Moon is classed
in some important treatises as a first rate benefic, almost
equivalent to Jupiter, and though the Moon (because she
after all waxes and wanes and she has only a reflected light)
cannot be given the full power or vigour of the Sun, yet,
since she too is Royal when well aspectd by Jupiter or Venus
will show greater strength and agility Just as a horse shows
more agility than an elephant. Even so a Full Moon owning
a good, house placed in the meridian and well harnessed
by the energizing aspect of a good, Venus or Jupiter will be

able to achieve even better results and name than a good
Sun in the 10th house. In fact, Full Moon in the 10* house
for a person bom in a royal family, even without aspects
would suffice to place him on the throne. But, for persons
born in other families, with a benefic aspect, the said Moon
will conduce to Raja Yoga.
SryHsIdyckf. SWoildJSH: !
ijchlsfa v3TTcT arf^Ri i
Ti^TT^,
I I
The honour denoted by the 10th house is the honour due
to profession and achievement. But, we are aware that there
are certain persons very honourable throughout life, even
though they have no particular vocation or employment.
It has to be remembered that Lagna is very important, even
more than The 10* house. Even 9th and 10* Raja-Yoga
would bear fruits and have full effect, only if it has
something to do with lagna or with lagnalord. A natural
benefic placed in Lagna, specially Jupiter in Lagna, is one
of the greatest gifts (even more than Sun in 1 1) in any
horoscope, because Jupiter in Lagna protects a man like a
God given kavacha, throughout life (of course, freedom
from spoiling malefic aspects is assumed). Lagnadhipathi
should be well combined or well aspcted by strong,
natural benefics, preferably from a Kendra or trikona,
to give long life, with health and happiness; and he
should also be free from baneful aspects of evil planets
like Saturn and Mars (expect where for instance, for
a Taurus native, Venus combines with Saturn, say in
the. meridian in Aquarius). Scanning through the
classics in Astrology, there is one golden thread to be
seen; and that is, the power of Lagnadhipathi, when
he is strong in a Kendra or trikona, well aspected or
combined and free from malefic association or aspect.
It is needless to refer to all the slokas but we will give
reference to 3 or 4 typical slokas, whose purport alone
will be given below, would be useful and necessary.

According to Phaladeepi ka, when lagnadhipathi is
combined with Jupiter and occupies a Kendra, and malefics
do not occupy a Kendra or trikona or the 8* house the
person lives very long, free from disease doing punyakarma
or virtuous actions, enjoying different kinds of pleasure or
happiness. According to the Jatakaparijata. if the lord of
Lagna, that is the ruling planet (according to the Western
astrologers) occupies a Kendra or a trikona and is placed in
the house of a benefic (there is another version to the effect
"withabenefic in the 10t,lhouse" combined
with and aspected by a benefic and strong the person gets
name and fame, extending up to the four oceans, that is
widespread fame. According to the Jataka Alankara, if the
ruling planet, that is Lagnadhipa is strong, in a Kendra,
and is with Jupiter or Venus, in the house of a benefic, and
is aspected by a benefic, the man will certainly be a man of
character and principles, endowed throughout life with all
kinds of wealth, and becomes a Sun among men ('Hl'lcl'l
,’fTrNI*lT ) that is; a prominent figure or personality in life.
Lagna denotes Keerthi and Murthi; and therefore, one sees,
that when Lagna and Lagnadhipa are blessed by strength
or by benefic association (by association is meant either
combination or aspect) the person must enjoy long life with
health and happiness. By happiness is meant, not the
happiness due to wealth necessarily, because great wealth
is governed more by the 2"d and 11* house which are also
regarded as houses with a sting, the lord of 2 being a Maraka
Planet also, and the lord of 11 being evil, more especially
fora cardinal or chara sign (even though 11 as Servabhishta_
Sthanam is good for any planet to occupy). Lords of 2 and
11 when combined in a Kendra are said to make a Kubera
or an equally rich person. But it would be a sad mistake to
suppose, that a man can be happy simply because he is in
possession of riches or worldly wealth. It is one thing to
say, that a reasonable amount of wealth is very necessary
for life in this world. What is more important is the "grace
of God" or Ishwara Anugraha which will protect a man,
through thick and thin, even when friends and relations

and others may forsake him. The position of Jupiter in a
horoscope indicates the measure of help, which an
individual will evoke from above and the position of 9lh
house and its lord denotes the poorvapunya to a man's
credit, which will help him in the shape of God's grace in
life. That is why it is said that the combination of the lord
of Lagna with the lord of the 9’" house would constitute
Lakshmi-yoga, giving rise to wealth and what is called
"personal magnetism" and pure nature and reputation
especially when one of the two planets is Jupiter. In fact the
9* house is the most important of all for anything, as it
denotes luck or fortune due to Poorvapunya. In a female
horoscope, if a benefic is in 9 even though 7 and 8 may be
occupied by malefics, the lady will have a long lease of
married life and happiness with husband, children and
wealth; such is the power of a benefic in 9 to confer fortune
despite malefics in 7 and 8.
One word about the 4th house which is also very
important, No man is perfectly happy in this world; for
people who appear to be better off in life, have their own
worries and anxieties. Happiness is, at best a relative
expression, because perfect happiness or bliss is
vouchsafed, only to the man who has no bondage in the
shape of a calling or profession, which takes up all his energy
and attention. True happiness will be vouchsafed only to
the man who, like the great Saint Rammen Maharshi
sincerely concentrates on Godhead, spurning all worldly
possessions as trash. Nobody can improve upon what the
great composer said regarding the treasures of the world
(Plffir) not being at all comparable to the proximity ('fTfyrfSl)
with Sri Krishna. As one of the writers has pointed out,
such perfect happiness or bliss would depend upon what
is called Mokshatrikona furnished by the 4th,/8lh, and 12’1'
houses. It would, therefore, be seen by readers that a good
and strong Jupiter in the 4th house is a great asset in a
horoscope even though Jupiter in Lagna is one of the best
gifts in a horoscope. The point is, Jupiter in 4 helps wordly
life, sholarship and comfort, because he is in 4 and aspects

10. He also makes a man think of the other world, because
he aspects 8 (and there by conduces to pilgrimages, dips in
holy waters) and the 12* house which represents the house
of Moksha or salvation. Jupiter in 4 makes also for a
contented man with reasonable peace or repose or mental
tranquility. The 4th house being occupied by a natural
malefic like Sun or Mars or Saturn would make a person
very much worried sometimes unnecessarily, even though
due to association or configuration there might be yoga,
unless the planet is in its own house or exaltation. The reason
is, that natural malefics in the 4lh house do not conduce to
mental peace or calmness or to healthy comforts or real
Sukha. According to Phaladeepika if the lord of Lagna is
stronger than the lord of 6, and if lord of 4 is strong the
man enjoys perfect health. The reason is clear. 6 represents
illness and disease, just as it represents enemies, debts and
all the rest of it. So, lagnadhipathi denoting the physique
of a person, should be stronger than the planet whose
strength would denote disease. And, in addition,
Sukhadhipathi should be strong for perfect physical health
to the enjoyed by a native. The point is, 4* house denotes
happiness. For any kind of happiness to be enjoyed the
first and the fore most requisite is that one should good
physical health. One cannot enjoy a good dinner or a good
ride whether in a car or on a horse, or one's work, or one's
own wife, unless one has the requisite health. The position
of the Sun and Moon is also important for health. The Sun
is giver of all health and the aphorism is (3Vlt '
Hi The Moon represents mind; and mind, like
water, is very potential for the grandest good and also for
the worst evil. Western astrologers speak of the tripod
denoted by the Lagna, the Sun and Moon. Indian
astrologers have laid very great stress especially on the
Moon, along with the Lagna, since Moon also forms a lagna,
called Chandra Lagna. So a Moon free from malefic
affliction or aspects, strong, and enjoying benefic
conjunction or aspects would be a great asset in any
horoscope conducing to physical health, and giving mental

power and brilliance, and also affluence, because Moon is
also Smpathkaraka. Only a strong Moon grants nationwide
fame. So to be a famous man one should have strong Moon.
Moon becomes strong, when its Kendras are occupied by
natural benefics, Jupiter Mercury and Venus. Dharma
Karmadhipati Yoga, Amala Yoga, Parijata Yoga, Gaja Keshri
Yoga, (when Kendras of Moon are vacant; one struggle
very hard in career). Neechvanga Raja Yogas, Mudrika
Yoga, Laxmi Yoga, Adhi Yoga etc excellent Yogas help a
man to roll in name, fame, money and happiness, all the
great people in history have strong Sun, Moon and strong
Lagnadhipati (Lord of ascendant) aspected by natural
benefics. Jupiter and Sun are the significators fo destiny.
So these planets are also found to be strong in the charts
of immortals. God only writes sad episodes about a person
whose Jupiter is weak and afflicted in the horoscope. This
is 100% true to the knowledge of the author (author has
examined Vi million horoscopes).
Parvata Yoga :
According to'Jathaka Parijata, this Yoga arise when
Kendras are occupied by benefics and if 6* and 8* house
are unoccupied or occupied by benfics. Such a man gets
wide fame. One occupation in 9* will increase the strength
of this yoga.
In an average horoscope , we see controversial planetary
groups such as Mars - Saturn, Saturn - Rahu, Sun - Venus,
Jupiter - Rahu, Saturn - Ketu etc. Also planets getting
exalted in evil house, weak in Navamsa, Bhava sandhis dasa
of yoga karakas intervening at wrong periods etc which
we may conclude as resulting fiom the misdeeds from the
previous birth. Generally a horoscope merits no
consideration if there is no planet in the 10"' house (or at
least aspect) and if Jupiter, Venus, Moon or Mercury does
not occupy a Kendra. Most of theplanets posited in 2/12,
shows a life of misery and setbacks.
Great men appeared to be ushered into this world when
Jupiter and Saturn are in mutual trines or angles. 6/8

relationships of Jupiter and Saturn indicates ups and down
in life. If 5* and 9* houses are weak, the native will earn a
bad name, will have scant respect for others, and will suffer
from many diseases, which sometimes prove fatal.
Strangely, the dasa of Ketu occupying 8* house confers
long and frequent travels, name, fame strong dreams astral
experience. If Mars or Saturn casts its glance, death may
occur. Malefics in 8* does not allow earning money easily.
Malefics in 12"' brings poverty, disgrace etc. All the rich
persons do have benefic either in 8,h/or 12*. Lord of 10* in
6* with 6* and 8* lord will make the native without any
power and may not give him a permanent job.
If the 8* lord occupies 10th house and Saturn aspects
this house, the native will be poor throughout his life. The
10h house being subjected to relationship with 8th/ 12th lords
is a set back for uninterrupted happiness in career. When a
malefic planet or 8,h lord occupies 10* house, the native's
thinking power will be clouded and his action will invite
the wrath of the government. If 10* lord occupies 6*, 8'"
or 12"' house, the native will be imperfect in his works.
This is very much true to the knowledge of the author.
Retrograde Saturn or retrograde Mars in the 12* house
spins a man like the wheel of a potter. Retrogression of 6 "V
8*/12* lords are never welcome. They increase litigations
in life. When Rahu passes over retrograde 8* lord, severe
financial setbacks set in. Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherji had
retrograde Jupiter and retrograde Saturn in his 8* house
Sagittarius. He spent his last days of life in Kashmir Jail
and was killed through a conspiracy in jail at a very young
age. Sri Atal behari Bajpai, the Ex-Prime Minister of India
learnt polities from the above great soul of Bengal, Sri Bajpai
was his personal secretary. Lord Krishna says in Srimad
Bagawat Geeta :
fc^fUrcT I
TpsJ "tTO afa cr>4u|qf^?tc<jc^ I I

10th Skanda chap 24, SI 13 which means living beings
are born or they die as per their deeds in the past. They
get pleasure and pains, fear and welfare according to
their deeds.
Mercury in 12th aspect to Saturn 8* lord will cause
infamy and disrepute due to sandals. Financial difficulties
will be harsh to endure if two of Mars, Rahu Jupiter and
Saturn transit in the 12th from natal Moon.
Now we shall study practical case histories, where 8th and
12* houses are afflicted and some defamation surfaced out.
Exp. 18 Young age paralysis
The native is an electronics engineer and was employed
in Gurgaon. He married his colleague (31.1.72, 5=30 AM,
New Jalpairguri In Dec. 1 998 during Jupiter - Venus dasa.
In 2000 during the same dasa , he had a paralytic attack in
the left side and grew lunatic. In 2005 he has recovered
slightly but is not in a position to join his job. Rupture of
brain cells in his right side made him lunatic. Mercury
rules youth, Saturn rules one's old age, when these planets
are not conjunct and are separated by ninety degrees, the
young age paralysis feared. But if they are together, old age
paralysis occurs. In this particular case Saturn and Mercury
are 90 degrees apart. All movements of limb is controlled
front the 3rJ house. So the affliction of 3rd house is found in
the cases of paralysis. His 3rd house is heavily afflicted by
Mars, Saturn and Ketu. 3"'/8"1 lord Mars is a combust planet.
The dasa of two Kendra lords bring peculiar results. God
maimed him, perhaps for ever during Jupiter - Venus dasa.
(because his 5* 1 1 * axis is heavily aff i 1 i c ted ) J u p i te r - Venus
dasa is peculiar like Venus - Saturn or Saturn - Venus dasa.
N.T. Rama Rao, ex-chief Minister of Andra Pradesh lost the
post of Chief Minister in peculiar circumstances during
Jupiter - Venus dasa and also died during this dasa (he had
libra Lagna). His 8* lord is a combust planet and is placed
in the 12th combust 8* lord in 12* (house of hospitalization)
can bring many diseases. His ll'Mord is hemmed between
malefics, 9* lord is afflicted by Ketu and Saturn. Mars is
posited in the Kendra of 6* lord. Whenever angles of 6*

Example No.18
Date 02/09/1972 Time 07.48:00 Day Saturday Lat 26:30:00 North Long 88:50:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23 12 52
Baiance of Dasa : Rahu 17 Years 9 Months 8 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
litigations in life. Afflicted 11"' house, afflicted 11* lord,
afflicted 21"1 lord did not allow him to earn money. In this
example 8* house is squared by Rahu - Ketu axis, 12* house
is afflicted by malefics. 2/12 relationships of Karmic control
planets proved fatal from him. Planets placed in the 8th house
feel themselves handicapped in bestowing wealth to their
natives. If 5* and 9* houses are treasures of previous good
deeds, the 6* and 8th houses are treasures of our bad deeds.
The 12* house shows our coming involution on the present
nature of Karma. 8* lord of themale is placed in the 3rJ house

of thefemale, 3rd house Mars is considered to be good. 8* lord
of th(? female is placed in the 12* house of the male partner
with combust 8th lord Mars. So the weak placement of the 8*
lord of the female partner in his 12* house played havoc role
in his life. He becomes lunatic soon after the marriage. His
wife's 7* house is heavily afflicted by Ketu, Saturn, further
aspected by 8* lord Sun and 6* lord Mercury. 6rh house/6*
lord are hemmed between malefics, as a result her 5th, 7*,
12th bhava results suffered from annihilation. Both of them
are highly qualified persons but leading a very wretched life
for the evil stars. They have no kids and no happiness. Both of
them are unemployed. The marriage points are only 11.5/36.
The boy is mangleek and girl is non-mangleek, and marriage
was not recommended by the software. Did the male partner
really suffered for the wrong placement of 8* lord of his wife?
Let the future astrologer of India investigate.
These two examples will open the eyes of everybody about
fate, Karma, Stars, and the role of destiny pattern in one's
mundane journey
Exp. 19 : Anxiety/ humiliations for the eloped daughter
7-8-55/12=44 Noon/Kolkata..
This is the birth chart of a prosperous Mechanical Engineer
from BE College, Howrah. He lives in Noida in a posh
locality. He has only one daughter who was reading in the
1st year biotechnology course in a Greater Noida College
(born on 4.11.85,11-30 AM, Kolkata Capricorn - Lagna,
Jupiter; Aries - Rahu, Gemini - Moon; Virgo - Venus 29°36',
Mars, Libra - Ketu, Sun, Scoipio - Mercury, Saturn) Saturn
- Rahu dasa prevailed on her from Jan 2004, and from that
time only she lost interest in studies. We have found Saturn
- Rahu, Rahu - Saturn, Mars - Rahu, Rahu - Saturn, Mars
- Rahu, Rahu - Mars, Saturn - Venus, Venus - Saturn dasas
are bad to about 90% persons. Those who have strong Raja
Yogas and powerful 9* lord, they can absorb the negative
results arising out ofbad dasa period in one's life. In May
2005 she left home without any in. jrmationto her parents.
Her boyfriend from Kolkata, took her there.
The above gentleman was passing Venus - Moon dasa in

Example No.19A
Date 07/08/1955 Time 12:44 00 Day Sunday Lat 22.30:00 North Long 88:20:00 East
Zone 82:30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:58:34
Balance of Dasa : Jupiler 0 Years 8 Months 30 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
5* house of Jupiter is hemmed between malefics. Ketu in 8*
and Saturn in 12* surfaced scandals in the family for the
daughter for the afflictioh of 5*, 8*, 12*. From freedom from
disgrace and scandals one's SVl^houses should be vacant.
Affliction of these bad houses brought disgrace in his life.
In his daughter's chart - we find debilitated Sun conjoins Ketu
in her 10* house. Two/three malefics in 10* house forces the
native to do some evil work. Should 8* lord join Saturn, Mars,
Rahu, Ketu, the things are never encouraging to the native. A

native remains very poor when 8* lord is aspcted by Saturn. In
her case Rahu is aspected by 8* lord Sun. So Saturn - Rahu dasa
forced her to flee from home. Malefics in Kendras make anybody
very sex-hungry, and Venus - Mars combination in the 4* house
of Moon made her extremely sex-hungry. Mars - Venus
combination is bad in 2nd/4,h/7*/8,h/ or 12* in a female chart.
Father's of such female natives should be careful during the
upbringing of their daughters. Saturn -Rahu in 6/8 relationships
forced her to flee home spoiling her educational pursuits.
Exp. 20 - Unfortunate son of a prosperous medical
doctor. 24.12.78/8=55AM/Agartala
Example No. 20
Date 24/12/1978 Time 08:5500 Day Sunday Lat 23 49 00 North Long 91 15 00 East
Zone 82:30'00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23.18 09
Balance of Oasa : Mars 6 Years 3 Months 1 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

Capricorn - Lagna; Pisces - Ketu; Cancer - Jupiter (R),
Leo (Saturn R), Virgo - Moon, Rahu; Libra - Venus,
Scorpio - Mercury, Sagittarius Sun, Mars.
He is the eldest son of a reputed medical doctor who is
a professor in a Medical College in MR He has passed
B.Com and MBA from Greater Noida (a third class MBA
college). He is working in a private firm in Noida with a
monthly salary of Rs. 10,000/- per month. According to
R. Santhanam, 6* lord in 11* promotes litigation in life.
If the said 6* lord is exalted in 1 1* (it is possible for Taurus
ascendant), these debacles will be still greater
In the present case the 4* house of Moon is occupied
by Mars and Sun. what is going on in mind is determined
from the 4* house. He has a very angry disposition and
he is not friendly with his mother and younger brother.
Affliction of 8,K/ 3 2'h houses provided him a cruel
temperament. His 10* lord Venus is placed in the 10*
house forming Malavya Mahapursh Yoga. When Lagna
and its lord are weak - Raja Yogas cease to function. His
lord of Lagna is placed in the bitter enemy Sun's house
and its dispositer is placed with badhakalord Mars in the
12* house. Lagna is not aspected by a single benefic.
Exalted Jupiter is retrograde and hence it will behave as
a debilitated planet. We can conclude, he has a weak
lagna, weak lagna lord. Affliction of 8lh/12lh houses will
add to his sufferings. He will not be free from scandals
and unfortunate incident in life.

Chapter - VI
Deep Research Caliber
The 8th House
4* house is the house of education, 5* house controls
intelligence faculty and Purvapunya. Purvapunya is also
judged from the 9' house. It has been observed by
examining thousands of horoscopes only people with
enough Purvapunya come up to this earth for harnessing
rich dividends for their past good Karmas. Obviously, only
a handful people are born as genius persons, (one out of
1,00,000 or so). 5* of 4"' = 8* i.e. purvapurnya of education
is the 8* house. Benefic aspects/contact of natural benefics
in 8* makes a man very genius in research matters. 9,h of 4'1'
= 12* therefore malefics in 8lh/12lh bring scandals in life.
The capacity to deal deep in matters and find out new
facts in knowledge is termed "Research". The scientist must
have an open mind capable of answering intrinsic value.
He should have an experimental mind that is creative. We
want scientists to find substitute of fossil fuels before 2040
or so. Now a days it is very difficult to get Ph.D. degree in
India. One has to study upto the age of 27 - 30 yrs for a
Ph.D. degree. UGC is conducting a competitive test for
granting fellowships during Ph.D. level. Those who acquire
a Ph.D. degree in science/arts/or commerce now-a-days
must be a very intelligent person with good planetary
configurations. Only strong 9* house/91" lord can grant a
Ph.D degree, with a benefic 8* house.

Commercial minded students never run for a Ph.D.
degree. Most of the students prefer to get an MBA degree
from I1M colleges of India and settle in life at the early yrs
of life. Nobody wants to study beyond 25 yrs or so. But for
a Ph.D. degree one has to study upto 30 yrs of his/her life
span. Those who have benefic 8'" house prefers to run after
Ph.D. degrees, these have become well explained in the
first six examples from the research diary of the author,
who is proud to examine the horoscopes of Nobel Laureates
to ordinary persons of the society.
It is to be anticipated that a Ph.D. degree will boost the
honour level of the person at least in the academic lines.
According to Jataka Parijata, Parvata Yoga, arises when the
Kendras are occupied by benefics and if 6*/8* houses are
unoccupied or aspcted by benfics. Such a man gets a wide
fame. The 8"' house being occupied or aspected by a benefic
is a great factor for the avoidance of all that is undesirable.
Many highly placed persons with Saturn, Rahu or Mars or
other malefics in the 8* house suffer scandals especially when
the 8* house is unaspected by natural benefics. (Exp. 19)
Yogas For Brilliance:
According to K.K. Pathak, Mahavignana Yoga arises
when 5* house, 5* lord, 9* house, 9* lord. 8* house, 8*
lord, Leo sign. Sun, Sagittarius sign, Jupiter, Scorpio sign,
Mars and nodes are found to be interconnected 5* and 9*
houses and their lords rule over new ideas, innovations and
inventions. 8"' house and 8th lord on the other hand rule
over research and discovery. Without research and discovery
invention is impossible and thus 8"' house and 8* lord are
important factors in making one an eminent scientist. Role
of the lords is to supplement 8* house and 8'1' lord Natural
zodiacal signs of Leo, Scorpio and Sagittarius and their
lords the Sun. Mars and Jupiter have natural lordships over
science. Strong Jupiter makes men of Genius. If he is placed
in an angular house or in a trinal house in a chart, the native
will certainly rise very high in life. God only writes sad
episodes about a person whose Jupiter is found weak in
horoscope.

Important Planetary Positions Which
Make Men Genius
Conjunction of Jupiter and Venus in the Is1 house at birth
makes great film stars, film directors, stage artists etc. In
the 2nJ house great poets, novelists and dramatists in the
3IL~ house-commercial artists, painter, sculptors .journalists ,
reporters, correspondents in the 4'" house-great scientists,
inventors, poets, novelists, political leaders, all sorts of
creative artists; in the 6*-great physician, doctors and
surgeons in the 7"' house-big industrial giants, factory
owners, trade union leaders etc, in the 8"’ - a tyrant who
seeks pleasure in teasing others, in the 9th house - great
philosophers, teachers professors etc.- in the 11* house- the
richest and wealthiest men; and in the 1211' house eminent
doctors and mystics.
Conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn in the 5"' or 9"' house
makes one a top person like Satyajeet Ray, Charlie Chaplin,
Uttam Kumar Chatterjee etc.
Conjunction of Mercury and Jupiter in the lsl, 2"1’, 4'"
and 5* makes one a man of genius.
Conjunction of Mars and Jupiter in the lsl house or in
the 5* house makes one a creative genius. We find this
combination in the birth chart of Rishi Auriobindo Ghose
of Pondicherry.
Persons with Sun-Jupiter combination do not care even
of their own kith and kin. Sun-Jupiter make one a scholar.
Even if he is not well educated in schools or colleges, he will
acquire better knowledge from contact. Lord Krishna had
Jupiter and Sun in Leo Sign, his 4'" bouse, Sardar PateJ had
Sun-Jupiter in his 4* house in Libra. Chatrapati Shivaji had
Sun-Jupiter in the 7th in Aquarius. He fought successfully
for establishing Hindu Dharma Rajya against all odds.
A genius is born when a combination ofVenus, Sun and
Mercury is posited in a Kendra or a trine (especially in the
house of Mercury and Venus). CR . Das has this yoga in
Libra ascendant, Rabindranath Tagore and Aurobindo
Ghosh had in 2"11 house and Einstein has this yoga in 9* in
Pisces.

One think to be borne in mind is that Mercury ahead of
the Sun and Venus behind the Sun give better results Adhi
Shankara had Mercury ahead and Venus behind the Sun.
Sri Ramanujacharya, Swarni Vivekananda. Albert Einstein
and Aurobindo Ghosh had both Mercury and Venus ahead
of Sun. Rajiv Gandhi too had Mercury and Venus ahead
of Sun. if Mercury is longitudinally ahead of Sun, the
person will be a scholar but will enjoy limited financial
prosperity.
In the horoscopes of Nobel Prize winners Mercury is
always well placed or associated either with the 9th, 10*,
11* or 2"d house or their lords. For scientific achievement,
Mars or Sun or a Yogakaraka Planet is associated with
Mercury and the lO^'house or its lord. For literature related
achievements. Venus the planet of fine arts is associated
with Mercury or the 10* house and its lord. For
achievements in peace Jupiter - the planet of peace is found
to be well placed or associated with yogakaraka or the 10nl
house and its lord. Now we will examine the horoscopes
of six Doctorates in Science/Commerce/Engineering line.
Example - 21. Doctorate in Computer Science (Dr.
Srivastava)
He completed BE (Computer Science) from the
Banaras Hindu University and MS, Ph.D degrees from
USA. His 5* lord is placed in the 9* house, opposition
to7* lord Jupiter forming a Raja Yoga for him. Mercury
behind Sun helped him to earn good amount before even
he less than 30 yrs. His 8* lord is exalted in the 5* house,
granting him enough research calibre. He has Taurus as
Deha Rasi, Gemini as Jeeva Rasi. Aries dasa between
23.12.1998 to 22.12.2005 was most colourful in life. He
recive Ph.D. degree, got married in 1999, produced a
son, purchased huge property in Noida. Dasa lord is
placed in the 10lh house from its natal position and is
exalted.
He works in IBM in India but stays most of his days
outside India. 9* lord in 12,hproduced so many foreign

Example No. 21
Date 02/09/197 1 Time 07:45:00 Day Thursday Lat 23:45:00 North Long 86.42.00 East
Zone 82'30 00 East Sri Sana tan Ayanamsa 23: 12:01
Balance of Dasa : Sun 2 Years 8 Months 15 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
travels for him. Aspect of divine [upiter on his ninth
house containing Saturn made him a very fortunate man
of the society in the young days of life
Example - 22. Doctorate in computer Science (Dr.
Ganguly)
DOB : 1-12-195 1/11=55PM/Jalpaiguri.
This gentleman came to India in 2004 for heading IBM
at Delhi I1T. He passed out from Jadavpur University in
1972 with BE computer science degree and acquired a
Ph.D. degree from Austine University USA in 1981. He is
married to a Bengali woman, got a daughter in 1987 and
settled permanently in USA. His 8* lord is placed in ly\?22

Example No. 22
Date 01/12/1951 Time 23 5f> tXJ Day Saturday Lat 26 30 00 North Long 88:50.00 East
Zone 82 30 00 Eas! Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22 55 29
Balance of Dasa : Venus 4 Years 1 Months 2 Days
Planels Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
provides a poor career because aspect of 8* lord in 2nd is
considered to be very bad. It will wipe out savings. The
statement of sages came true in his life. His posting in India
is like a police Inspector, getting the chair of a sub-inspector
of Police. He feels humiliated in 2004. Venus, Saturn, Jupiter,
Moon, Mercury are all in the angle of yogakaraka Mars.
So many planets (like Mahatma Gandhi) in the angle of
yogakaraka Mars made him a very big man of the society.
From chandra lagna we find Moon - Mercury - Venus are
in mutual angles forming famous Mudrika yoga. Even a

person bom in an ordinary family rises very high in life
with this rare yoga (Advanced Predictive Astrology Vol 2
by Dr. S.S. Chatterjee P 28) His 8* lord Jupiter's dasa
brought pains in mind. He is separated from his family
members. In 2006, he he earns so little salary, that he can
hardly afford to run his family in USA. Jupiter Venus dasa
is peculiar to anybody.
Exp. 23 Doctorate in Physics and Management (Dr. Ram
Gopal) DOB 29.6.43, 7=25PM, Jhansi
This is the horoscope of Prof. Dr. Ram Gopal, who got a
Ph.D. degree in Physics from BHU and another Ph.D.
Example No. 23
Date 2Si.ui.,'la4J Time 19:25.00 Day Tuesday Lat 25 27:00 North Long 78:34 00 East
Zone 82.30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:40:26
Balance of Dasa : Moon 0 Years 7 Months 4 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

degree in Management from USA. He joined as a Vice
Chancellor of Bombay University at a very young age. He
worked in 1GNU and at the Governor's office at Ptana. He
has a glorious career from the young age of life. Rahu in
the presence of excalted Jupiter and Demon God Venus in
8th house provided him much reseach caliber. Rahu is the
giver of intution and sudden inspiration. It can give birth
of a new idea in someone's head in a flash; an event, which
is not deliberate and thus cannot be revolutionary that it
just cannot be birthed or sometimes even understood by
Mercurial reasoning, Martian reasoning or Saturnnine
common sense. Rahu Jupiter Venus in 8th provided him
profound knowledge in the field of physics. His 8* lord is
exalted and he is bom with the famous Adhi yoga from
Janma Lagna. Only very very special people are bom with
this rare Lagnadhi Yoga. So he was a very very special
man of the society 9th lord in the angle provided him a
very big chair while he was very young. When 9* lord is
posited in an angle - an early success in life is to be
anticipated. 5* lord in 5* made hint a super intelligent
person. Without strong Mars (Mars is the significator of
logic) it is not possible to get a Ph.D degree in physic/
electronics etc. Venus - Jupiter combination in the 8"1 house
made him a creative genius in research activities. His 6th/
8* lords have house exchanged places. Sun is hemmed
between benefics. Such a person can learn many things
even without reading books. Sun in the 7'h house made his
wife a patient of arthritis. He has two daughters and a
son. The son is studying at Delhi College of Engineering.
Two daughters are also engineers.

Example No. 24
Date 08/07/1943 Time 05: 10:00 Day Thursday Lat 22.30.00 North Long 88.20 00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:48:27
Balance of Dasa : Venus 8 Years 5 Months 21 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Exp. 24. Prof Mukherjeee ofDelhi College ofEconomics
DOB : 8-7-1943, 5=10AM. Kolkata
ProfMukherejee is a MA (Eeo.) from Calcutta University
with a very bright academic record. He and his wife (chart
25) worked under a' Nobel Laureate at MIT, Boston for their
Ph.D. degrees. They joined, Delhi School of economics
directly from MIT, Boston. He retired in July 2005, now he
is working as a vice-chancellor in a Haryana University.
His 9* house is aspectedby two natural benefics. 8"' lord
occupies 12* house/Mars is posited in his 9th house.
Mercury the lord of Lagna has framed Budhadity yoga

Lagna. His Jupiter is exalted. 9* lord in 12* grated him
higher studies in USA. Aspect of Yogakarka Saturn on
Rahu Jupiter in the 2"‘! house eliminated Chandaia Yoga.
Exalted benefic planets in the 2nd give good education.
Beautiful planetary combinations shaped his destiny in a
very nice manner. His eldest son is an MBA from Columbia
University, New York and is employed in Hong Kong.
Younger son died at the age of 20 for the joint aspects of
Saturn and Mars on the 5* house of Jupiter.
Exp. 25 Prof Mrs. Mukherjee, Ex. Professor of Delhi
School of Economics (DOB 17.5.42, 5=12PM, Barisal),
Bangladesh .
Example No. 25
Date 17/05/1942 Time 17 12 00 Day Sunday Lat 22 45.00 North Long 90 20.00 East
Zone 8230:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:47 30
Baianco of Dasa : Mars 4 Years H Months 3 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

She passed her MA (Economics) from Calcutta University
in 1964 - 1965. She was the class friend of Dr. Mukherjee
in Presidency College. She obtained her Ph.D. degree in
1973 from MIT, Boston and joined as a professor of
economics, at Delhi School of Economics. Her 8Lh lord is
exalted in the 6th house. 10* lord is exalted in the 8* house.
These two beautiful planetary combinations made her a
creative genius and formed the powerful Adhi yoga. Saturn
in 8* played a dirty role. She had to resign her post of
professorship around 1994 due to politics. (Satrun - Mars
dasa) She worked in a NGO firm for the last 1 1 yrs from
1994. Saturn dasa produced intense grief in her mind.
Her 5th house has Ketu aspected by Saturn from the 8*
house. This house is also aspected by 6* lord Jupiter
carry Lug the influence of Mars with it. Her younger son
died in an accident. Two natural benefics Moon and
Mercury, Sun in 8"' house along with 5* lord Saturn and
9"1 lord Mercury in 8* provided her a very deep research
calibre. Four planets in the 8 * house helped her in an area
outside her own field of activity i.e. economics. Whenever
there are many planets in the 8* the native shifts to a
different area from where he/she started life.
Exp. 26 : Prof Bhattacharya, Ex- Dean, Faculty of
Engineering, Delhi 11T, 5-11-1934, 4=30 AM Purulia.
8* lord of Surya Lagna, joins Sun, compelling him to
take birth in a poor family. In his school days, - his father
lost everything in a theft case. His elder brother helped
him to come up in life. Aspect of three natural benefics on
the 8* house made him a super intelligent person. He
obtained M.Sc (Physics) and PhD. in electronics from BHU.
8* lord in 12* has generated a Yipareeth Raja Yoga.
Mercury - Venus - Jupiter in mutual angles generated
Mudrika Yoga - a unique and rare yoga. A person bom
in Mudhrika Yoga invariably rises very high in life.
Almost for the entire life he was the professor of
Electronics at Delhi HT. His Ph.D. students are occupying
top positioned at various cities of this globe. He went to

Example No.26
Date 05/1 1/1934 Time 04:30:00 Day Monday Lat23:2uUu Nuitu Long 8G:240U Eas»
Zone 88:20:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:41 1 1
Balance of Dasa : Moon 1 Years 4 Months 2‘Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
USA as a postdoctoral fellow in 19S9, and has visited
many foreign universities as a visiting professor.
Debilitated 12* lord did not allow him to settle in USA.
Many American Universities offered him faculty jobs,
but he preferred to stay as a professor of Delhi HT. Most
of the planets are in the angle of 9* lord Venus. This
rare yoga shaped his destiny in a very nice manner. His
wife is a Ph.D. in Astrology from Lai Bahadur University,
Delhi. He has two daughters, both of them settled in
USA. At present he is a professor of JP Engineering
college in Noida. He has settled in Sector - 26. Noida

near famous Kali Temple. He spends many hours
worshiping various Gods and Goddesses. He is an
extremely religious minded person. They follow the
instructions of Swami Ramdeo in Astha channel, for
maintaining excellent health.
What we learn from the above six real birth charts of
eminent scientists of India. All of them have strong 5*/
9* houses, several Raja Yogas and brilliant 8* house. If
the lord of 5* house is aspected by a benefic planet, the
native possess keen intellect. In chart - 21, 5* lord is
aspected by divine Jupiter. In chart - 22, the 5* lord
Jupiter occupies its own house in 8* providing deep
research power. In chart 23, 5* lord is placed in its own
house and exalted Jupiter occupies its Kendra. In chart
24, 511 lord Venus is in conjunction with Moon. A natural
benefic as the 21"1 lord in 3rd (2nd to 2nd) provides top
education. In chart 25 her 5th lord Saturn is in
conjunction with 9th lord Mercury, forming a strong Raja
Yoga. In chart 26 10’1' house of 5* lord Saturn is occupied
by three natural benefics, Jupiter Venus and Mercury.

Chapter - VII.
Lady Luck, The Discovery &
The 8th House
Ancient Greeks worshipped Gods and Goddesses Grecian
Gods represented strength, power valour, knowledge etc. In
case love and luck specially were represented by Goddesses,
e.g. Venus the Goddess of love. Aphrodite the Goddess of
beauty etc, even in the field of judgment female deity is still
now regarded and respected. In every court house
throughout the world stands a statue of the lady of justice
with a balance in hand. In Western World people pray for
the blessings of Lady Luck for overall prosperity. Among
the Hindus goddess Lakshmi is considered harbinger of good
luck, wealth, peace prosperity and of course wisdom. The
lotus seat and the lotus in her hand represent wisdom,
prosperity- spiritual and material. She is an emblem of
heighten, personality and prosperity. Wealth, peace,
prosperity showers on a person when Goddess Lakshmi in
other words lady luck smiles on the person. So in the study
of astrology the role of lady luck is vital. An experienced and
expert astrologer with his/her sound predictive acumen can
explain when lady luck would bestow her blessings on the
person concerned and, how and in which way a person can
gain immeasurable blessings from her.
All men see the same objects, but do not equally understand them. Intelligence is the tongue that discerns and
tastes them. 8* house is the supreme ruler of accidents but
a benefic accident may help to discover a new thing which
may bring unimaginable happiness in the lifestyle of
millions of human beings on this earth. Einstein who had

exalted Mars and Rahu in his 8* house is considered to be
the father figure among all the inventors of history, a benfic
Rahu alone in 8* or in presence of exalted or a planet in its
own sign in 8"' house helps to discover something novel
(depositor of Rahu should occupy trine / quadrants)
through accidents/chance which may make him a very
famous man overnight. Now we shall study the horoscope
of Edgar Cayce, the most celebrated physchics and seers
W 30. Cancer Lagna; Leo - Ketu; Sagittarius - Jupter, Mars,
Aquaurius - Mercury, Venus, Saturn, Rahu; Pisces - Sun;
Aries - Moon, and dies lan 3. 19451.
Edgar Cayce
Dale 18/03/1877 Time 15 00 00 Day Sunday Lat 36.50:00 North Lon9 87:30:00 East
Zone 87.30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 21:52 56
Balance of Dasa : Venus 19 Years 0 Months 12 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna' Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

Edgar Cayce has Mercury, Venus, Saturn and Rahu in
Aquarius in his 8* house. Saturn in its own sign Aquarius
stabilized the energy of Rahu and helped it to function on
a higher plane. Mercury's close eonjunciton with Rahu gave
him the opportunity to realize his own potential within
his lifetime. Rahu being very strong in Aquarius could
channel the combined energies of the Mercury, Vermins
and Saturn. Rahu is the most important planet - in his
chart as it connected these planets with the astral realm
and Akashic records (The universal library for all the past,
present and future events). Between 25.10.1910 to
25.10.1928 he enjoyed the Mahadasa of rahu. Druring this
dasa he came up with futuristic prophecies and began
covering topies such as astrology, reincarnation, ancient
civilizations like Egypt, India and Atlantis. All the areas
are intimately connected with the sign Aqarius. 4* - 8* -
12* houses control Mokshya Trikona. Fourth house
represents past, 8* house relates to the cycles of time while
twelfth house relates to the future. 8* is actually 1 1 * from
10*. So the present income is reflected from this 8* house.
Conjunction with a luminary in 8* enhances the status of
nodes. Ketu in the second house aspected by divine Jupiter
enhanced his sixth sense.Controller of pineal glands are
ketu and Moon. Both of them are aspected by divine
lupiter.Well developed pineal gland gives oneormore types
oi psychic ability. Pineal glands have been called the Third
eye and Rene Descartes and other Philosophers of old
called it the seat of the soul. Tim Burners Lee
Tim Burners Lee, a brilliant British physicist and a
computer scientist who in 1991 invented the world wide
web (www) paving the way for the development of Cyber
Cafes even in a remote village, throughout the world. The
website has spiraled the prospects global business without
investment of much money. In 1999 TIME placed Burners
Lee on its list of "100 persons of the 20* Century". The
phenomenal success of this great break through engineered
by this icon of cyberspace occurred, in part, by chance. "There
was an element of serendipity, says Arthur Molella, director

of Smithsonian's Lemelson Centre for the study of invention
and innovation". A wonderful and new technology, a
coincidence that he evidently recognized and seized upon.
That element of chance has helped produce many of the most
important innovations in modern life. What do Popsicles,
penicillin and the World Wide Web all have in common? Lady
luck had a hand in the success of all of them. Alexander
Fleming of London, discovered in 1928 that some mould
efficiently destroy the germs. The creation ofpenicillin began,
which ultimately earned him and two colleagues a Nobel Prize.
Sometimes Lady Luck delivers the invention but not the
fortune that should go with it. When 9* house, 9lh lord, Jupiter
and Sun are not strong one fails to earn much money in life.
In 1839 Charles Goodyear invented vulcanized rubber, a
process that gave it useful properties such as strength and
elasticity (today it is used in everything from automobile tyres
to golf balls). But that did little help Goodyear himself. His
many patents were regularly violated when he died in 1860,
he was more than $ 200,000 in debt. The two wheeled Segway
Human Transport is the latest creation of Dean Kamen, who
invents 2T" Century Gizmos. The transporter, which carries
a standing person along at upto 20 kilometers an hour, grew
outofKamen's development of BOT, Kamen, the businessman
hopes the Segway, which first came on the US market in
November 2001, will become as essentia] as the car or the
telephone. Kamen is still awaiting for the smile of Lady Luck.
A genius is one who shoots at something, no one else can see '
and hit it. Rarely genius persons are born on this earth. Genius
begins great works; labour alone finishes them.
Thomas Alva Edison is called the wizard of inventions.
He invented electric bulb, taperecorders, gramophone,
modernized telephone industry discovered by Graham Bell.
Before 1922 movies were silent and after his sensational
discovery talkie films came into existence. First electric bulb
was invented on 21.10.1879 and very soon he used them
in New York localities. This great scientist submitted to holy
lorders on 18.10.1931 (Saturn - Mercury dasa) after about
1300 inventions. Let us study his horoscope (DOB 11.2.184^„j^

Thomas Alva Edison Horoscope
Date 1 1/02'" 347 Time ‘ 3 4;, ou Day Titursday Lat 3125:00 North Long - 93:50:00 West
Zone - 90.00:00 West Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 21 27:44
Balance of Dasa : Keiu 1 Years 3 Months 28 Days
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
12=45PM in Milan, Ohio, USA. Gemini - Lagna, Libra -
Rahu; Sagittarius - Moon, Mars; Aquarius - Sun, Mercury,
Venus, Saturn; Aries - Ketu; Taurus - Jupiter, balance -
Ketu 3y 3m 9d). He was bom with Parijata Yoga, the yoga
for immortals. Lord of Lagna is posited in the 9"' house
with 9'" lord Saturn. Lagna lord in 9,h with 9,h lord elevated
him in his early days of life. He started earning money from
the age of 13. He made his first patent ofVoltmetre in 1869
at the age of 22 only which rose to 100 before 1876. He
modernized telephone in 1 876, discovered gramophone in
1877. He got huge money for inventing telephone, and

acquired the status of Henry Ford in his early forties.
Mudrika Yoga (Jupiter- Mercury - Venus in mutual angles)
made him rich. Even a person bom in a poor family becomes
rich in his life time with this Yoga. With the steady flow of
income from his patents he became a very rich man before
40 yrs or so. 4'1' lord Mercury, 5"' lord Venus, 9th lord Saturn
formed a special Dhanayoga in his Bhagyasthan. Union of
4,h and 9th lord is a rare yoga and is found in birth charts of
eminent personalities. Aspect of Mars in Lagna and his 10*
house made him a highly ambitious person. Rahu is
aspecting his 8U' lord in 9n in association of two natural
benefics Venus - Mercury. 9lh house is the house of super
intelligence. Mixed and blended energies of five planets in
9th house involving 8th lord supported by Jupiter (this divine
planet is placed in the angle of 9th house/9* lord) helped
him to discover so many useful things for the society. For
the Sun - Venus - Mercury conjunction in 9'h house he
was a genious persons. This Yoga and strong Moon
provided him worldwide fame. For an International fame,
one should have a strong Moon and lord of Lagna should
be aspected by benefics. ?lldlord in 7th is a divorce yoga. 2"li
lord/6'1' lords in 7"' made his first marriage shortlived. His
illustrilous wife Merry died in 1884, leaving behind three
kids. Edison remarried again in 1886, but never received
any happiness form the second wife. For few years after
the second marriage he remained idle. However God
motivated him soon and he continued his marvellous
inventions till death in 1931. Happiness ofthe2ml marriage
is controlled from the Venus and 11 lh house (as per
Santhanam). Afflicted Venus and Ketu in 11 produced
unhappiness in the second marriage. Because both the
Karmic control planets join the luminaries he become a
legendary figure in his lifetime. Pt. Madan Mohan Malvia
had this Yoga. Let us study the horoscope of Sigtrtund
Freud (DOB 65.1856 at 6=30PM at Freiburg, Germany, 48
N 38, 18E 19, Libra - Lagna, Ketu; Pisces - Jupiter, Aries -
Rahu, Venus, Sun; Taurus - Merucry, Moon; Gemini -
Saturn, Virgo - Mars, balance Moon 0 y 4 m 23 d (AM2006,
P 267) BhagwadGita says, "If one constantly thinking about

Sigmund Freud
Date 0{i,iK". Time U' Ho L'; Day luesday Lat 48.30 10 North Long 18 19 GO East
Zone 18 19 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 2 1 35:28
Balance of Dasa : Moon 0 Years 3 Months 21 Days
objects of senses (desires), there springs attachment for
them, from attachments springs longing. From longing
(when thwarted) arises wrath (frustration) from wrath
ensues bewildering confusion. From an inability to
discriminate (the right or wrong), reason crashes and ruin
is the result. Freud is a great psychoanalyst who classified
the mind into 3 main forms - the id or the instinct, the ego
or the organized part of the personality and the superego
corresponding roughly to the conscience. According to him
mind and body are inseparable, at least during life; they
are mutually dependent for energy; the strength of the one
is the power of the other, the weakness of one is the

impotence of both. His student - Ludwig Binswanger
believed the 'spirit' in man played a major role in regulating
all thought and activity. Freud did not support him. Freud's
chart is stunning revelation of his theory. He was born was
famous Lagnadhi Yoga (See Astrology Nectar by Dr. S. S.
Chatterjee). With this Yoga one will get intimate friends,
great pleasures, and wealth, will have their enemies crushed
will live long free from diseases lives like a king. 9lh and
10"' lords have conjoined together inthe8th house. It is a
super Rajayoga named Dharmakarmadhipati Yoga. Only
great persons of this earth can have both these Yogas.
Satrun is his Yogakarka. Dasa of entire Saturn yielded very
fruitfiillresults for him. 5"1 lord in 9'" is itself a Raja Yoga.
Dasa 9'" lord and 10'" lord produced highly benefic results
for him. The 8'" being known as the hidden house and
therefore ruling hidden urges and instincts and so,
signifying the id, or the instinst. Strong Moon in 8^ helped
him the sencessal discovery regarding the matters of the
8* house. Strong Moon also made him world famous. Raja
Yogas in his horoscope shaped his delisting in a very
favourable manner.
The seventh house is exceptionally strong in his chart as
it houses an exalted Sun, the ascendant/ 8,h lord Venus,
Rahu, Pluto and Uranus. The 7th lord Mars also aspects this
house by its 8th aspect. His 8th house is hemmed between
malefics. The presence of Rahu along with Sun magnifies
the intensity of the already powerful Sun but in an external
way. This intensity is 'used to illuminate only the outer
energies of Venus and the 7,h house. He has Moon (mind),
Mercury (reasoning) in the 8th house. The final result he
got from his research was that sex was the underlying
principle of alt relationships. It is quite clear that this theory
is far from the truth, but was to be expected from this chart
because he could not get beyond the illusory power of maya
represented by Rahu. This isa classic case of Mars - Venus
influence on Rahu and sex God Pluto where sexuality
assumes prime importance in a native's life. Here Mars and
Venus are also the karmic control planets, so their affect is
more pronounced and has its roots in his past lives. In all
big personalities do have contact of their Karmic control

planets with luminaries, 9* or 10th lords. Carl Gustav Jung,
his own disciple, corrected a lot of flaws in his works by
presenting a more unified and evenly balanced view of
reality. Freud passed MBBS from Viena in 1881 at the age
of 25. Sensational books written by him are: Studies in
Hysteria (1895), Interpretation of Dreams (1900), The
Psychopathology of everyday life (1904), Wit and its
relation to the Unconscious (1905), The three contribution
to the theory of sexuality (1905), Totem and Tabu (1913).
He was honoured by various American Universities in 1909.
Clark University arranged his stay in USA. Ketu is in the
star of 2l,d/7,h lord Mars and hence became his killer planet.
The German invaders under Hitler attacked Austria in 1937
and put him under house arrest because he was a Jew
(Ketu-Rahu dasa). One Greek princess paid 20,000 pound
as ransom money and arranged for his freedom. He was
taken to London, in July 1938, but ultimately died with a
broken heart on 29.9.39 during Ketu - Saturn dasa. Saturn
is placed in the 9lh house of Ketu. When a malefic planet is
present in a trinal house form another malefic planet, their
dasa — antardasa produce immense grief in life. Aspect of
6,h lord on 2"'J lord Mars in the 12"' house (house of loss)
made him a pennyles man at the fag end of his life. Hitler's
army snatched away all the money from him. Aspect of 6,h
lord in the ]2i> house containing a malefic is never
welcome. It generates total bankruptcy. It has been found
by experience that afflicted house produce poverty.
He received many awards. British Royal Society made him
a fellow in 1936. he was the head of the department of
Neurology of Vienna University in 1932. his magnificent
contribution, "Interpretation of Dreams" may be compared
with The Dialogue of two principal systems of the world by
Galileo, Principia of Newton, origin of species of Darwin.
Though his ideas created a storm in Europe, in real life he
was friendly with anybody. He had a special sympathy for
the animals. Strong 6* lord in 6''' provided the love or the
animals. Thus we can unfold many mysteries of real life
though the magic eyes of astrology. We should pay great
respect for those wise sages of yore, who invented astrology
for the benefit of mankind.

Chapter - VIII
Difficult Childhood &
The 8th House
Should Sun be aspected by 8"1 lord from Surya Lagna, the
native takes birth in an ordinary family. This aphorism is
stunningly true to the knowledge of the author. Dasa of 8
lord, dasa of any planet related to 8"1 lord or dasa of the
ascendant lord at the beginning of life produces difficult
childhood. The lord of ascendant in 6/8/12produces poverty
and there will be frequent ups and downs in career. Lords of
2"',/ll'h in 6/8/12 makes a man poor. Saturn, Moon in an
inauspicious house generates difficult childhood. When the
4,h house is hemmed between malefics same results are
obtained. Generaly poor people are born without any Raja
Yoga and mentionable good Yogas. Shakata Yoga Kemadruma
Yoga, weak2'“VH,h lords makes a man poor. But people born
in good families also suffer when they start their life with the
dasa of 8"1 lord. Exp. 27.
According to Mantreswar in his Phaladeepika if the 10lh
house is occupied by cruel planets and if the 10* lord is either
combined with or aspected by inauspicious planets in 6/8/
12 house "DURYOGA" is caused, with this yoga one will
not be able to achieve success in any work inspite of one's
best efforts. Should the 10th and 11* be occupied by malefics,
the native will indulge in bad deeds and will defy his own
men. If the 10'hlord is conjoined with 8"' or 12bl lord, the
native's profession will decline or may even be ruined. If the

8th lord occupies 10th house and Saturn aspects this house,
the native will remain poor throughout his life. The 10* house
being subjected to a relationship with 8*/12lh lords is a setback
for uninterrupted happiness in career. What a malefic planet
as 8th lord occupies 10* house, the native's thinking will be
clouded and his actions will invite wrath of the Government.
His parents will suffer. Whenever 6* lord aspects 10* house/
10* lord, the native may be involved in scandals. 10* lord is 8"'
house is bad, it may not give a superior job but if the 10"' lord is
in simultaneously in favourable navamsa in its own house, may
give quite a powerful Raja yoga. 10* lord's conjunction with
Ketu is among the most dangerous phenomenon for stability
and continuity. The native will be mined when the dasa lord
establishes relationship with 8* lord. 10"’ lord becomes powerful
when it is placed in the 2ll'l/4,b/7l,/9'1'/10,h or 11* from Sun.
A benefic 10th lord in 2"d/7"'/8lh house can boost the
prospects of the 10th house (2"d house is 5* from 10'", 7,h house
is 1(T from 10* and 8"' house represent current income from
profession because it is 11* from 10*), when the 8* house
has a powerful Venus as the 10* lord, it will not only boost
the prospects of the 8* house but also will sooth the evil
effects of 10th house. If 6lh/8,h/12th lords make any
relationship with l*l/9lh/10,h lords, one faces terrible
resistances in life. When a planet is retrograde and very close
to the ascending degree, one will have to go though many
reversals during childhood.
When the Sun is weak, the native does not have the
protection of the protection of a rich father for a longtime
and has to suffer immensely in the general scheme of life. In
Kal chakra dasa system (KCD) when the Is* dasa is related
to the 8*1 house, the effects are not going to be encouraging.
Such children would be bom in ordinary families and would
stall their life from an ordinary level . Difficult childhood days
are indicated if the 8* lord is related Lagna or its lord.
Should the dasa of 8"' lord opens in vimsottori system then
also the same affect will come to pass. When 9th lord is
debilitated and Mars occupies either 4* (or 10*), the native's
father is a poor man. Debilitated 9* lord is navamsa forceps ^

the native to take birth in a poor family. For a long living
father, 9* lord should not be combust, debilitated, highly
afflicted and the 4* house should be strong. Misfortunes
never come alone, only the injured foot is again injured. Such
adages rather become true in one's life when 9 J' lord is ill
aspected by the ill placed 6*/8*/12"' lord (TOA July 1996 P
7) Ketu is a malefic not conductive to material pleasures. With
conjunction with 9* lord or debilitated Saturn/Sun kills the
roots of a happy life.
A debilitated planet in the 10h house many create tension
in the place of work. It may even restrict the potentiality of
the native to rise high in life. A retrograde and debilitative
planet in the 10* will definitely fail to act as trend setter and
manifests a tendency unnecessarily to complicate matter
relating to service and career of thenative. A natural malefic's
aspects on that planet will reduce further to do good to the
native. A debilitated planet with conjunction of a natural
malefic and combust may become too powerless to push the
native forward in his life. In addition to the above, if the
dispositor of the debilitated planet i.e the lord of the sign is
also weak - the sufferings of the native will be limitless. The
strength of the dispositor of the 10* lord becomes an
important factor in assessing the strength of the horoscope,
including the favourable disposition of other planets, get
already adversely in a great manner, when this planet is
posited in 6,1,/8,h/12Ul from Lagna. The planet in
retrogression does not allow its significance to materialize
easily, one has to struggle or lot in that regard. The dasa of a
retrograde planet also presents many obstacles for a greater
part of its dasa. The only exception is the retrogression of the
10'" lord, being too good for wealth as reflected in Sambhn
Hora Prakash, by Late R Santbanam. Great success in career
largely depends on the strength of the 10'" lord. When this
planet is conjoined with a natural benefic and aspected by
Jupiter - such a native flourishes well in life. A benefic 10*
lord in 2"d/7th/8,lhouse can boost the prospect of the 10th
house (2nd house is 5'" from 10*, 7'" house is 10* from 10*
and 8* house represents current income from profession).

Mars is the 10"' lord in 'f' will damage native's health
overstrain his nerves and will also damage his mental
happiness. When 8* house has a powerful Venus as the 10'"
lord, it will not only boost the prospects of the 10* house but
also sooth the evils of the 8* house. For a glorious career the
Bhadaka lord should be placed in trines or in 3/6/8/12
house or in his house of own house. It creates obstacles in
career. 10th lord's conjunction with Ketu in 10* is the most
dangerous phenomenon for stability and continuity. The more
is the affliction of Sun, Moon and Lagnalord, less and less
will be the fame and success.
It is to be understood, those persons who have Saturn or
Mars in the 7* house they have done some bad work in their
previous life, and hence will suffer in the present life. Saturn
in 7* does not allow the fuller utilization of his latent talents
Malefics in Kendras have not been praised by our seers. If
the lord of the ascendant is placed anywhere within 180
degree of the descendant (i.e, 7* cusp) the native will not be
lucky in his birth region and will have to seek livelihood
elsewhere. So if the ascendant lord is place anywhere from
8* to 12* - he may be lucky in his birth region. The author
has bom in Kolkata, but he ever got a job in West Bangal.
His lord of Ascendant is placed in the 5* house with 3rd/ 12"'
lord Jupiter aspectd by Venus fiom the 1 1 * house (Exp - 14).
The 8'" house falls in the IT" from the 10* house or the
house of profession. Income from one's profession thus be
gauged fiom the 8th house as well as the planets placed
therein. A strong 8* house could be any way indicate greater
monetary returns fiom one's occupation. One-way in which
this house is strengthened by placement of several planets
(natural benefic as well as natural malefics) in it.
Multiplanetary influence of a house could be also expected
through several planets aspecting a house, when several
planets exert their influence on the eight house through its
occupation or aspect, professional earnings are enhanced.
Bhagaban Rajneesh and Mega Film Star Amitabh Bachchan
had several planets in the 8th house. When 8'" house is
hemmed between benefics - a great professional earnings

could be expected. This is highly logical because the 9* and
7'" house should be occupied by natural benefics. A natural
benefic in the 9th house - makes anybody happy and
prosperous in life, if it in his own house the results will be
better. Happy incidents in life may be foretold by an astrologer
when he observes a benefic 9th lord in his own house. The
intrinsic value of a bhava is enhanced when it is hemmed
between benefics under such a circumstance his resistance
to earn more money will decrese. Benefic planets in 2"'V8'h
axis is always beneficial for earning more money provided
Lagna and its lord are strong. Additionally one should have
strong Moon, Sun and Jupiter. Jupiter and Sun are the
significators of invisible lady luck or fortune. Malefics in 8*
house provide stiff resistances in earning more money. Let
us study two very interesting cases. Poor career of a Gold
medallist in MBA.
Exp. 27: Poor career of a Gold medallist in MBA 24-91969/9=48PM /Delhi
The native took birth in a good family but stared his life
with highly malefic 8* lord/11* Jupiter's dasa which ruled
him for 13 yrs 0 m 15 d. Yogakaraka Saturn demolished him
completely. He lost his mother on 25-8-2000 during Sat -
Jupiter - Venus dasa. Adhi Yoga helped him to take birth in
a good family. He passed B.Sc and MBA in 1994 from Pune
University and started his life with Rs.2500/- month. Hardly,
he could stay in job for more than 9 months. He lost jobs
frequently. His yogakaraka Saturn's dispositer is placed in
the 8* house, and hence Saturn is very weak for him. In Aug
2005 he lost his job again, when his salary was 50,000/- a
Month. Mars in 8* house and Saturn in 12lh house did not
allow him to earn more than Rs, 5 lakh between 1994- 2005,
because most of the time he remained unemployed. Malefics
in these two evil houses generate misfortunes, scandals infamy
etc. Her younger sister called police for a minor quarrel with
her in Sept., 2005. His 2"d house is aspected by Saturn and
Mars - so he has difficulty in earning money. 2nd lord is
retrograde and has conjoined with 8th lord Jupiter which is
producing resistances in money generating schemes. His ^

Example Nd.27
Date 24/09/1969 Time 21 48 00 Day Wednesday Lat 28:39:00 North Long 77:13 00 East
Zone 82:30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23' 10:24
Balance of Dasa : Jupiter 12 Years 6 Months 9 Days
the very sensitive dual signs are afflicted. This very reason did
not arrange his marriage.
His Deha signs is Aries, Jeeva Rasi is Sagittarius. They are
in 5/9 relationships, which may auger well in late life. Both
of them are occupied by malefics. If these are occupied by
Mars, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu and particularly the 8"' lord,
the native will suffer misfortunes. His life span and health is
under severe threat. The natives having no planets in these
sign have normal lives, depending on that planetary
dispositions and overall strength of the horoscope. 8lh lord in
Deha /Jeeva signs only tailors a dark future for the native.

This aphorison as true as the Sun rises in the east. Mesh
clasa between 24-3-1996 - 24-3-2003, ruined him completely.
His marriage did not materialize, he lost jobs frequently. Vrisha
dasa started from 24-3-2003 for 16 yrs. he is likely to go
abroad, for earning his livelihood. 9111 lord in 12th favours
such an endeavour. Whenever, Rahu or Saturn occupy the
8lh house of Jupiter one does not earn much money.
Everything depends on the dasa sequences and the 9th lord/
9thhouse. Everything evaporate in air when 9'1' lord.9111 house
is weak. In deed he has a very weak 9th lord. His dasa
sequences are also bad. He is now running retrograde
Mercury's dasa. An exalted planet in retrograde motion
behaves like a debilitated planet. Moreover this Mercury has
been spoiled by 8th lord Jupiter. Any dasa hang contact with
8th house yields highly inauspicious results only a foreign
journey may rescue the native. Retrograde Saturn is the 12th
house spins a man like a wheel of a potter. To be fortunate in
life 8th house of Jupiter, Sun, Moon and 8th lord should not be
occupied by malefics. 8th house of all these vital money forming
planets are occupied by malefics forcing him to stay in the
la vers of poor persons of the society. Saturn in the 8"' house
of Jupiter always brings proverty. A postman of the society
draws a very poor salary. 8th house of Jupiter of such a person
is always occupied by malefics (see Fortune and Finance by
Dr. S.S. Chatterjee P 239).
Exp. 28: Story of a driver, born in a poor family.
24.12.74, 7=30AM, Haldiwani,
His father is a IV class employee in the power sector. He
passed XII and joined as a driver in a rich family. He earns
Rs.3000/- per month in 2006. His elder brother is an MA,
was part time lecturer, but he also lost his job and has been
deserted by his wife. The native is married, and his wife
fighting very hard to get a job. Father is suffering from brain
haemorrhage is about a retire from his service with in 2007.
for adding woes to the family only sister returned from her
in-laws house with two kids . He has been born with
Kemadruma Yoga, which arises where there is no planets
on 2nJ or 12ll'from Moon (Sun and nodes are not considered^

Example No. 28
Date 24/12/1974 Time 07:30:00 Day Tuesday Lat 29.13.00 North Long 70:31:00 East
Zone 82:3000 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:14 48
Balance of Dasa : Ketu 4 Years 9 Months 11 Days
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
He has indeed been bom under this yoga as all the kendras
fo Moon are vacant. This yoga causes calamities, poverty,
loss of position and grief. Success may not come in early life
when the 4,h/10'h houses from Janma Lagna or Moon are
vacant. Regarding a hard life in early life, we remember the
chart of Bernard Shaw (1856 - 1950) who was awarded the
Nobel prize in literature in 1925. Surprisingly he has Dharma
Karmadhipati yoga in Lagna and Venus 6*/ll* lord is the
Yogavanga planet in Lagna. He enjoyed Venus dasa from
November 1979 to November 1999, which ruined him
completely. In almost 100% cases, dasa of a Yogavanga planet

ruins the native. In order to be fortunate in life one has to
enjoy to dasas of yoga forming planets, and the dasas of
501 /9'1' lords. During Sun's dasa he was O.K. But again
the dasa of 8"' lord Moon ruined the family completely.
He finds no hope for living. He has a retrograde Satrun
in 7'1' house, which is aspected by mars from the 12lh.
house is generally judged for business prospects, marriages
and business partner, diplomacy, competitive
examinations, marital happiness, office colleagues etc.
Malefics like Mars or Saturn if posited in he 7th hosue,
may develop strong oppositions and enemies from spouse
and office colleagues who may ruin or damage one's
career. It may cause delay in promotion or elevation in^
rank. God did not provide him any status to him. Saturn
in 7'" does not allow the native for the fuller utilization in
his inherent talents. More than one malefic in 12* does
not allow the native to earn money easily. Jupiter is squared
by Rahu-Ketu axis, and Jupiter is very weak in the 3rJ
house. Without strong Jupiter it is not possible to rise high
in life. His dasa sequences are also not favourable to rise
high in life, inspie of thepresence ofDharmakarmadhipati
Yoga. 8th lord in 5th does not allow a man to prosper in
life. This dispositer of 8lh lord has moved to 12,hhouse and
is afflicted by Ketu/Rahu axis. Therefore 8lh lord Moon's
dasa is not much encouraging for him. Scandals and
infamy will engulf him because 8th /1 2"' houses of Chandra
Lagna are highly afflicted. 2/12 relationships of Karmic
Central planets Venus and Mars only add fuel to the fire.
Jupiter, Sun and Moon 81*1 lord are the vital planets for
harnessing wealth. 8lb houses of these planets shouldnot
be occupied by malefics. His Moon is the 8'" lord whose 8'"
house is occupied by Mars and Rahu. So, weak S1*1 lord
made him a poor man of the society. Inspire of all lacunae
in the horoscope, if 8'1' lord and Saturn ae strong, the
naitve does well in life. Aspect of Mars or Saturn reduced
the benovolence power of Saturn Weak Saturn and weak
8'" lord made him a very poor man of the society.

Chapter - IX
Eighth House And The Yogas
Yogas are invaluable tools for examining a horoscope.
An astrologer should be wellversed person and should
remember thousands of subtle astrological slokas framed
by the sages of yore. They are actually the weapons of the
astrologers. The literature is very vast. The author has
worked very hard to extract the precious data from the
labyrinths of thousands of slokas for the benefit of mankind.
He has examined many books and vast literature and found
the following slokas, covering the trika houses to be very
useful in real life even in 2006.
1 . If 6th/8u,/12,h lords make any relationship with 1st, 9th/
1()' lords - one faces terible resistances in life.
2. Ultan Kalamitra says if Rahu is posited in 6"1/ 8th /or 12*
house and aspected by the lords of those houses - Rahu's dasa
will be mrityapada or full of griefs.
3 . 1 “'lord in 8* may make one of misercly disposition intent
upon gathering wealth, 2"d lord in 8th make self-destructive. If
1st and 2nd lords are in if1 , the native will ever be troubled by
poverty.
4. If the lO^lord is relegated to the 8th along with Rahu the
native will hate others, be a great fool and will do bad deeds.
5. If 10* lord is in 6th, 8* or 12th house, the native will be
imperfect in his work. This aphorism is stunningly true to the
knowledge of the author.
6. If the 10* lord is conjoined with 8th or 12th lords, the
native's profession wil decline or may even be ruined, (example
7. Malefics in 8’1' does not allow earning money easily.
Malefics in 12'1' brings poverty . All rich persons do have a benefic

either in 8"7or 12th. A benefic in 8th /or 12"' tries to
counterbalance the evil influence of other house.
8. Retrograde Saturn or Retrograde Mars in the 12th,
spins a man like a wheel of a potter. Retrogression of 6,h/
8th/ 12th lords are never welcome. They increase litigations
in life. When Rahu passes over retrograde 8lh lord, severe
financial set backs set in Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee
has retrograde Saturn and retrograde. Jupiter in the 81'1
house, Sagittarius. He spent his last days of his life in
Kashmir Jail and was killed through a conspiracy.
9. Indeed very bad places for Rahu and Ketu are the 6"'/
8u'/12fl1 houses or even in the 11* house counted from the
ascendant or from the Moon. In such a case misery or calamity
of a great and not so easily repairable order is bound to be there,
though there may be same plus point in given cases.
10. Mars and the lord of Ascendant joining together in the
6lh/8,h/or 12* house will cause disorders of blood vessels or
danger though weapons.
11. The Sun in the ascendant with another malefic planet
while Saturn and Mars are together in the 6”/8ll’house, will
lead to severe pains through diseases in privities.
12. Mars and Saturn together in the 6*/orin 8Ul house will
lead to epilepsy will produce violent accients.
13. Saturn, Mars and Rahu in 6ll,/8th/12’1' houses along
with Moon will lead to epilepsy (that is these four planets can
in any manner occupy one, two or three of the said houses).
14. Mercury in the 3rd, 61*1, 8* or 12* house along with a
malefic planet will lead to mental malady.
15. When Rahu is placed either in 6*/or 8* and Saturn
occupies 8* house from Rahu - such a native has fear from fire.
16. 8'1' lord + Lord of Ascendant, and a malefic in 6th curtails
longevity.
17. As per Shiva Jataka, dasa of the lord of the signs
occupied by and aspcted by 8,h lord gives auspicious results
18. Lord of 8th in 12* promotes longevity but in 1 1* curtails
longevity. Lord of 8* aspecting Lagna grants longevity.
19. If 8'" lord or occupant of 8* is vargottam, one inherits
ancestral property.

20. If 8* lord is strongly placed in 1 1*, 1st half dasa of 5*
lord bring legacies. If 11* lord is placed in 8* - this dasa will
generate good results (example - 4)
21. 81" lord in Lagna with Ketu gives short life.
22. Sub-period of 8* lord is always bad. It reduces one's
wealth. The authourlost everything in a tragic incident - during
Venus -Sun dasa (example-14)
23. Dasa ofRahu, Ketu, Mars, Saturn related to 8"’ lord is
highly inauspicious.
24. Two malefics unredeemed by any benefic, aspecting 8*
or 10* give unnatural death by suicide, weapon or poison.
25. Ladies become sexually principled, when benefics
occupy the 8* house.
26. A retrograde planet in 8th curtails longevity.
27. A person becomes short lived when lord of ascendant is
weakeven though 8* lord is strong. For along lifeS"1 lord should
be weak.
28. When S1*1 lord is placed in 6*, such a native gets wealth
suddenly and fame also but suffers ill health.
29. Saturn and Moon in the 8lh house will cause splenary
disorders.
30. Saturn and Rahu together in 8* house while another
malefic is in strength anywhere will cause epilepsy.
31. The Sun, the Moon, and Mars placed anyway in the 8*
house and the ascendant (i.e. both the houses occupied by ill
any manner by these three planets, any two in one of these
places, while the other is in the other place) and receiving malefic
aspects will lead to epilepsy
32. All malefics (i.e Saturn, Sun, Mars and a node) in the 8*
house while the Moon and Venus together in an angle will cause
epilepsy.
33 Mercury in 12* aspect to Saturn or the 8* lord will cause
infamy and disrepute due to scandals.
34. lfthe ascendant lord is in the 8* house along with
the 2nJ lord, the native will be over trouble by poverty.
35. If a strong malefic owning 6lh/or 8th house is in
1 2th, the native may lose his money and land.
36. If the 6*/8t1' lord is related to 4* house/4* lord, there
will be division of property in native's family

37. Mars is in a trika, the naive is concerned about his own
happiness (Mars in 8*/ 12,hhouses causes dreaded KujaDosha.)
38. Major health problems will strike in the dasa of a planet
with referenceto whom the 6*/7*/8* are occupied by malefics,
inimical or debilitated planets.
39. Misfortunes of a great order will rule the entire dasa of
a planet with reference to whom the 6*/8*/12* are occupied
by malefics, debilitated planets and or enemies.
40. One's fortunes will often be stalled if the 4* lord is in the
company of Sun and receives the aspect of 8* lord.
41 .If 6"'/8l,'/12thhouses are occupiedby individual malefics,
the person will be shunned by his family members.
42. The lord of 8* house occupying the ll'1' house will cause
many difficulties in childhood but bless the person with much
happiness in the latter part of his life.
43. Retrograde Mars in 6lh/8'l'/12l11 house will cause major
losses though fire.
44. A planet even in 6*/8*/12*, if in his own sign or in
exaltation and well aspected by a powerful benefic becomes
auspicious.
45. 8th, 3rJ, 12* and 6* houses are bad in descending order,
6"' house is actually 9* from 10* house. So whatever we do in
this life depends on the 6* house. On account of this reason our
sages have formulated Adhi yoga - yoga of millions. When 6*,
7"', 8th house of Moon or Lagna are occupied by Venus, Jupiter
and Mercury - this rare yoga forms. This yoga is absent even in
the horoscopes of 99% persons of great personalities. One will
not get the fruits of great Adhi yoga when Moon, Lagna and its
lord are weak. Only a strong Lagna and its lord can ensure
achievements in life. Richest man under the Sun. Bill Gate of
USA is bom with Adhi Yoga (read Astrology Nectar by Dr. S.S.
Chatterjee for the Adhi yoga details)
46. When 8* lord is in 30* degree, one's life span can be
affected adversely. In case of females, additional effect is a short
lived marriage. In a female horoscope, if Jupiter is placed in the
2”d/4'h/911' will counteract all the Doshas when malefics are
placed in the 8* /or 7*.
47. Nakshatra occupied by S’11 lord is very important for a
happy married life. The natal nakshatra of the spouse should.

not be same or the 10* or 19* thereof. Suppose one is bom in
cancer ascendant. The 8"' lord is Saturn and he is in Bharani.
The spouse should not have Bharani, Poorva Phalguni (11) or
Poorva Ashada (20) as Janma Nakshatra.
48. Saturn (withour retrogression, debility or combustion)
in 8* or the owner of the 8* (without combustion) in 8* and not
ill associated gives long life.
49. According to "Doctrines of Suka Nadi - Retold" by R.
Santhanam.
a. Shall the 8* lord be in a benefic sign while the 9* lord
being in exaltation /own sign in aspected by Jupiter, the native
will acquire huge wealth and be quite happy.
b . When la/8'h lords are invoked in Parivartan yoga, while
the 1 1 * occupied by 6*/Or 12lh lord, the native will lose in each
and every eftoit.
c. No undertakings of the native will be successful if
Jupiter's dispositor is in the 11 *, and 1 1* lord is in 12* with
aspect to 8* lord.
d. If the lords of the 1 1 * and 2ndjoin the 8* in aspect to
Mars or Saturn, one will be very poor.
e. If the lord of the ascendant, 9'" and 1 1 * are relegated to
the 8* house, the native will be extremely poor.
f. One will be poor if the 8* and 12lh are occupied in any
manner by the lords of 8* and the 9*.
g. No disease will afflict the native if the 9* lord is exalted
though the ascendant lord may occupy the 8* house.
h. Should be 6* lord be in exaltation in the ascendant while
the lord of the ascendant is relegated to the 8th, the native may
die of urinary diseases.
i. The native may die of severe fever or heat stroke, if 1st,
4"', 8'1' lords are together in the 8* house. If Sun be in the 8* in
company of the3r2and 4* lords while the 4'1' lord in the yoga is
in fall, the subject will die due to pains of the heart/ lungs.
50. Jataka Tatwa on 8* house:
a. Benefics in the 8* house indicates afflux of wealth.
b. If the lords of 8'", 9th are conjoined with a malefic in the
4*, the native may be lame.
c. If Venus and Mars occupy the 8* or a sign of Mars, the
native may suffer from a disease of testicles.

d. If Jupiter and 2rilord occupy 6L>i 8* or 12* native may
be a mute.
e. Saturn in 12'J', Moon in 2"d and Sun in 8* may cause
blindness.
f. If the lords of lsl and 6"' houses be in 611', 8*, or 12'1' they
may cause blindness.
51 . Sanketa Nidhi on 8* house:
a. Mars in 6*, Saturn in 8* and Rahu in 7* may make the
native lose his wife even though he may marry more than once.
b . When the 7th or the 8* house is occupied by Mars, Saturn
and Rahu, the person concerned will suffer the risk of being
bitter by dogs, snakes and the like or he will surely suffer from
a very bad poisonous disease.
c. The 8* house is known as the house of Mystery Matters
relating to fear or danger from enemies spring of diseases, a
hole or slit, a cave boat, imprisonment and the like, bondage,
crossing of a river, theft, robbery crime, blockade, fighting etc.
d. If malefics are posited in the 8* wealth is destroyed while
baiefics there bring in wealth. When malefics are in the 8* they
cause wounds or moles in the private parts ofthenative,.
e. When malefics occupy the 8* house, the native may
suffer from various diseases. He will not have quick success in
his endeavours. He may be involved in protracted quarrels or
dispute (Richard Nixon had Rahu in Pisces in his 8* houses).
He may meet with his end in encounter or at the hands of
criminals in modern context.
f. If Mars and Saturn combine with Rahu and occupy the
8"1 house, the native meets with premature death through
weapons, missiles etc (in encounter). Even a benefic in the 8*
house, if it be aspected by'mimical and malefic planets will bring
about the death of the native in some encounter.
52. Jatakadesa Marga on 8* house
In sloka 1 1 , chapter 10 of Jatakadesa Maga by Somayajj,itis
said that the lord of the6* house will cause danger from enemies
and the like while the lord of the 8"1 may cause risk to life. The
lord of 12* house may cause a fall from one's position, poverty
and the like. These adverse effects will become more accurate
when a malefic conjoins with or aspects such planets.

53. According to Jataka Alankara by Sage Ganesh Kavi
a. Moon + Venus in 8* - the native suffers from night
blindness.
b. Lord of 8* + a malefic in 6th/orl2th will produce short
life.
c. Lord of 8"' + ascendant lord - short life.
d. Lord of Ascendant + Sun in 6/8/12- the native suffers
from fever, boils.
e. Lord of Ascendant + Moon in 6/8/12 - boils due water
f. Lord of Ascendant + Mars in 6/8/12 - Glandular
troubles, wounds caused by arms, weapons.
g. Lord of Ascendant + Jupiter in 6/8/12 - dysentery
h. Lord of Ascendant + Venus in 6/8/12 - Marasma,
wasting disease
i. Lord of Ascendant + Sun in 6/8/12- the native suffers
at the hands ofthieves, tribals
j. Sun, Moon, Sat in 6*/ 8* - Trouble in hands
k Saturn in 6/12 from Venus - Nearly incapable of sex act
1. 6* lord + Sat in 12* aspected by malefics - loss of thighs
54. Results of planets in Dusthanas 6/8/12
1. Malefic in 6 -Goodfor power but causes diseases
2. Rahu in 6 -Freedom from enmity success through
foreigner but causes disorders in nervous system.
3. Benefic in 6 -Good for intelligence, but causes disease
4. Mars in 8 -Violent death/loss
5. Saturn in 8 -Adds longevity, but no prosperity
55. According to R.Santhanain
a. If The 6°' house is occupied by a female planet, the
subject will be happy through his sisters
b. A benefic planet in the 8* house with aspect of another
baiefic will cause a number of pilgrimages (or association with
holy men and places)
c. If 6,h/8,h/12u' are occupied by individual malefics, the
person will be shunned by his family members.
d. Mercury in the 6* house aspected by Saturn can lead to
deafness or ear related problems.
e. The dasa of Ketu in 12* house will be a source of great
financial achievements.

f. The Sun in 6* aspected by Mars means troubles from
government sources.
56. When Trika lords yield favourable results?
When they are aspected the 5"' /9"1 lords or posited in the Kendra
of 9* lord, or generated Vipareeth Raja yoga or their kendras are
occupied by planets which provide prime dignity to the trika
lords (TOA, Jan 1996 P 31) An afflicted eighth house and its
lords is a major factor in predicting about fatal events of life.
57. If the 8* house is occupied by two of the three planets
viz Jupiter, Saturn and a node, the naive's father will have two
wives (TOA Aug 1997p 55)
58. Ketu in the 8"' house aspected by a malefic plana in 11
brigforth great social humiliation (TOA Aug 1997)
59. It is the inherent strength of horoscope which is
multiplied by the presence of yogas. A good horoscope is
characterized by the strength of Kendra and trikona houses and
weakness of the trika houses, house should be more
powerful than the b* house if the native is to be freefrom diseases,
enemies and debts. The 9* house should be stronger than S*
and the 11* house must be stronger than 12* for success,
prosperity and good luck.
60. Should Mars join one of the planets viz Moon, Sun and
Jupiter the subject will have major (Mars is the 8* lord of the
zodiac ill health or litigation. There is no way for him to escape
this kind of an event (TOA May 1997 P 1) see example 55.
61 . If 2nJ 7* lords and Venus be placed in the constellation
of 6,8,12 houses such conditions may result in disappointment
in love, domestic unhappiness, sickness of partner or mutual
separation and sometimes may lead to two or more wives.
62. According to Sage Parasar, if the lords of a particular
house remain in Kendras or trikonas from Ascendant, such lords
will be fruitful, workout well and active, whereas if they remain
in 6"'/8lh/ 12"' houses from Ascendant/or from their own houses,
the house of which they are lords will cease to function (they
will function if they occupy own Navamsa). Planets also do not
function when there placed in 0° or in 30" or hemmed between
malefics.
63. If the 2"d lord is placed in 6*/8*/12*, or from its own
house, however big the amount, he will never be able to savf«j0

anything.
64. If Saturn is retrograde at birth in the 8* house, the native
will be separated from his family. Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee
died in Kashmir for this yoga, for away from his own house and
family.
65. "Misfortunes never come alone", only the injured
foot is again injured. Horoscopically such adages rather
true in one's life when the 9th lord is ill aspected by the ill
placed 6,h/8th/12lh lord.
66. The 12,h house aspected by the 6* lord or 8* lord indicates
eloping from home, criminal punishments, early danger to one's kids.
67. If 6,h house is aspected by the 8"’ /12th lord (or even the
6* lord) will be a source of diseases and like. 6* lord and 12th
lords when exchange places or posited in their own houses , this
yoga will sufaceout. So exchange of 6'V 12th lords does not auger
well for the native.
68. The 8th house aspectd by 6* lord or 12* lord indicates
reduction of life span, inheritance gain, honour etc.
69. Saturn in the 8'" or aspecting 8* house is an indication
for difficulties relating to rectum, hi a female's case it can cause
difficulties concerning ovary.
70. If 6dl /8,h/12u' lords be inimically placed, be in depression,
be eclipsed or vanquished in war they will turn out to be
auspicious and may give a kind of Raja yoga. For example in
case of Leo, 12lh lord Moon in Scorpio with Rahu, 8* lord Jupiter
in 10* with Ketu, 6* lord Saturn in Lagna will cause this yoga.
Here Saturn is placed in the inimical sign.
71 . The dasa of a planet in the 8* house will cause family
death. In a weak horoscope, it can affect the native itself.
72. Mars and the 3rd lord in 8* are detrimental for happiness
of brotherhood.
73 . 5th lord in 6* /8tl712l11 may cause delay, denial or loss of issues.
74. 6th lord in 6,J,/8“'/T'may cause injury insomepartofthebody.
75. If 6lh and 8* lords are in Lagna along with Sun, there
may be prolonged fever. If they were combined with Mars they
may cause injury by weapons or may give gout. If they be
combined with Mercuiy, they may cause trouble in gall bladders,
or may give bilious complaints, it combined with Venus, they

may cause veneral diseases, diabetes or urinary troubles, if
combined with Saturn they may give gastritis, gout or paralysis,
if combhied with Rahu they may give fear from animals, if
combined with Ketu, they may give some ulcer in lower
abdomen near naval, if combhied with Moon they may give
coughs or pleurisy, but if combined with Jupiter disease will be
destroyed or will be ordinary one.
76. Mars in the 6* house, 6* lord in 8* or 12* may give
some serious illness.
77. Sun in 6*/or 8th and Moon in 12* there from may cause
fear from water.
78. 8th lord in Kendra makes one long lived but if 8* lord is
combhied with some malefic or Lagna lord in 8* house itself it
may give only short life.
79. Moon is not aspected by benefic, malefics in 8* and the
8* lord combined with malefics give short life.
80. Exalted Lagna lord. Moon in 11* and Jupiter in 8* give
long life.
81. 8* lord in own sign, own Navamsa or in a friendly sign
will give long life.
82. Malelics in 8th and 12th, 8* lord is debilitated, Lagna lord
weak -may give short life.
83 . ll,hlordin flVS"'/l 2th when combined with malefics will
foil all attempts for gains and economic prosperity of the native.
84. 8* lord is combined with some malefics in 12th will cut
short one's life. 8* lord in 12,u makes one spend on bad cause.
85. Any planet situated in3'a/6,h/8,l'/12')'fromthe ascendent
of the divisional chart gives bad results in his period. However a
plant in own Navamsa, usually bestows good results and this is
the finding of the author.
86. The Moon's transit over the 6*1'/ 8a' / 12th house from Lagna/
Moon, is highly unfavourable with possibility of harassment,
sudden illness, injury, accident etc.
87. According to Muhurta Chintamani malefics in 8'" cause
death of king (literally meaning it is difficult to earn money)
whereas malefics in 4* or 7th give fall from power and malefics
in 12* give poverty. Stigma of combustion of Lagnalord and
10'" lord is not ordinary. Itis no less evil doer.

88. Planets in the 8* house of a women
Sun -Sorrowful, poor, irreligious with some injured limb.
Mon -May give ill fame, disease, poverty, ill dressed, defective
eyes, defective breasts, and defective vagina
Mercury -May make a woman quarrelsome denied of
wealth, virtues and kindness, also dirty and deceptive.
Saturn -Will make a women wicked, malicious or a cheat
and denied of conjugal happiness
Rahu -Will make a woman highly cruel hearted, diseased
characterless and bereft of conjugal happiness.
Jupiter-Sexually principled, fat, fewer issues, deserted by
husband.
Venus -Will make mad for power, bereft of health, virtues
and kindness, also dirty and deceptive
Mars -It is a graveyard for her. She produces unhappiness
in the family. May become a widow.
It is better that there is no planet in the 8,h house in a female
horoscope. If there are malefics in 2'“’ /12th both from Lagna
and the Moon such a woman may ruin both her own family
and the family of her husband. Jupiter in Kendra reduces the
evils of a woman. If both 8* / 12* houses are occupied by
malefics she bring disgrace to the family. A baiefic in the 9rt
house reduces the evils of 8*/7*/12* house.
89. Vish Kanya : A woman bom in Aslesha, Krittika
Satabhisa on Tuesday, Sunday or Saturday on 2"d, 7* or 12th
lunar thithis will be a poisonous woman. If the 7* lord or any
benefic occupies 7* from Lagna or the Moon, Visha Kanya yoga
is cancelled out
90. Shakata Yoga: Rapport between Jupiter and Moongets
completely lost when they from 6/8 or 2/12 relationships. This
is an evil yoga and reduces the merit of thehoroscope. It provides
a shock to the native at least once in his life time and make the
native bewildered through its suddenness. This yoga is found
in the birth charts of Pundit Nehru, Narashima Rao, Shivaji,
Mrs. Sonia Gandhi, and others' charts. Think of Mrs. Sonia
Gandhi who lost her illustrious husband under most tragic
circumstances. Narashima Rao was visibly shaken when
Harshad Mehta brought allegations against him. When Moon

is exalted or in his own house or in a Kendra from Lagna or in
the house of Jupiter, shakata yoga is cancelled.
91. A planet placed in adverse position in 3rd, 6th, 8* and
12°' from its own house, the prospects of that house would
suffer. For Sagittarius Ascendant, Jupiter will be exalted in the
8"1 house, so such native do not get benefits during Jupiter's
dasa.
92. Rahu in 6*/8*/or 12* unexpected by benefics will be
giving troubles in its dasa. Rajiv Gandhi had Rahu in his 12*
house and was not aspected by any planet. Hence it turned to
be a killer planet. Rahu / Ketu aspected by trine/quadrant lords
behaves as a yogakaraka.
93 . If any planet is lord of the ascendant and lord of 8"' house,
then being the lord of ascendant the Dosha of being lord of 8*
is cancelled. Mars in the case of Aries and Scorpio and Venus in
the cause of Libra ascendant ; Moon for Sagittarius and Sun for
Capricorn and exempted from the 8* lordships. '
94. When Deha or Jeeva Rasi occupied by dire malefic like
8* lord, Saturn, the dasa sequences in KCD will fail togi ve highly
favourable effects for Saturn is all out to keep the person
unhappy. Godess Lakxmi will never visit the native, when he
has 8*/6* lords in Deha/Jeeva signs. If a retrograde 8* lord
occupies the above signs the native becomes a beggar. Sun and
Moon does not suffer from 8"' lordship blemishes
95. If lord of 10*, the Sun is in close conjunction with 811'
lord (retrograde 8* lord is more dangerous), 8"' house has malefics
like Mars and Rahu, this kind of powerful adversities could
only take away the apparentmerit of the horoscope.
96. The role of Saturn is determined by the Karma of the
previous births. Without the support of Saturn, it is very difficult
to achieve the goods of life. For Cancer Saturn is the ^ lord, for
Pisces - Saturn is the 12"' lord, for Leo - Saturn is the 6* lord. If
a person is born under the above three Ascendants and if Saturn
is not exalted and is not in aspect of Jupiter or Mars, the same
Saturn provides lot of sufferings. And such a Saturn in
conjunction or opposition with Moon renders life totally
miserable. This is the planetary position which is called Visha
Yoga, the poisonous position (TOA, July 94 P 16) .• g

97. 8th lord in 8* provides a poor career (see examples. 22,
33,52,55) Even a Yogakarka in 8* house with 8* lord becomes
powerless.
98. According R. Santharam (TOA March 1994 P 5) for an
excellent career 1 O'1' house should not have aspects of 6th /8 * lords.
Joint influence is too dangerous. Jupiter aspecteed by 6* lord
produces worst results for any Lagna. It is a grisly combination
and is to be feared.
99. Vipareeth Raja Yoga and Neech Vanga Raja Yoga
Raja Yogas arising out of Kendra Kona are usually stable and
well ordained. Neech Vanga Raja Yogas are usually victory of
Purushartha over Bhagya, even a person of humble status may
rise to high position on account of Neecha Vanga Raja yoga if
he can exert his will in proper direction at the appropriate time.
Vipareeth Raha yoga occurring in 12* or 8* houses are not as
much durable as in the 10th house. In Narasimha Rao's
horoscope 8* lord and 12* lord in 10* house has enhanced the
significance of 10,h house standing for power and position.
Subha Ubhayachani yoga has further sanctified his 10* house.
Mercury ahead of Sim gives fine wit and presence of mind,
Varus behind Sun provides culture and refines of mind (P.V.
Narasimha Rao, Virgo - Lagna, Libra - Rahu, Pisces - Moon,
Aries - ketu , Taurus - Venus, Gemini - Sun, Mars, Cancer -
Mercury, Leo - Jupiter, Sun). He breathed his last in 2004. The
author has observed that when 6"'/l 21'1 lords exchange places
- these people build casde in ah. They face total humiliations in
life. Vipareeth Raja yoga does not provide any help to them.
Mahatma Gandhi, the father of the nation has brutally
assassinated by Nathuram Godsay in 1948. His 8* house was
aspected by Saturn and Mars, 11* lord Sun in 12* aspected his
6* house, benefices in Lagna and Jupiter in 8* delayed his own
end. When a Vipareeth Raja Yoga involving 6*/8*/12* lord
occur, then there should not be any otherplanet in these houses,
this yoga produces excellent results during the dasa of thetrika
lords forming virpareeth raja yoga. In the dasa of other planets,
they suffer immensely in the general scheme of life. Until or
unless Raja Yoga is formed by the union or relationships between
a trine and a Kendra lord financial stability can never be

achieved. When Rahu and Ketu are aspected by trine, quadrants
lords or a yoga karka such a planet behaves well in its dasa
Rajiv Gandhi's Rahu was not aspected by Kendra/or trine lords .
So he was assassinated during Rahu's Mahadasa. George Bush
(Sr.) had the following horoscope Leo - Lagna, Rahu; Virgo -
Moon, Libra - Saturn (R), Scorpio - Jupiter R; Aquarius - Mars,
Ketu, Taurus - Sun, Mercury, Gemini - Venus.
Geogre Bush (Sr) will be remembered in the history tor
dismantling Communist Empire from the world. Today in 2006,
the USA has become the political and economic boss of the
world. This country is fighting against global terrorism after the
blasting of twin towers in New York on 1 1* Sept. 2001 by Osma
Bin Laden (indirectly) and A1 Quida group of terrorists. Pinnacle
of this glory goes to only one person, who is none but Sr. George
Bush. His illustrious son George Bush Or) is ralhig the earth
from Washington D.C from Nov 2000 with firm hand and
determination for eliminating terrorists. George Bush's 8* house
and lord of Lagna is aspected by Jupiter, Sun is not afflicted by
Saturn. 2nd, 7*, 8* 12* 1st houses are free from aspect of Saturn.
Rahu in the 12* house of Moon has generated Mahashakti Yoga.
Rahu or Saturn behind Moon raises anybody for gigantic
purposes . His Parijata Yoga made him immortal . Lord of Lagna
is posited in 10*, whose dispositor Venus is in 11th, whose
dispostor Mercury is in 10* forming this unique Parijata Yoga
All great men of history like Aurangzeb, Kabir, Lata Mangeskar,
Shivaji, Akbar, Vivekananda are bom with this rare yoga. His
84’ lord Jupiter lost its venom, being in the angle of Yogakaraka
Mars. Rahu - Ketu axis has bear energized by Yogakaraka Mars .
, It is unbelievable that his son is also the president of USA who is
fighting against terrorism from Sept 2001 . Sr. Bush fought
against communists and eliminated them from the map of the
world, his son is fighting against terrorists. 2nd lord in 10"’ (1 0th
from 5*), a natural benefic Moon in 2rf provided him a dynamic
son. President Junior Bush is visited India with his wife in the
first weak of March 2006.
100. If Venus is aspected or aP'cted by malefic planets and
posited in the 7*, 8* or 12* it may fairly be said that passions
and desires hold important place in the native's life. In case

Venus is afflicted by Sun and Moon or Venus is hemmed between
Sun and Moon then the naive is deprived of sexual pleasure
inspite of being married or stays unmarried. Sun and Moon are
the enemies of Venus, the significator of sex. Hence luminaries
throw cold water on the prospects of sexual happiness in the
life of the native, when Venus is found with Sun or Moon.
1 01 .If Mars is located in the 8* house from Moon, the native
is killer of the living beings, a shiner, bereft of good nature and
tmthfulness. A "killer living beings" has been interpreted by as
"capable of poisoning others". A natural malefic in $ house is
considered afflictions to the Lagna, when a malefic is located in
the 8* house from the Moon it is affliction to the Moon.
102.1f4*/8*/12* houses of Venus are occupied by malefics,
divorce or death of wife will be the outcome. If 6"' /8,h/l 2dl houses
of Mars are occupied by malefics - manned life of the lady will
be dull.
103. In KCD system, the dasa will bring financial set backs
in life containing the 8* lord.
1 04. Death by explosions/Gun fire
•a.* According to Jataka Parijata if Mars aspects the 8* house
death through weapons is possible. Malefics in 8* house or
malefics aspects on 8* house or 8* lord, may cause painful deaths.
b. According to Parasar, Saturn is proximity to Lagna
devoid of benefic aspect may cause dismemberment of body at
naval point, if Sun, Moon and Raliu combination is also present
in the birth chart.
c. According to Brihat Yavana Jataka
1 . Saturn's aspect on 8* house causes danger from weapons
or water.
2. Aspect of Marson 8* house causes fear of death through
weapons or criminals with injuiy at naval point.
3. Rahu in 12th may cause end of life through strife or
through fall from height.
d. According to Parasar, Rahu in 6*/8*/12* may cause
displacement from position and also death through conspiracy,
especially in its Mahadasa. Saturn in influence on the above
houses may cause death through flow of blood or trouble from
poison, or fire. Martian association on the above house mav

cause wounds, through weapons or fire.
105. Failures are the results when I5*/ 2nd, 9*, 11"' houses or
their lords are having connection with 6"'/ 8'1' lords.
106. Generally all the planets in 6* /811' / 1 2* or in enemy's
camp or in papa Kartari Yoga do not yield favourable results.
lO/.lfmalefic planets are located in the 12*, 5* or 8* house,
the yoga indicates the discontinuation of the family tree and the
man becomes bereft of wealth.
108. If many malefics occupy the 8'" house from Moon, the
yoga indicates the extinction of the family tree.
1 09. When 6* / 8* or 2"d / 12* relationship is found between
Lagna and the 5* lord, the native will not be able to enjoy full
life, even though he may possess sufficient wealth and other
amenities to lead a very happy life.
110. According to Jataka Parijata, Parvatayoga arises when
the kendras are occupied by benefics and if 6* and 8* houses
are unoccupied or occupied by benefices. Such a yoga brings
wide fame.
11 1. Afflictions of 3rd/ 6* / 8* house makes one a hardcore
criminal.
1 1 2. A malefic occupying the 8111 from another malefic destroys
the benefic qualities of the house, occupied by the latter. When
Rahu is placed in the S* house from Jupiter, one fails to earn
much money (Vedic Astrology by Bepin Behari P 262). Same is
the case when Mars occupies the 8* house of Saturn.
11 3. When 8* lord is in 30°, one's life span can be affected
adversely. In the cause of females additional effect is short-lived
marriage .
1 14. 6h lord is related to 8* lord, sorrow through diseases
thefts etc will be clean possibility. The native will be denied
inheritance.
1 15. Aspect of 6*/8* lords arepoisonus what they aspect the
10* house the native suffers from scandals, defamation and
litigations. But they lose Venom in 3/6//8/12houses other than
of their own house. An evil plana should be located in other
evil house only.
116. The 6/8 or the 2/ 12 position between Sun and the Moon
or more precisely if the Sun is placed closely or exactly in the 8*

or the 12th house from the Moon, it does not auger well for the
father. However a dignified Sun in the 8* house will bestow
prosperity of the father soon after his birth.
117. Mars and Sun in 8* give high fever before 20 years.
They should be careful about any cut injury - which may
become septic. With this combination, the individual can gain
in real estate. If Sun, Mars & Saturn occupy 4*/8*/12* house,
amputation of a limb or a part of the body might become
unavoidable.
118. A benefic planet in the 8* house with aspect to another
benefic will cause a number of pilgrimages.
11 9. If the 8'1' house is spoilt, the other relevant houses and
planets will not find it easy to undo the damage.
120. Planets situated in the 12"' house, 8th house from Rahu
or Ketu loses some power. (Vedic Astrology by Bipin Behari P
262). Jupiter placed in the 8"‘ from Rahu makes a man poor.
121. If the ascendant lord is in the 8* house along with 2"li
lord, the native will ever be troubled by poverty.
122. The Sun - Mercury association in the 8* house brings
sudden political prosperity.
123. Defame will flow if Rahu or Ketu along with Saturn
simultaneously transit the 8th house from natal Moon.
124. One will turn into a forger if the 8* lord is in the 3rd
house along with Mars or Ketu.
125. Rahu in the 8* house identical with Scorpio will cause
uterus disorders for a female native.
1 26. Retrograde Mars in the 8lh house can introduce a violent
and unexpected end of the spouse.
127. If the 4* lord is conjunct with Moon while the latter is
not lord of 6lh/8,l,/12lh/the native will acquire housing properties
in his early youth.
128. Mars or Saturn debilitated in 7* /8 * lonely causes short stature.
129. Two of Mars - Rahu - Ketu - Satumjoining in the 8*
house identical with a fixed sign will give long lasting diseases.
130. Venus in the 8* house identical with Cancer/Scorpio
and aspeted by Mars or Rahu indicate, kidney disorders, urinary
diseases.
131 .If in a query relating to lost articles, the 8* lord is going

to be retrograde - The thief will be caught coinciding with
retrogression or direct motion of the planet.
1 32. A strong 8h house and its lord indicate that the native has
a capacity fa- struggle, a will to over-power the real fighting attitude.
A weak 8* house and its lord make the native adopt easy and illegal
ways of acquiring money and power. All underhand activities,
which start with the setting Sun are represented by this house.
Practical case studies have revealed - a weak 6* and strong 8*
lords help the native to earn money easily .
133. The sub-period of 8* lord related to 9* house can affect
a person either in respect of his own fortune or may cause an
untoward event concerning father, like ill health, danger and
reversal. The author lost everything in subperiod of 8,h lord in
9* in the main period of Venus in 11*. (example - 14.)
1 34. The It)1 house being subjected to a relationship with 8*
and 12'1' lords is a set back fa- uninterrupted happiness in career.
135. 8* lord in 9'1' - such a native begets a wicked wife and
leads a life full of misfortunes. 8* lord in 10* house will make
the native devoid of parental bliss.
tb
136. When 6 lord is related to 8* lord, sorrow through
diseases, theft etc will be clear possibility.
137. When 9* lord gets related to 8* lord, the native will
somehow be in perennial trouble (example 335255)
138. If the lord of 8* house is in the 7* house without the
aspect of a natural benefic planet, the native will be troubled by
diseases and expenses.
139. Jupiter in the 8* house with Rahu does not allow the
native to earn much money. Debilated Sun in 8* produce the
same results. Matters will be more complicated when Saturn
joins the Sun in 8 house (example - 45). Weak Sun in 8* brings
infamy, because Sun is the lord of fame. Jupiter and Sun are the
Karaka planets of 9'" house. Weak Sun and weal^ Jupiter will
tailor unhappiness for the native. A planet in the 8 house feels
handicapped in bestowing results.
140. Whar there is exchange of 1st and 8"' lords, if the 8* lord is
a malefic, native will be treasure house of diseases. If it is a benefic,
it will increase his longevity. He will intent upon gathering wealth.
141 .Two malefics unredeemed by any baiefic aspecting 8 .
lob

or 10* give unnatural death by suicide, weapon or poison (see
example - 17)
142. Verbatim application of any astrological aphorism is
meaningless. The astrologers should judge each horoscope with
his own brainpower and intuition. A honest astrologer is one
who knows the fundamental and basic principles of Astroscience, efficient in mathematics, a very learned person with
authentic university records with distinction, truthful in speech,
humble, engaged in the studies ofVedas and an expert in the
interpretation of birth charts/ or palm with a in-born power in
propitiation of theplanets. Astrologer must be a seer. A seer is a
person supposedly able to see visions of the future. When a
person climbs at a very high altitude, he can scan the wider
Chapter of the city. He can see the front side of a railway track
and also the backside very clearly. So a man who climbs very
high in real life either through the guidelines of spiritual guru or
receives sound education (minimum should be a first class
graduate), he can very easily become an eminent astrologer
within 5 years with dedication. Just as Sun removes all darkness,
a person can remove the darkness ofhis own mind though the
sound education. He receives some power to remove the
darkness from the minds of others. Seers of former days used
to train disciples through strict discipline in forests for 12-13
yrs, before allowing them to return to the society. No person is
your friend who demands your silence, or denies your right to
grow. The physical world isjust a mirror of a deeper intelligence.
Intelligence is the invisible organizer of all matter and energy
and since a portion of intelligence, resides in you, you share in
the organizing power of thecosmos. Because you are inseparably
linked to everything, you cannot afford to foul the planet's air
and water. But at a deeper level, you cannot afford to live with a
toxic mind, because every thought - makes an impression on
the whole field of intelligence. Living in balance and purity is
the highest good for you and for the society you five. The beautiful
thing about learning is nobody can take it away from you. The
final goal is total self knowledge. When you achieve that, what
you most want will automatically be there, and what you most
dislike will disappear. From the time of ancient Greeks the study
of astrology has claimed its place for the benefit of mankind.

Nastradamus the noted the French astrologer has made several
invaluable predictions 500 years ago, which now came out as
stunningly true, and his andentmethodology to depict correctly
the fate of the people is being followed by the modem astrologers.
Our Indian seers and savants has also contributed a great deal
in the study of astrology like sage Parasara, Jaimini,
Varahamihiratic. But it is very unfortunate that we have
forgotten the name of the greatest lady astrologer of the universe
Smt. Kshana. Still now her numberless astrological riddles are
cent percent true and in West Bengal her invaluable predictive
riddles are followed by eveiyone. It is wonder that how that
goddess like lady's riddles regarding stars and planets, changes
of seasons, a person's nature, good and bad events etc are very
much applicable in the modem society. As she died anearly death,
her predictive riddles are dwindling into the significance. Due
to sheer negligence her invaluable contributionin the field of
astrology is not being valued.and utilized. 1 hope the modem
astrologers would take sincere intiative to unearth this hidden
treasure fa- the benefit of mankind. An astrologer acts as a friend,
philosoper and guide in a society. Only an astrologer can predict
one's serious illness in future and if precautionary measures are
taken in proper time that disease can be less filial. An expert
astrologer can guide the students to choose right career, can
choose right life partners, and beautiful house through vastu
technology/even disturbed family peace can be restored by the
help of the astrologers. Astrologers help a parent to find out his
lost on kidnapped child. Even the dreaded criminals can be
spotted through the correct calculations by the astrologers.
Thourgh stone therapy, aroma therapy, colour therapy,, metal
therapy, music therapy, and rituals, an astioloer can relieve a
person from all the problems of life - Physical, mental or
monetanry . hi a nutshell we can claim that a dedicated astrologer
acts as a mentor to the society.

Chapter - X
Borrowing And The 8th House
Today we observe all the leading banks are extending
loans for the purchase of cars, flats, Khotis, firm house etc
starting from 1999 onwards. So young persons of India are
the owner of luxurious cars, descent flats etc. In 1965, when
the author started his career on a salary of Rs.400/- per
month, purchase of cars, flats were beyond the dreams of
ordinary employees of any company. (Jpto 1995 whole life's
savings needed to purchase a flat. In 2005, a highly educated
person can purchase a flat with his salary of just one year
only. Foreign jobs can make the game easier. Borrowing is
a technique by which one's bank position, cash in hand
improves all on a sudden. He becomes the owner of cars,
TV, air-conditioner, flats etc. One may earn money through
1-10 houses of a horoscope. First house by exertion, 2nd -
amount of income of the service class people, 3rf through
brother, short journeys, touring agency, editing etc. 4* house
governs earned income (gains through real estate, rent,
bank interest etc.) how much one will have unearned
money will be determined by the 12* house (9* from 4*
i.e. fortune of 4* house). Benefics posited in the 12th house
or aspected by benefics will yield very favourable results
for the native, 54' through speculation, cinema, music,
children; 6* by serving other / employing servants in
factory; by business and thought partners; 8* - insurance,
legacy, inheritance, income from his own profession (it is
11* from 10h ), 9th - long journey, connection with
foreigners, 10"' - though his own profession. Sun in 10th

gives money from father, Moon - mother, Mars - enemies
Mercury in 10* - money firm friends. Jupiter in 10* -
money firm brothers, Venus in 10* - money from women
and Saturn in 10* gives money from servants / foreigners.
11th house indicates a If gains from 1st - 10* houses added
together, the loss from 12th is deducted, the net balance is
known as profit which is shown by the 11* house. Sun in
1 1* gives money from' friends, father, Govt. Moon in 11*-
business of liquids, maternal sources, Mercury in 11* -
money from friends, learning, maternal uncle, Jupiter in
1 1* - classical learning, sons, jewellery business, Venus in
11* - money from books, literature, arts, woman, wife,
business of luxury items, astrology, business of gems like
diamonds Saturn in 1 1 * - money from servants and
farming.
Other Indications From The 11th House
Find out which is stronger, Lagna or Moon. Then find
out which is the 1 1 * house from there. Such eleventh house
gives some indications about the nature of gains. If the 11*
house is
Aries -From quadrupeds, from government service and
foreign countries
Taurus-From gentlemanly sources, fanning, cattle,
religious deeds, and own wife.
Gemini -From drink, food, clothes
Cancer -Gentlemanly sources, classical learning, utensils,
clothes etc.
Lxo -From trading, foreign countries and slaughter of
men and animals.
Virgo-Though intelligent planning, innovation with
intelligent sense of discrimination, from classical learning
and in multifarious ways.
Libra -Forest products, variety of things, courteous
behaviour and from service to good men earn praise.
Scorpio-Through unscrupulous means, evil doings and
clever talk.

Sagittarius -From government, classical learning,
flowers and clothes and he enjoys life.
Capricorn -From boats or ships, foreign countries,
government. But he is a spend thrift.
Aquarius -From charity, learning, brave deeds and both
in the company of good and evil persons he seeks profits.
Pisces -Though affection, variety of activities, from
friends from government gains.
Let us study the horoscope of Chengiz Khan (from
notable Horoscopes by Dr. B.V Raman). For the severe
afflictions of the 3rd house he became the cruelest man of
his time. He made a monument of human skulls in Delhi
d uring his invasion of India for the celebration of his victory
in war. Leo is the 11th house of Moon - which has
encouraged him slaughtering men, women and children.
The contact killers and dreaded terrorists of 21st Century
will have afflicted Leo or Leo will be posited in their 1 1 *
house either from Moon or Janma Lagna. The Police may
take guidelines from this book for identifying dreaded
criminals. (Chengiz Khan 15/16* Sept. 1186, Cancer -
Lagna, Virgo - Sun, Mars Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn,
Libra - Moon Ketu, Aries Rahu).
Role Of 6th/ 7 "7 8th/ 12‘" House In Borrowing
Sixth house denotes debts. Therefore debt is receipt of
money by the person who borrows and expenses to one who
lends money. The ascendant indicates the person who
borrows. The 7* house from the Ascendant devotes the
gentleman or the banker who advances the loan. A benefic
6,h house allows overdraft facility. If 6* lord aspects 6* - debts
shall be liquidated. 6* lord in 12* - one conquers one's rivals.
A malefic as 6* lord if aspects ascendant, one gets straggle at
each step of life. Such a person's life becomes cupful of
sorrows. 6* house is both a trika and an upachaya house.
Upachaya (growing) effects maybe expected when this house
is aspected by a benefic. 8*, 3rd, 12* and 6* house are bad in
descending order. A native suffers from debts and poverty
when the ascendant lord receives the aspect of 6*/8*/12*

lords or ascendant lord is posited with a malefic in 6*/8*/
12* house. Kalidas in Uttar Kalamitra has said that 12* house
of a person shows clearing off loans or part payment towards
the debt. Natural benefices as the lord of 12*, if strong confer
wealth. If 12* lord is strong one becomes wealthy and happy
in Life. 12* lord in 8* makes a man God fearing, truthful and
religious. Ifabenefic occupies the 12*, the native shall have
a godfather to take care of him in hours of need. Gulika in
12* give misfortunes and a defective physique. If 3 or 4
planets (both malefic and benefic) are posited in the 12*
one becomes invariably very rich in life (Advanced predictive
Astrology Vol 1, by Dr. S.S. Chatterjee, 1999)
The 8'1' house is the second of 7* second house shows one's
finance, whereas 7* house denotes one with whom
transaction is done. Suppose there is an evil planet in the 8'1'
house of a person, it means that the evil is in the 2,,d house to
one who transacts, it threatens that the person with whom
the money transaction is done, will lose money and there
will be difficulty, so if your know that a person has malefics
in 8* - you should never extend loan to him as he will not
return your money. Benefics in 8* give sudden startling afflux
of wealth or legacies. Malefics in 8* bring great hardships in
repayment. A person who has two or more malefics in 8"'
should take very less loan for the purchase of anything.
Borrowing Money And Repayment
Generally 2nd, 3rd, 10* and 1 1 * are studied to understand
how one makes money; 6* house denotes why, when and
the extent to which one borrows money; 8"' house indicates
either loss and misery oi unexpected gains; 12* house
indicates one's expenses, investments, repayment of loans
or lending money etc. Therefore a careful consideration of
6*, 8 , and 12* will indicate one's commitments, expenses,
loss and the necessity to borrow. Kalidas in Uttar Kalamrita
has said that 12th house is to be judged for clearing offloans.
Discharge of debts can be Tead from the houses 4lh, 5 , 8lh
and 12*. So benefics occupying the houses 4th, 5th, 8th or
12* or owning or aspecting these houses or planets ill the
constellation of the occupants and owner of their houses

indicate the discharge of the loan during their dasa and
bhukti. If one is not able to return, who will be put into
trouble? Loss of reputation and imprisonment are
threatened by the malefics posited in 2nd, 5th, 9* and 12*.
Aspect of Saturn and 6"' lord in Lagna indicate visit of
prison for crimes. All will make sincere and good efforts to
return the amount borrowed in time. He will do so, if there
is a benefic in the 8* house, especially the lord of 12*. The
lord of 12* in 8* will cause Vipareeth Raja Yoga. Suppose
Jupiter in the lord of 12t!', and it is in the 8th house, it can
aspect one's 12* house and 2"J house. Therefore, people
born with Capricorn Ascendant will return their debts
during Jupiter's periods and sub-periods without strain.
Repayment of loans is controlled mainly from the 12th
house. ]2h lord under the influence of Rahu and Saturn
makes one a miser. Strong 12th lord makes the native spend
thrift, if weak - miser. Second lord and 12* lord in 2,ul -
income and expenditure runs neck to neck.
Those who have malefics in 8* should not accept or extend
loans; because they will not be able to repay or getback the
money. Those who lends money should note, whether the
borrower has a benefic or a malefic in 8th before lending
money, so that he may know where he stands.
Debt Yoga
1. 2nd lord in 12u>aspeted by Ketu - one is always in
debt.
2. In Sun, Mars, Rahu, Saturn or weak Moon is placed
in 2"" there will be destruction of wealth.
3. Mercury in 2nd aspectd by Moon or Vice Versa will
destroy the wealth.
4. 12"' lord in 21"1 or II* lord in 6"' / 8th / 12lhproduce
debt yoga.
Golden Rules of Set Backs In Life
The wealth possessed by the native usually increases or
decrease. The operating planets connected with the Bhavas
or planet ruling financial prosperity help us to know
whether times are good or bad or if in transit the Da§a.

Bhukti lords get combusted or is afflicted or is debilitated,
their potency to do good is lessened immensely. The
concerned planets forming yogas must operate otherwise
the financial prospects visible in the horoscope are not
realized. The Dasa period lords points to the roots. The subperiod lords do take nourishment from him, though they
also depend on their own strengths. Generally dasa of 2IK|
3rd, 11* 6th, 8* and 12"' are bad. Even Kendra lord/trine
lords when are combust retrograde, under papakartari
yoga, 8th / 12* from their natal position fail to bestow good
results. Normally dasas of 3r‘,/6'h/ll,h lords or planets
combined with 3ri1/ 6,h/1 1 ,h lords give inauspicious results.
Planets in the 2nd or 7* house or in the 8"' hosue when
combined with Maraka Lord (7* or 2"d) will generate
inauspicious results in their dasas. Dasas of the star lord of
natal Mars and natal Saturn generally give adverse results.
When these star lords are ill placed, afflicted - sufferings of
the native will multiply. Failures are the results when 1st,
2,K| 5*, 9*, A1 * houses or their lords are having connection
with 6*/8*/12"' lords. Dasa of any planet in relation to 8"'
lord will produce inauspicious results. The periods of the
planets, one exalted and the other debilitated may have
strong character causing downfall. The sub period of a
planet in 8* will destroy wealth. According to R. Santhanam
the dasa and sub period of Saturn - Rahu, Rahu - Saturn,
Jupiter - Rahu, Rahu - Mercury, Mercuiy - Rahu Venus -
Saturn, Saturn - Venus introduce severe set backs in
professional sphere. According to the author, Rahu - Jupiter
and Mars - Rahu dasa are equally malefic in nature. Jupiter
- Venus dasa brings set backs in career. Let us study two
interesting cases:
Example - 29 : An example where the native failed to
repay loans (DOB 30/31-8-1945, 1=10AM, Agra).
His Lagnesh Venus and 3rf lord Moon have changed
places forming an inauspicious Khalayoga. Person bom with
this yoga live in prosperity and poverty in a cyclic order.
We are infinitely amused to observe the infinite wisdom of
our seers. This particular example will force us to bow our

Example No. 29
Date 30/08/1945 Time 23.40:00 Day Thursday Lat 27 09 00 North Long 78:00.00 East
Zone 82 30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22 SO: 1 5
Balance of Dasa : Moon 1 Years 0 Months 28 Days
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
heads in great respect fa' those wise sages of yore who
developed this divine branch of science. He is a highly
qualified person having M. Tech (Mech) and MBA degrees.
He worked as an executive engineer in Cement
Corporation of India between 4-10-1980 to 19-7-1992. He
obtained for voluntary retirement scheme (in Saturn
Mercuiy dasa). Saturn Venus dasa completely demolished
him. He raised loan from Various sources and from several
friends and stated a Cement Factory in Jaipur, Rajasthan,
which closed down within a year making him a totally
bankrupt man (Saturn - Venus dasa). His all attempts to
get a job upto July 2001 brought futile results. He did not

return the money to his friends. Afflicted 4'1', 5l1’, 8'1' and
12"' houses did not allow him to return money. Satrun -
Venus or Venus - Saturn dasa is bad for almost 99% persons.
Example - 30 : A case of refusal to pay back education
loan (DOB 4-4-1975/8=22 AM/Kansas, USA).
The native's mother is a medical doctor from India (from
Jhansi) who settled in USA with her engineer husband and
two sons. The above native has a younger brother. He was
a very brilliant boy in his school days and was the topper
of his class. He had to study Medicine against his wishes.
He came out of the medical college with flying colours, but
Example No. 30
Date 04/04/1 975 Time 09:22:00 Day Friday Lat39:05:00 North Long - 94:34:00 West
Zone - 90:00:00 West Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:15:02
Balance of Dasa : Sun 3 Years 1 Months 18 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chaiit-Cuspal

decided to take revenge. Her mother took education loans
for his studies - but he is refusing to payback the loans, left
house, staying with a 38 yrs old South Indian lady in 2005
and doing odd jobs, in a hospital in the administrative
department. He has no regards for his parents because he
is behaving like an American guy; upbringing in USA killed
the morality. Other Indians of the same age possess good
moral virtues; they have responsibility for their parents,
brothers, sisters and kith and kin. American environment
is opposite to Indian environment because India is a land
of Gods. In the 22,“1 century the Indians bom in India will
rule the entire earth as per the wish of the great poet
Ravindra Nath Tagore. His 4"' house is heavily afflicted by
Saturn and Mars, 5th house is afflicted by Mars and Ketu,
8th house is afflicted by Saturn, 12th house is hemmed
between malefics. Afflicted 4th, 5'\ 8th and 1 2th house
provided him the idea for nonpayment of the loans.
Affliction of and 12th house brought scandals in life
(usually an American of the same age does not bother for
the sexual scandals). Rahu Mahadasa dominated him from
the age of 1 8. Rahu is placed in the 7lh house - so naturally
he fell in love with an elderly lady because 7* lord is placed
in the house of Saturn (Saturn is a aged planet) His aged
parents are feeling the burnt of education loan. What goes
on in mind is controlled by the 4"' house. Severe affliction
of the 4"' house denied him moral virtues like an Indian of
the same age. 12uTordis an enemy camp, squared by Rahu
- Ketu axis did not allow the repayment.
Western education has created a materialistic bias and
deprived our youth of the support of a religious vocabulary
without which it is difficult to frame spiritual ideas. The
realization of the spiritual nature of man and of the ultimate
reality underlying the universe made Hindu Religion, the
foundationstone of the Indian culture and civilization. The
concept of Mokshya gives a new dimension to the problems
of morality formulated by the Indians. Renunciation and
service are the national ideals of India. These are rooted in
the doctrine of the potential divinity of man. The spirit of.

detachment and service pervaded the outlook of ancient
thinkers. Spirituality is India's gift to he world. This ancient
wisdom has to be propagated in a modem voice, not just
an echo of an old word but the authentic expression of a
new relisation. Man has a two fold journey: one, on the
secular temporal plane as an individual and as part of
society fulfilling his duties in life, and the other, the quest
for the true eternal nature as spirit which is ever integrated
with the cosmic spiritual reality. Self realization, therefore,
is not self-seeking in the narrow sense.
1 request the parents of India settled in the Western
countries to teach their children about the brighter side of
Hindu Religion. It teaches firmly that one should not be
too much materialistic in life. He should contrinute
significantly tor the development of his own kith and kins.
Nobody will take the money to heaven after his death,
ironically, no western person belives this point till death
and has no fellow feeling, curving them to be too much
materialistic in nature. The author has observed that the
young parents of the Western Countries do not bother for
their childrend in the event of divorce. Thousands of
childrens are thrown on the streets to take care of
themselves. This pohit is unimaginable in India, because
of too much moral values governing the individuals.
Mars - Saturn - Raliu Combination
In any Lagna Mars, Sat, Rahu's combination is not
welcome except in 3,J/lllh houses. In Is1 it will disturb
health, wealth, pleasure of domestic life, married life and
the social character. Native will be bound to earn bad name
and displeasure every where but he will earn unexpected
property through questionable means in Saturn and Rahu's
period. In 2lu1 house this combination ruin's one wealth and
career. In fourth the combination will force the native to
abandon his native place in search of livelihood elsewhere.
In 5 11 it will turn him a crimin'’ or eccentric minded with
quarrelsome attitude, in 6,h it will ruin one's health in
7,h it will ruin one's martial happiness, in 8lh it will brin^

many disgrace and dishonour to the native,, he may
meet unnatural death, he may get pleasure in harming
others, he may like to kill or commit crimes of severe
nature, in 9* - he will be an unfortunate soul, in 10"'
he will do evil things, he is imperfect in his work and is
not a trustworthy person, in 1 ll it may make the native
a hardcore criminal or one who takes part in all risky
adventures; in 12* it will make the man a brute and
antisocial. This combination is very baneful for ladies
in the 2nd and 8th houses. They will face turbulent
married life.

Chapter - XI
Inheritance And The 8th House
Inheritances mean financial boosting without earning
the money through parents, grandparents, in-laws etc.
The wealth we earn with our own efforts is reflected by
the 2nd house. Its opposition i.e. 8lh house denotes
inheritances by virtue of birth or due to certain acquired
rights. Inheritance is opposite to self earned wealth. .
Generally we acquire wealth by investing hard labour
which extracts sweats from our faces i.e. only the
laborious persons with razor sharp intelligence with the
grace of invisible lady luck (must have strong 9* house/
9"' lord) can earn money easily. Strong 8th lord helps also
to earn money easily/or through inheritance. 6lh house is
the lord of litigation. When 6lh/8'1' lords are interrelated
or establishes any relationship there will be obstacles like
losing the inheritance outright or waiting for long in the
midst of dispute. A long drawn battle for divorce is to be
anticipated when (a) the 6lh lord is retrograde (b) aspect
on 8lh lord on 6,h house (c) retrograde planets (particularly
Venus) aspecting B* house. Inheritance from mother
should be examined from 2nd and 5"' houses. (IIth from 4th
= 2"d and 2nd from 4th = 5th) the ll,h house is 2nd from 10th.
Thus 8Ul and 1 1th houses are to be judged for the
inheritance though father. Strong 11 1,1 1st, 4th and 91*1 houses
indicate the possibility of inheritance. Without the
strength of 8* house, 8th lord or Mars there will be nothing
to inherit. The exchange between the 4th and 8"' lords links

the fourth house, which concerns itself with lands and
home, with the 8th house of inheritance. Inheritances occur
easily if the 8th lord is well placed or the 8th house is well
contained. Regarding money matter, it is said that the 8*
house does not only indicate the receipt of gift, dowry,
legacy, money of he deceased, insurance, bonus, gratuity
but also indicate the repayment of loan. Whether one will
give or take will depend upon the planets signifying houses
6'1' or 12,h. When the dasa periods are related to 8* and
12th, then one has to repay. 8th house is also related to
underground wealth. When the 11 111 lord occupies the 4"'
house in a friendly sign, one may get buried wealth. It
should be aspected by a benefic planet. If 9th house is house
of purbapunya, 8* house is the house of misdeeds of the
previous birth. Malefics in the 8th house remind our
misdeeds of the previous birth. Therefore, malefics in the
tb th
8 and the 12 house does not allow easy inheritance.
The lord of 9th or the Sun in the 8"' may have other kinds
of disadvantages concerning father viz the native may not
be in good terms with his father or father may be sickly or
short lived etc, but it has a distinct asset with it, the person
will have some inheritance through father. Similarly we
should understand the 4th lord or the Moon in the 8th
concerning mother and maternal inheritances. Such
inheritances will easily come if the 8'" lord is well placed
or the 8"' house is well contained. If on the contrary the 8th
lord is associated with the lord of 6Lh or an adversary for
the natal ascendant, or the 8'1' house is ill-occupied,
inheritances will be hard to be obtained. In that case one
has to work his way up. Strong Sun in the 8* preferably
exalted allows easy inheritance. A highly profitable link
between the 2"d 4lh, 8th, 9th and 11th lord is established
promising material possessions and inheritance there is also
an element of unexpectedness and occasional losses
th th
(involvement of 12 lord and the 8 house). A benefic in
the 8 house gives longer life span, honours, inheritance
and marital happiness Let us study a few cases for
inheritance and lust for money. <|g<|

Example No. 31
Date 17/1)2/1943 Time06 1000 Day Wednesday Lat 23 1U 00 Noitn Long 89‘ 10 00 Easl
Zone 82.30:00 East SriSanatan Ayanamsa 22 48 06
Balance of Dasa : Jupiter 5 Years 2 Months 20 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
Example : 31 - No inheritance. DOB 16/17-2-1943/
6= 1 0 AM/Jessore
By birth he is a refugee from East Pakistan (Now
Bangladesh). Exchange between 2nd and 4th lords has
generated a Maha yoga. The man bom in Maha yoga will
get the blessings of the Goddess Lakshmi. He will be
protected by sovereign and will command vehicles, wealth
and children. They are well dressed and wear costly
ornaments. They will receive valuable presents from the
king or people in authority. When Saturn is placed in the
l2h house of Moon, such people are born for gigantic

purposes. Opposition of Moon and Mars is also a good
yoga for the prosperity in life. 9th lord in Lagna speaks about
his Purvapruna. So God saved him and inspite of the initial
turmoil in the family he managed BE (Mech) from
Rourkella and came to Delhi with a iob. He did not inherit
any property from his father. 8* lord Sun is conjoined with
malefic Ketu in an inimicial sign and further aspected by
Saturn. Yogakaraka's conjunction with Sun however
increased the intrinsic strenth of the 8* lord and it lost its
venom. His both the luminaries are blessed by Jupiter.
Strong Sun, Strong Moon and strong Lagna made him a
rich man. However, Rahu in 8th house is a liability for any
native. Through hard work and determination he is the
owner of house and cars. God provided him a son and a
prosperous daughter who is settled in USA. Strong 8th lord
helped him to earn money easily. Actually 6,h / 8th / 12th lords
should be weak for a prosperous life on this earth and for
avoiding many death like situtation. His words are
penetrating. He speaks always with a pinch of salt. 8lh lord
with Ketu in the 2nd house aspected by Saturn provided
him a sharp critical tongue. Gajakeshari yoga in the 6,h
house provided him an excellent career. He is still earning
good money through his business: Yogakar'aka Venus is
placed in his own house in Navamsa Lagna, boosting the
prospects of his horoscope.
Example : 32 - Huge inheritance, DOB 9-9-82/
16=30hra/DeLhi. His Lagnesh is placed in he 9* house with
exalted 9th lord. When 9" lord and lord of Lagna combine
- such a native gets boost at the right age. He is the son of
the example No. 3 1 . We find Adhi Yoga a class one, Dhana
Yoga from his natal Moon. Strong Sun in 8* invariably
helps anybody to inherit property from the father. Saturn
- Sun in 8* does not allow inheritance. He is also an engineer
by profession and likely to grow further for his own efforts.
A strong third house provided extra energy in life. His third
lord is in the 1 O'11 house with Mars. Mars in Lagna 4th and
10“' provides determination and ambition for doing well in
life. So he is destined to do well in life. One rolls in moiry_ _

Example No. 32
Date 09/09/1982 Time 16:30 00 Day Thursday Lat 28:39:00 North Long 77.13.00 East
Zone 82 30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23 21 15
Balance of Dasa : Sun 1 Years 6 Months 2 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
when the 8U house/or 2“ house is occupied by benefics.
Rahu in 6th behaves well with any native. His Adhi Yoga is
bound to make him a richman in life.
Example : 33- Huge inheritance with a dull career and
painful life. (DOB 21-10-1960/20=55/Hyderabad).
8th lord is in S'1', 9th lord in 8*, this beautiful combination
helped him to take birth in a multimillionaire family. His father
from Andra Pradesh is a Lawyer of the Supreme Court of
Delhi and earns huge money annually. He is the only son of
his father. His mother belongs to a rich Persi family of Mumbai
and she brought much Jewellary with her. He enjoyed his life

Example No. 33
Date 21/10/1960 Time 20:55 00 Day Friday Lat 17:22:00 North Long 78:26:00 East
Zone 82:30.00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:02:56
Balance of Dasa : Rahu 0 Years 1 Months 17 Days
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
during Jupiter's Mahadasa. He had a handsome personality
and everybody used to love him. He passed LL.B firm Delhi
University at the age of 24 yrs and completed his LLM degree
fiom UK and retimed to India in 1990. His downfall started
fiom Saturn - Mars dasa. He failed miserably to practice law
and never earned money. Ketu in 10 house did not grant
him any career. Ketu in 10th always curtails one's career. After
pursing LLB he worked as a junior to his own father, but
never utilized his golden period for practicing law. Because
of his aggressiveness in his talks (Saturn - Mars opposition
involving 2,nl/8,h house) he could never find any friend in

India. He got married in 27-9-1991 but the wife ranaway in
April 92. In 1996 again he married a lady lawyer from
Karnataka and made the biggest mistake of his lifetime. He
got a son in 1997 and a daughter in 1999, but his wife started
sleeping with her kids in a separate room. Isolation and
loneliness engulfed him fiom July 1999. Today his parents
and wife do not talk to him. He gets some pleasures by talking
to his little children. He gets a monthly Rs. 14000/- from his
father as his pocket money (alcohol expenses) Ketu in the
angle of 6th lord made his life with full of litigations . He consults
astrologers, when he will get all the money of his parents?
Saturn, Rahu or Ketu in the angle of 6lh lord always brings
litigations in life. When a Yogakaraka of any horoscope
occupies 8th/ 12th house fonn lagna even it be in exaltation
such a planet makes the native very cruel who always
entertains destructive thinking. Since his Yogakaraka Saturn
is placed in the 8th house with 8th lord he never had any
positive thinking. 7th house is hemmed between malefics, 10*
house is occupied by Ketu. When 10*1 lord is in 8th the native
is imperfect with his work. This is 100% true. Jupiter is spoiled
by Saturn, Mars and Rahu. God only writes sad episodes
about a person whose Jupiter is found weak in a horoscope.
Saturn in 8"' or I2a' gives little domestic peace, much wasteful
expenditure and family circle becomes mimical. All the
prophecies of sages came true in his life. Because Sun and
Moon occupy his 61'1 house - his parents are also not happy
with him. Nobody loves a rose without fragrance. He failed
to inherit peace of mind. When Saturn and 8’J' lord conjoins
in 8,h house many sufferings in life are store for the native.
This aphorism is 100% true to the knowledge of he author.
K)h lord in 8* conjoined with 8U| lord in 8* also provides a
poor career (See exampless. 22, 52,55). We should be grateful
to our sages for framing so many golden subtle rules for the
benefit of mankind.

Example No.34
Date 04/04/1943 Time 19 00:00 Day Sunday Lat 34 10 00 North Long 99:44 00 East
Zone 99.44-00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:48 14
Balance of Dasa : Saium 1 Years 0 Monlhs 12 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
Example : 34 - Insatiable lust for money from insurance
This is the birth chart of a criminal minded woman who
engineered the death of her husband, and children with
an eye on insurance money. She has Ketu on the 6th house,
aspected by deadly Saturn. One malefic in 6th house is
welcome, but more than one malefic shatters health and
adversely affects the 5th, 7th and lZ'^house indications. Ketu
in such a position can give taste for all kinds of intoxicants
and smoking, is really addictive for such natives. There is
always the desire to immerse the ego completely in the se^

of illusions resulting Iran excessive indulgence. The native
does not follow the religious orders or any other type of
institutions. Sixth house Ketu has a tendency of making
the native to much out of those working under him/her.
Such natives also are not very good at taking orders and
generally get frustrated on routine jobs. Usually they have
no dearth of enemies either of their own making or those
conferred by providence. She digged her own grave by
indulging her hands in crimes, but why?
She married after high school and had three children.
The husband died on 15-5-1971, when she collected huge
amount from insurance. Thereafter, she collected a huge
sum of insurance money on two houses that got burnt. In
Jan 1978, she moved in with a new boy-friend. In May
1980 a son died in a drowning incident. In June, 1980,
another son survived lead and arsenic poisoning when the
whole truth came trembling out. All the incident and deaths
were engineered by the woman with an eye on the insurance
money. In any horoscope, if the Yogakaraka from Lagna
or Moon occupies 8th/ 12 firm Lagna, such a planet makes
the native very cruel in nature and hard boiled criminal.
Such a native always entertains destructive thinking. Her
9"' Lord, Yogakaraka for Virgo Lagna is placed in the 8th.
When 6th/ 8,h/12"' houses are afflicted one becomes very cruel
with revengeful attitude. Her 6,h house is occupied Ketu,
aspectedby Saturn, 8th house is aspected by 8fll lord Mars.
12thhouse is occupied by Rahu, aspectedby Mars from 5"'.
Moon - Mercury conjunction from Paisacha Yoga (AM,
2006, P 272) that brings in mental abbersations. All these
evil Yogas turned her to be a hard boiled criminal. 5th house
is afflicted by 8th ford Mars, 9th house is occupied by 6th
lord Saturn, 5lh lord Saturn is squared by Rahu - Ketu axis.
9th ford is afflicted by 8"' lord Mars. Lower mind 3rd house
is aspected by 6|1' ford Saturn. All these factors provided
her a misdirected talent and does not speak about any
balance of Purvapunya.
Afflicted 2,lcV6lh/8,h/12,h houses of Pada Lagna,
Sagittarius, also helped her to earn money through illegijigg

ways. Significatar of intelligence Mercury was in close
conjunction with Moon and Sun. combust Moon (New
Moon), and Mercury made her a perverted lady. She visited
prison for the spoilt 12* house. Rahu, Mars, Saturn in the
angle of 6th lord brings many litigations in life, including
imprisonment. Rahu occupies the 4'h house of 6th lord
Saturn in her chart. 8* house is the house of inheritance.
9th lord Venus in 8th provided her the idea through
inheritances, of course, through unnatural ways for which
she was severely punished by the hands of law. She was
awarded the death penalty. Actually she gambled with her
fate, because Bhagyapati Venus is hemmed between
malefics in the house of death. Her 9'1' lord is aspected by
8"' lord. When 91'1 lord is related to 8"' lord, the native will
somehow be in perennial trouble. All these unfortunate
incidents occurred, when she was passing Venus dasa in
the 8"' house, in an mimical sign aspected by Mars and
Rahu. This Venus is also hemmed between malefic planets.
Such a malefic planet provided her the idea of financial
gains through killing. She lost all common good senses for
the presence of Mars and Satum in her 5,h/9,h houses.
Afflicted 8,h house encourages criminal acts like theft,
dacoity, robbery, murderous attack, murder etc. The truth
surfaced out during the Mahadasa of Sun which is planet
of justice and fate. The dasa of the 12lhlord Sun in the
presence of 11th lord Moon produced highly inauspicious
results for her. She went to gallows during Sun Mahadasa.
The dasa of any planet in combination of 1 1 * lord is bad
for any native. Afflicted Leo, like chengiz Khan, provided
her pleasures for the killing. Since Moon a nd~Sirrr -arehemmed between malefics (Mars, Rahu are aspecting her
Aries sign) her family tree was extinguished. Afflictions of
12th, 5th, or 8th also indicate extinction of family tree. She
had this yoga.

Chapter -XII
Attractive Soul Mate And Role Of
8th House In Married Life
It is said that, at birth, four events are pre-ordained in
life - the time and nature of birth and death, one's
occupation and one's marriage. God has restricted the period
of mundane journey for a limited period (say 80 yrs) and
he has to go back to the place from where he has come. We
have no control either on birth time or on death time. The
quantum of prana, the force with which man lives and'
moves on this earth, is apportioned at the time of his birth
as a result of past deeds. In this way 1st house becomes
meaningful. If the life force itself has been very limited, no
matter how other houses are, the life of the individual would
not be very long. The quantum of life force provided
initially to the individual at the time of his birth as per the
7th house activities gets dissipated. When all the energy with
which he was born has completed its creative functions,
the person's physical life ebbs out and he passes to the next
realm' of manifestation, higher plane of creation. The 8,h
house is where the soul should proceed after death, the
plane of non-physical existence. This house can be viewed
as the 1st house for considering the soul's journey in the
astral world, which means the nature of death and
experience therein. The general strength of the chart is
assessed in relation of the 1st house. Even longevity, the
general status of the individual, his potentialities, his elan
vital and everything connected with the life force are
examined firstly in relation to the 1st house. One must not
forget that the 1st house is the 5th from 9* which implies

that the individual is the result of progeny, offspring of his
own punya - the past i.e. astrology begins by assuming the
present of the individual is always in the womb of his past
The longevity of the person and his death depend upon
the balance between his material attachments, maya forces
(the 2nJ house) and his occult attainments (12* house). For
acquiring good progeny one needs a good housewife or
life partner or more technically it is a better half. Marriages
are conducted in heaven but solemnized on earth. 7* house
is the house of marriage. But enemies career, business
partners etc. are adjudged from this house. In the 21st
century the definition of marriage will be to live with an
enemy under the same umbrella is known as marriage.
All astrologers, including Mridula Trivedi, and Mr. T.P.
Trivedi overlooked the importance of 8th lord in marriage
in their book "Predicting Marriage” Published by Times of
Astrology, New Delhi. A new theory has been developed
by the author for explaining the reasons of divorce even
after scoring high marks in matching compatibility
procedures. This will also explain who will die earlier,
husband or wife or who will be defeated in the court case.
Meaning of Marriage : Man is a rational animal. He has
brain with deep thinking power. Higher thinking and
meditation allows anybody to escape the wrath of bondage
of slavery and finally helps him to achieve emancipation
(Mokshya). Mokshya trikona is represented by 4,h,8'1' and
12th. Everybody wants to lead a honourable life on his
mundane journey. All dreams can evaporate in air if
anybody does not earn enough money for a honourable
living. In 2006, we find everybody is hankering for a
descent flat/house, cars, TV scooter, well furnished drawing
room with air-conditioners, an attractive spouse with good
looking and brainy children. For having good children one
must have good sex life. This is an unique feature as
designed by God, 8* house controls our marital bond, sexlife, genital organs, sex diseases, accidental death, scandals,
sins (randhra), strength for sex acts, enmity with wife, death
and its place, dispute, defeat, loss, accident, un-natural

death, fall from height, chronic disease, giving loans, mental
distress, punishment from government, sudden gain,
inheritances, occult science, undisclosed affairs, killing a
living being, hidden wealth, delays, foreign travel, gifts, unearned money urinary trouble, wickedness, husband's
relatives, anger, theft, loss, sudden gain, insult, serious
troubles in J'fe, agony, severe distress, scandals, infamy,
sudden death, desire to do harm to others, evil mind,
cheating tendencies, accusations and hurting others. The
native could hurt others by his bad words if the 2nd house
gets connected with the 8th house. Same thing may happen
if Rahu-Ketu axis passes through 8,h/2ml axis. Rahu-Ketu
represents a snake with two heads. Hence Rahu-Ketu joins
both the houses. This has been observed by the author and
is stunningly true to his knowledge. So a lady having Rahuketu axis in 2"'1 /8 th house can pass bitter remarks in her inlaws house. Anti-social involvements, deep research mind
etc are also controlled from the 8* house. A benefic Rahu
in the S* house helps the inventors and scientists. Rahu in
8lh should be considered strong when his dispositor
occupies trines/quadrants. Rahu in the presence of
luminaries, exatted planets behave well with the native.
The 6*!,/8tf'/ 12th houses are considered to be bad houses
in a horoscope. Their lords attain the most malefic qualities
in the horoscope. Due to the malefic tendencies, they affect
the planets or the Bhavas they are associated with and
destroy them, to the effect that they lose their power. When
6,h/8<l,/12l1' lords make any relationship ls,/9,h/10,h lords -
the native will experience terrible resistances in life. When
malefics occupy the angles the person becomes too much
sexy and participates in animal like sex copulation. If these
planets occupy trinal house - it decreases the carnal urge.
If Saturn, Sun, Mars or 4* house lord or Rahu in 7th and
Mars in 4lh the subject becomes very sexy and his sex habit
is like that of a beast. Almost same result is expected when
all the above six planets (Rahu, Ketu, Sun, Mars, Saturn
and 4th lord) are located in trines. Malefics in Kendras have
not been praised by Sage Parasar. The native suffers from

many diseases - when Kendras are occupied by malefics.
If the lord of Lagna or the lord of 6th house will be attached
with Rahu, Ketu Saturn or Mars - the subject will be a
loose character. If Saturn becomes 7lh lord and is united
with a malefic planet/or malefic planets - the person
develops lasciviousness. Afflicted Venus makes any body
of loose moral. Affliction of Mars in the case of ladies and
affliction of Venus in case of males bring disharmony in
married life.
Importance of Sex Life And The 8th House
Modern doctors are of the opinions that making love
improves the flow of lymph fluid throughout the body.
Our lymphatic system is responsible for removing bacteria,
toxin and other wastes that build up in our tissues. Besides,
regular sex by doing exercise and relaxing our body help
us to protect from three modern killers: heart disease, blood
pressure and stroke. Sex is a instant cure of mild
depression. Sex discharges the body's endorphins into blood
stream, producing a sense of euphoria and leaving us with
a feeling of well being. To enjoy these all we require a legal
partner/opposite sexes. Marriages are legal prostitution acts,
honoured by the society. To have sex with many women or
men beyond the matrimonial bond is condemned by every
society and by every religion and by every country. In the
eye of law it is an offence and may bring even
imprisonment. Hunger and thrust are the primordial and
most powerful urges of a man and a woman having their
sway from the moment a child or a baby (male or female)
is born, till the old man or woman dies. Next only to those
instinctive urges is the sex urge of a male from his
adolescence till even 70 or 75 or of a female from her
attaining puberty at the age of 10/12 yrs till she attains
menopause, when menstruation ceases and so, the woman
may cease to think of sex or desire of the sex-act. Human
ingenuity devised the institution of marriage by yoking a
man and a woman in wedlock, for mating and begetting
progeny for wade through the ocean of Samsara (joint
family life till death). There are parents blessed with rich

beautiful, educated, employed children but who are
deprived of marital bliss. There are parents who have
children without any of the above blessings but have marital
bliss to their children even at a young age, from these facts
in life we have to come to the conclusion that marriages
are tailored in heaven or a predestined affair. There is a
saying we have no control over "type of cars, type of house,
type of spouse and mode of death" all of which are
controlled from the 8"' house. 8th house rules sex life and
sex organs, a planet in 8th house may also determine the
sex life and a woman may witness some events about her
private life during the transit of planets influencing 8lh
house at birth or Janma Lagna. This house also indicates
longevity of husband, has control over generative organs,
pelvis, kidney and bladder etc. also indicates loss of wealth,
gain through inheritance, will bequest and insurance etc.
8"' house represents death, danger, surgical operation,
power to bear pains of illness and immunity. 12"' house is
the house of hospitalization. For any diseases one has to
judge 5/6/8/11/12 house and their lords, when the Sun,
Moon, Ascendant lord makes relationship with 6/8/12"'
lords, one may have a dangerous diseases. 5"'/ 11"' axis
should be afflicted.
8,h house normally should be free from influence of Rahu,
Saturn, aspect or combination and should be treated malefic
for the continuation of own culture, heredity and religion.
Benefics in 8“ house help to preserve the culture, heredity
fellow feeling, sympathy for the people of his own religion
and race. According to Hindus marriage is the most social
event and a pious bond between the souls. It is a landmark
in one's life which brings "bouquets" for some while
brickbats for some others. It can fill life with everlasting
joy or can be the beginning of the end of happy life. A
Frenhman defined marriage as an incomparable mutual
friendship embellished by a unique mutual possession.
Good mental friends save the vvei. and woes of each other
and a sincere friend in need will never forsake his friend.
Marriage, being a life long friendship between two

members of opposite sexes, is faster and stronger, on
account of the sexual intimacy between the spouses for their
mutual satisfaction. To Muslims and Protestant Christians
marriage is only a contract. But to catholic Christians and
Hindu's, marriage is a sacrament. The Catholics refer to
the knot that none can untie till death separates the spouse.
We Hindus regard marriage as a sacrament despite modern
in roads of secular law allowing registered marriages and
self respect marriages, and even divorce, on special
grounds. But Staunch Hindus, who respect the Shastra and
a marriage solemnized over the sacred fire, still regard
marriage as a life long partnership brought about by God
fcr the spouses to enjoy prosperity and suffer adversity
together. There must be not only physical compatibility
but also mental affinity and compatibility. It is therefore, of
paramount need to choose with caution a life's partner who
has quite co-operative lives in such a way as to please the
fancy of men, avoiding what they dislike and seeking what
is pleasing to them. It is not possible to enjoy life fully
without good health. Health is wealth. Ben Jonson in
Volpone 11, has written, "Ohealth! health! The blessing of
the rich! The riches of the poor! Who can buy The at too
dear a rate, since there is no enjoying this world thee? The
preservation of health is a duty. Few seem conscious that
there is such a thing as physical mortality. Astrologically,
the lords of 8th and 6'" house are responsible for most of the
intense miseries of life. They ruin the houses wherever
they are posited. They have poisonous aspects, union of
6t!' / 8lh / 12th lords only multiply complexities of life. It is very
baneful combination. The debility of the lords of 6,h and
in 8* house is very necessary for the cancellation of evil
effects. The lord of 8"1 house should preferably be in 3rd,
6"' or I2h or it should be weekend by debilitation, etc.
Lord 8th in 3rd cancels evils and preserves longevity (vide
Pulippani Muni) or when lord of 8'" house is also lord of a
better house also, either he should occupy the better house,
or he should have good Pari vartan, avoiding the evil of
the 8h house lordship. For Scorpio lagna when Mercury

occupies Lagna and Mars is in Virgo, the evil lordship of
Mercury (8ih) and 6th lordship of Mars is almost cancelled
out. In astrology Mars is the symbol of youth and
represents young man whereas Venus represents young
damsels. For Masculine characteristics to flourish the man
should have strong Mars, whereas the female should have
a strong Venus, for her good qualities to develop. Afflicted
Mars in a female horoscope is an indicator of turbulent
married life. Enemies, marriage partner, business partner
are adjudged from the 7th house. Therefore marriage may
be defined, "to live with an enemy under the same
umbrella is known as marriage”. To develop a friendship
with a known enemy is akin to building terms with the
spouse and it needs same meticulous sincerity and honesty
as is required for turning foe into friend. My advice to the
young couple of the 21st century, "one should expect in
the relation with his/her partner only compassion and
understanding and accept him/her, however imperfect
(not matching with dreams), without always demanding
more to retain bliss to the companionship". Male and
female relationship is not the sprint of vagabond desires
and soaring ambitions but instead is like a cool,
complacent, carefree light stroll where each has his own
norma] dispensations. This can be achieved by reducing
the dynamism of Mars and encouraging the altruism of
Venus. Mars is extrovert and Venus is introvert. This is
true in general for a common man and a common woman.
A strong Mars in a female horoscope will increase her
masculine characteristics; a strong Venus in a male chart
will increase his famine characteristics. Moon in the eighth
house provides a female nature in the male native and
masculine nature to the female. A strong Venus in either
a male or female chart moulds him/her with an
impersonal and unselfish character. The Venusians is the
embodiment oflove, sympathy, warmth and attractiveness
(our body luster is controlled by Venus) Mars denotes
feeling that is impersonal and selfish, Venus, that which
is impersonal and unselfish. Theoretically we should

expect a weak Mars and a strong Venus in a female
horoscope. For the ideal female spouse the horoscope
should have strong Venus and Strong Jupiter
(commonsense, no desire to do harm to others, have
respect for seniors like father-in-law and mother-in-law.
Afflicted 5th and 9lh houses provide disrespect for others.
They have no love for others and they are very selfish.
The girls with afflicted 5th and 9* house will only bring
unhappiness in the family of in-laws. Classical works say
that in a female horoscope the length of marital bond is
deciphered from the 8Ll1 house, her physique from the
ascendant her husband's fortunes from the 5 th house, an
affliction of the 8th house can mean denial of sexual
pleasures through death of the marriage partner or
through disease of the sexual organs. Under certain
conditions it can also mean lack of principles in sexual
conduct. The 8th house is the 2nd from 7"' (maraka from
husband's) and this is one of the reasons that widowhood
is attributed to the 8"1 house afflictions. Another reason
that widowhood was assigned to the 8 1,1 house, is that it
means loss of fortune or bhagya being the 12th (house of
loss) from the 9th (house of fortune). In older days a
woman's fortune was directly linked to her husband. Loss
of husband invariably meant loss of fortune. Even today
(in 2006), large number of women are dependent on their
husbands for their income, for status and we can therefore
consider the 8tb house as a major significator of
widowhood. But since there are a growing number of
women who pursue independent careers it would be wise
not to rush to conclusions about widowhood based on 8'1'
house alone. Benefics in 8* generally indicate a sexually
principled person. In a female chart - if the 7’Jl house and
its lord are well aspected and associated with benefics, the
marriage takes place early and she lives a happy life. With
all these, if the 8th house is aspected by malefics, definitely
something goes wrong and the married life is not happy as
per expectations. One benefic in 9* house of a lady removes
the blemishes of 7th or 8lh house. The house has

traditionally been given rulership over sayana - sukha or
"comforts of bed, the widowhood or divorce. Benefic
influences on the 8* house can counter balance malefic
influence in the 12th or vice versa. For a scandal fiee life 8'1'
and 12.'1' house should be vacant. Unblemished benefic in
8"' house gives longer life span (retrograde planets in 8th
house curtail longevity), brings honours, inheritance and
mental happiness. Everybody likes to live with honour,
good health and happhiess. British Orator Edmund Burke
said even the humblest human being would like to avoid
and shun disgrace and dishonour, though one cannot attain
fame (must have strong moon), position (strong Is', 7,h, 10*
lords) , wealth (strong 2,ui, 1 1 * and Lagna blended with
Dhana Yogas and Raja Yoga). Samuel Garth in his famous
book "The Dispensary" has written when honour's lost 'this
a relief to die. Death's but a sure retreat from infamy". Thus
poet thinks death is better than infamy. Fame is the
perfume of heroic deeds. Fame has also has great drawback,
that if we pursue it we must direct our expectations for a
normal and happy sex life and longevity of husband.
Affliction to Scorpio Sign, 8* house and its lord is not
favourable for a good married life. Affliction of Libra Sign
also brings disharmony. A well guarded Mars is always good
in a female chart but a strong Mars and in a malefic house
destroys the balance of sex life in a woman. Also bad for
sex life in a woman when Mars is afflicted by conjunction
or aspect of lords of evil houses (6* / 8* / 12*). This
aphorism is stunningly true to the knowledge of the author.
Astrologically it is found that when man and woman are of
the same ascendant and the same moon sign are friendly
to each other, their union lasts life long. Moon should be in
the different quadrant from the spouse. Malefics in 8th
house, the house for mutual adjustment of married
partners, often spoil married life. Mars is particularly
blamed for causing the so-called Mangala Dasha when it
occupies 8* house. A malefic 8* lord in 7th causes the native
to develop hostility with his wife and meet his end through
his wife. Mutual exchanges of 7th and 8th lords generate

Duryoga, death of wife, unhappy family life due to sickly
wife. 8* lord in Lagna usually breaks the marriage. It is
Yoga of remarriage. Association of the 8* lord with the 7lh
house / 7* lord is a destructive factor for a smooth marital
life especially when additional factors operate
simultaneously.
The best rule for matching marriage is that bride's and
bridegrooms ascendant must fall in each other's 3rd, 4*, 5*,
7th, 9*, 10* and 11* (Mrs. Rajeshwari Shankar - editor of
TOA has Moon in Sagittarius Lagna and Mr. Daya Shankar,
IRS- her illustrious husband has Moon in Gemini Lagna.
This couple is hell bent today for recovering the lost glory
of Astrology) and one's Moon opposes the other's Moon
and vice versa, it will be a fruitful union. Opposition of
Moon should not be Cancer - Capricorn or Leo - Aquarius.
For a fruitful marriage a few planets should be in the
opposite house or in the same house. The same planet
should not be debilitated in both the horoscopes, (in
example 42 Rahu is debilitated in both the horoscopes,
marriage during Rahu dasa brought the disaster in life. Rahu
in Scorpio and in Pisces behaves as a debilitated planet as
per the author.)
According to Shakespeare : "Marriage is matter of more
worth, Then to be dealt in by attorneys hip. For what it is
wedlock forced but a hell. An age of discord end continual
strife? While as the contrary bring bliss And is a pattern of
celestial peace". Only successful astrologers can satisfy the
statement as wholly true.
Attractive Soul Mate
Throughout history it has been recognized that man and
woman are equal but fundamentally different. The pituitary
gland controls the sex glands in both. sexes but the results
of male hormones are completely different from those of
female hormones. Then there are diseases which are peculiar
to one sex. According to author, pyramid of diseases are
known as woman. The menstrual cycle with its attendant
physical and emotional effects is unique to women. Such
being the case it is important to realize that though 499

fundamental laws of astrology are equally applicable to
both sexes, interpretation of a horoscope has to be based
on the sex of the person concerned. Classical works says
that in a female horoscope, the length of the marital bond
is to be deciphered from the 8* house, her physique from
the ascendant, her husband's fortunes from the 7* house
and her children's fortunes from the 5 111 house (also from
9th house). The 8* house devotes the sexual organs. An
affliction to the 8* house can mean denial of sexual
pleasure through the death of the marriage partner or
through the disease of the sexual organs. Under certain
conditions it can also mean lack of principles in sexual
conduct. 8th house is the 2nd from 7* (maraka for husband)
and these are of the reasons that widowhood is attributed
to 8* house afflictions. Another reason that widowhood was
assigned to the 8* house is that 8* is the 12* (house of loss)
from 9"' (house of fortune or bhagya). An afflicted 8* house
then means loss of fortune. Benefices in 8* generally indicate
a sexually principled person. The 12* house has traditionally
been given ruler ship over sayana-sukha or comforts of the
bed. Malefics in the 12* can also cause widowhood or
divorce. Benefic influence on the 8* house can counter
balance malefic influence of the 12* house in the horoscope.
The 7* lord is in a dual sign and either 7"1 or 8,h house is
severely afflicted, there can be more than one marriage.
Venus in 11* generally arranges two marriages. Malefics in
the angle of Venus also bring two marriages. Upto 1980
remarriage of a woman was unthinkable in India. But in
the 21st century remarriage of a woman is seen in every street
in India. 8* house of a woman and the 2nd house of a man
should not be affiliated for a happy married life. For both
males and females, it is better that 7°' and 8* houses are
vacant and free from malefic influences. In the case of male,
if there is any malefic planet in the 2ral or 7* it is considered
bad but it is said that the presence of similar combinations
in both male and the female nullifies the impact. However
there is a concession, in the event of occupation of planets
(malefic) in 7"' and 8'", it is most desirable to have benefics

in the 9* to take care. A benefic in 9* and 7* lord well placed
and dignified desirably in contact with Lagna Lord ensures
happy and prosperous married life. An unsullied benefic in
12h gives pleasures of bed and take care of conservation of
wealth. Any conjunction or aspect from Saturn, Mars, Rahu
or Ketu to above houses will spoil the results of those houses
severely (see example 42). They are better placed in 3rd, 6*
and 11*. Ifbenefics or yogakaraka planets are associated
with the nodes, the evils may be minimized but still may not
produce perfectly good results. In the event of Mars in 8* in
the case of females, Jupiter or well placed Venus in the 2nd
will ensure Soumanglya. Preferably well dignified Jupiter
in 4* is praised as Jupiter can aspect 8*. However, the malefic
therein should not return the aspect. The conjunction of 7th
and 9* lord in a trine or angle is best placement. Exchange
of 7Ul and 9* lords with a benefic in 2nd is' also treated as a
fortunate combination. If ascendant and Chandra Lagna
fall in even signs (negative signs) with benefic aspects, the
lady will be of a noble character, with feminine features and
will be blessed with good husband and prosperous children.
She will partake her husband in worships and auspicious
functions and religions activities. If the ascendant is aspected
by divine Jupiter or her 4* house is tenanted by dignified
Jupiter (as a benefic lordship), the lady will bring luster to
the family by maintaining a high degree of morality,
chastity, will live long with her husband and enjoy
prosperity. When her 8* house is aspected by Jupiter
/ Venus or full moon as benefics by lordship, she will
lead a long life as sumangali. When her ascendant and
moon fall in odd signs (positive signs) separately, the
lady will be of angry by temperament, masculine in
appearace and behaviour towards her husband will
be odd and resentful. When ascendant and moon
occupy even and odd signs separately, the lady will
be of mixed character and exhibit both masculine and
famine features. When most of the planets are in even
sign, the lady will be sober in nature.
The first and foremost basic principle in female char^Q^

is the, 7"' house should fall in benefic sign and its lord
should be well placed in dignity and well aspected, here
Navamsa position also holds prime importance. A malefic
in 7th without any benefic influence will give negative
results, and she will be source of misery to husband.
Ascendant and moon should not be placed in the malefic
Navamsa. Mars is the source of trouble in a female
horoscope, both health wise and morality wise. If Saturn
and Mars are placed in the 2nd, 4th, 7 *, 8* & 12*, the
horoscope is not worth investigating. Venus - Mars
combination also in the above mentioned houses will make
the female native too much sex-conscious in her early days
of life. The parents of such girls should watch the
upbringing of their daughter. She is not allowed to stay
outside home at night without valid reasons. She should
not have boy friends. Visit of boy friends should be checked
with caution. The wife will bear all the famine qualities in
her general nature and behaviour, if Moon, Mercury or
Venus occupy the 7* house. The wife may be endowed
with masculine qualities, if Sun, Mars or Jupiter plays
predominance over the 7'1 house. If this house is influenced
by Saturn, Rahu and Ketu the wife will have mixed nature.
If the 7th house is bereft of benefic aspect and is vacant, the
lady will marry a worthless man. If Jupiter is in the Kendra
/ trine in own house or exaltation and is with or aspected by
the Moon or Venus, a female lives very happily with her
husband and kids. See the shloka :
Tlfe '•Terfel TI TJcT •’Trfel^ I
JTcPfTfa cllcbqfei Tf:| I
■‘Terfel w^MfacrfR: 1 ger ■’J’Tpt
Tf^iefr i i
The author has observed if 5*h/ll,h is afflicted Jupiter in
Kendra will not help the female native. (See example 42).
Affliction of 5* 19* house produces dare devil female native
who can marry even in her out side community without
the consent of her parents. If Jupiter is in a Kendra or in a
trine in own house or exaltation and is aspected by natural

benefics, the native becomes ruler and even an emperor.
Her majesty Queen Elizabeth of England has Jupiter in
exaltation in the 8lh house. She has two children Prince
Charles and Princess Anne. However Jupiter in Lagna in a
male chart makes delays, if not denies happiness from
children. In the case of Virgo or Gemini, if Jupiter is under
the malefic influence of Saturn, Mars or Ketu, she becomes
a widow. Now we shall discuss the role of Lagna on the
females. The Aries born will be cruel, easily angered, suffer
from phlegm, have a harsh tongue, be not much attached
to relatives. The Taurus born will be truthful, pleasant
mannered, humble, beloved of the husband, well versed
in fine arts, attached to friends relatives and deities. The
Gemini born is harsh of tongue, lustful and lacks good
qualities. When Lagna and Mercury are aspected by
benefics she becomes a very learned and well respected
lady of the society. The Cancer born will be gentle, love
relatives, be of good character, blessed with children and
comfort. The Leo born will be sharp, quarrelsome,
phlegmatic, a voracious eater, helpful to others and well
dressed. Leo born persons with dignified Sun becomes the
CEO of the companies. The Virgo born is humble, enjoys
married life help relatives, controls her instincts and is an
adept in fine arts. The Libra born lacks humility, is proud,
avaricious and selfish. If Venus is afflicted they adopt
immorality easily. Very mean people are born in Scorpio.
They are selfish and cheaters. When Jupiter is in Lagna -
such ladies are good. The Sagittarius bom is mainly bent
on fighting, conversant with shastras, lacks conjugal
happiness, is cruel and unfriendly. The Capricorn born
enjoys good sex life; is truthful, loves pilgrim centers,
destroys enemies; is chief in the family ; famous, have good
hair; endowed with good qualities, sons and character. They
have some tragedies in life. It is really very unfortunate to
have Capricorn Lagna or Capricorn in the 10* house. A
benefic Capricorn does not harm the native (A malefic
should not occupy Lagna including Saturn. A malefic in
any Lagna spells trouble for the native even if it is Lagna

Lord. When the 12* lord is benefic planet and occupy ‘
quadrant/trine such a female native will grow her family
tree well.) The Aquarius born is noble, loves her husband,
is esteemed by relatives, clever and suffers from pimples
on the face. The Pisces bom is noble, loves husband, is
esteemed by relatives, has lovely eyes and hair, devoted to
God and holy man, learned and the pet of preceptors.
Sun rules over body, reputation, position etc. Moon
controls mind when these two planets are well guarded,
they make us mentally strong. Well placed well guarded
Sun and Moon always fight and counter act the malefic
influence of malefic Venus and the eighth house. Where
Sun, Moon and Mars, all the afflicted, a woman is likely to
lead a very wretched life. If Sun and Moon and Lagna fall
in negative signs it forms a Raja Yoga. Smt. Indira Gandhi
had this Yoga in her horoscope. For a male native Sun, Moon
and Lagna in positive signs form the Raja Yoga. When Sun
and Moon are aspected by Jupiter the native enjoys some
reputations for which no justification cannot be given.
Queen Victoria of England was bom with these auspicious
yogas. Her Sun, Moon and Lagna were aspected by divine
Jupiter. So in the marriage of any girl in 2006 onwards we
expect at least one of her luminaries will be aspected by
divine Jupiter. When the lords of 7* and Is' make 2/12 or
6/8 or 3/11 position it indicates that the native carries a
seed of separation. Such a separation could be by death,
desertion or divorce and is likely to materialize during the
operative periods of the lords of the concerned bhava.
Another combination that can disrupt family life and bring
about separation between couple is the position of lord of
Kalatra Bhava m Kutumba Bhava ^lord in 2'"1) Its potential
to cause wreck increases under other malefic influences on
it. The Moon's disposition in the constellation of Saturn
makes her sometimes melancholic and moody and she
generally prefers to be alone . A mind in conflict is a tortured
mind, a twisted mind, a distorted mind and how can such
a mind be tree to observe the beauty of earth, sky, tree,
beauty of a child, or a woman or a man. Moon Mercury

conjunction in an evil house generates paischa yoga that
brings in mantal aberrations. In a female horoscope Moon
should be posited alone in any Rasi not aspected by malefic
and should be > 12° away tram Sun. When Venusjupiter
and Mars in one horoscope is situated in the other
horoscope in a trine or 3 and 11 positions, that is if in the
husband's horoscope, Venus is in Taurus in wife's
horoscope in Cancer or Virgo it is a favourable position.
When the Sun and the Moon have similar harmonious
positions, except in 2/12 or 6/8 relationships, there is
usually a strong attachment. Both the Moons should not
form 2/12 or 6/8 relationships. Sun, Mars and Mercury in
ascendant provide a stony heart, selfishness and self
aggrandizement. A beauty is a woman you notice. A
charmer is one who notices you - by Adlal Stevenson. So
once you marry a woman, try to bring peace in the family
by abondoning ego. The nice thing about egotists is that
they don't talk about other people. The grand essentials of
happiness are, something to do, something to love, and
something to hope for.
Absence of Serious Illness
5"’/ lllh axis in any horoscope is vital. Absence of
prolonged illness is necessary fora good married life. If in a
horoscope 5* (Purvapumya) and lllh houses (6* to 6lh =
recovery power) and their lords are blemished, it will go
on long way to tide over any health troubles. Both of them ,
are the Kendras of the 8* house. Malefic planets and
2, 3,6,7, 8,1 1 lords should be placed in these houses only in
unblemished conditions. Debilitated planets in 3rd/ 6,h/8lh/
12* will produce Raja Yogas.
Yogas For. Troubled Married Life
1. Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces are dual signs,
Gemini and Virgo are the extremely sensitive houses. If
7l\ 8* or li' coincides with dual signs, are afflicted by
Mill's multiple marriage yogas surface out.
2. If the lords of 9lll/10,h with malefic planets she
encourages bad deeds, involves herself in sinful acts and
if good planets are placed, she is kind and courageous 2Q5

3. Jarayoga: 10,h house occupied by lords of 10*, 2nd and
7th leads to the formation of inauspicious yoga called Jarayoga,
which results in the native being extra marital relations. Mars
in the I2h house of Venus also forms this Yoga
4. Mercury and Jupiter are opposite each other in 1 -
7 axis synchronising with dual signs, the native will have
more than one marriage.
5. If the 7* lord is in a dual sign and if either the 7* or
the 8* house is severely afflicted, there can be more than
one marriage.
6. What leads to a divorce/widowhood
Heavy affliction to the 7* and the 8* houses, lords of
Lagna and 7* in 6/8 or 2/12 indicate it. The 1 2*/6* position
ofRahu - Ketu sometimes does it. If Sun, Rahu or Saturn
is placed in the 6* from Venus and 8* from 7* lord
indicates widowhood.
7. Vishakanya Yoga
• a. A girl, is born in 2ri lunar day by in Aslesha
Nakshatra on Saturday will be a vishkanya.
th
b. A girl born on 7 lunar, day with Satavisaj
Nakeshatra on a Tuesday will be Vishkanya. On 12* lunar
day on Sunday with Krittika nakshatra will a vishkanya.
The girl who has Saturn in lagna (A malefic in Lagna spglls
trouble for the native), the Sun in the 5* and Mars in 9 is
vishkanya. Saturn in Lagna produces serious ups and
down in life of anybody. Such lady is dreaded in one's
life. If strong benefics occupy the 7* house from lagna or
Moon Vishkanya yoga will have no effect.
8. If Mercury is afflicted, weak or under Pupakaxtari
Yoga or is associated with or aspected by malefics in the
8* house - the wife may kill the husband. Afflictions of
5* and 9* house will add fuel to the fire.
9. If the lords of 7* and 8* houses are conjoined, the
relation between them will be immoral and if the lord of
8* house is afflicted by malefic planets, such woman have
access to club, society and pass her sinful life secretly. If
Saturn, Mars, Rahu, Sun or Ketu is placed in 6* and 206

house from Moon and Lord of 7* house - she is debarred
from marital happiness, domestic quarrel and difference
with husband, divorce and death of husband, children
and other miseries are likely events.
10. When Sun, Mars and Mercury are in Lagna or in
the 7lh give rise to extreme selfishness and a strong heart,
invite discord in marital bond.
11. In female nativity when Moon is in Chitra (14).
Ardhra (6) Vishakha (16) Moola (19) Ashlesha (9) Satavisaj
(24) Krittika (3)and Pushya (8) will create unhappiness
to husband and children and even separation is possible.
The Moon in the Nakhatra of Venus and Rahu give excess
of sexual desire, an erotic nature etc. When in both
horoscopes Sun, Moon are in 6/8 or 2/12, it brings a rift
in married life.
12. When 4* and 7th house are afflicted, one falls firm
grace and power. When the 4th house is afflicted by a strong
malefic (what goes on mind is judged from the 4* house) it
is an indication of denial of conjugal happhiess. Similarly
when 7<h house is strong but the 8* is afflicted in Rasi or
Navamsa, it indicates unconventional marriage as well as a
crazy out look on marriage issues which bring shock to the
social set up. Let us study one interesting case.
Example 35 : Eloped with a married Muslim man,
When Sun, Moon and Mars are all afflicted, a woman is
likely to lead a very wretched life. This is such an example.
Her brother's Muslim friend brought disgrace to the entire
family. When the 7* house is vacant, such a woman
marries a worthless chap. Foresights out of sages came
stunningly came true in her life. She was a 2nd year textile
design student and used to stay in hostel. She developed
close intimacy with the married Muslimman from Oct 2003
during her Saturn - Saturn dasa (18-5-2003 to 21-2-2006).
Antiplanet's dasa is usually bad for 90% persons of this
earth. Her 7Jl house is vacant, Moon is placed in a
poisonous star Satavisaj ruled by Rahu, her Venus is placed

Example No.35
Date 28/1 0/1 98k Time t0'15:00 Day Thursday Lat 28 39:00 North Long 77 13:00 East
Zone 82 30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:21.22
Balance of Dasa : Rahu 4 Years 3 Months 1 1 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
in the constellations of Rahu. Moon in the constellation of
Rahu or Venus and Venus in the constellation of Rahu or
Vice versa give excess of sexual desire, an erotic nature.
Her all the common signs are afflicted Mars is spoiling Pisces
and Gemini. When all the common sign are afflicted such a
native has multiple marriage yogas. Afflictions of 8th & 12th
houses brought scandals, infamy in her life. Her 7* lord
Venus is conjoined with debilitated Sun, Saturn and Jupiter
and Pluto. Afflicted Venus in the 12"' house alongwith Pluto
acts like an atom bomb in one's life. Her Lagna Scorpio is
hemmed between malefics; Lagnesh Mars is afflictedby Ketu

and Uranus. Venus - Saturn conjunction in evil houses or
their opposition makes anybody characterless. In Oct, 2003
she became so much sex hungry that she did not bother to
return home even after repeated appeals from her aged and
wonied parents. She had frequent intercourse with the
Muslim man for about six months. She brought disgrace to
the entire family. Afflicted Mars spells doom for the girls.
Afflicted Venus spells doom for males. Venus in a movable
sign is a female's chart shows that her husband has affairs
with other women. She was born in Apasaya group B 3rd
quarter in KCD cycles. Mithun = Jeeva, Makar = Deha. She
opened her life with Capricorn dasa 2 yr 1 m 15d. The
Gemini, Leo followed her. She opened Cancer dasa firm
13-12-1998, which has generated Markata Gathi. With
reference to Apasavya Group in such a Gathi loss of father,
futile wanderings or unsuccessful efforts etc occur. In
Apasarya group benefic planets produce worst results. It
has moved to 8th place ftom its natal position. This point
added fuel to fire. In Jeeva Rasi she has Rahu. Saturn Was
transiting Gemini in Oct 2003. One can easily forecast an
untoward event in the life of the native whenever a malefic
transits either a Deha or Jeeva Rasi containg a malefic.
Affliction of Scorpio, eighth house and 8,h lord is not desirable
in a female horoscope. Affliction of Venus has an adverse
affect on morals. Afflictions of5*/9* houses and their lords,
placement of Saturn in the 8th house in Navamsa Spread
shock waves in the society.
Divorce is A Painful Experience For Children
Divorce rates are very high in USA and other Western
countries. Norval D Glenn, a professor of sociology at the
University of Texas, said in Oct 2005 that a quarter of all
Americans age of 18 to 35 were not yet not even 16, when
they experienced their parent's divorce. Divorce shapes the
emotional tenor of childhood. Recently I visited one
gentleman who never found any happiness from women.
Strangely, when he was a kid, his mother (a Karnataka
woman, deserted his Punjabi father) and again in July 2003
his wife left his house, leaving behind a 1 1 yr old daught^pg

and a 8 yr old son. Both the cases occurred when he was
passing Ulka dasa as per Yogini System. In Northern
India, particularly in Punjab Yogini Dasa finds wide
spread application in real life. Let us study his horoscope
in detail. He is a mechanical engineer from Rookee and
set up business for money. He is making Silver and Gold
foils in HP.
Example 36 : Deserted by women, DOB 11-8-62/1=10
PM/Moysore
The position of Deha and Jeeva signs may be in the
following order 5/9, 2/12, 6/8. The last relationship is
dangerous and is harmful for health, freedom for litigation
and the like. Since the above native has 6/8 relationship of
Deha and Jeeva, all the prophecies of sages came true in his
life. Aspects of 6th/8th lords on these sensitive signs are
very dangerous. This gentleman opened his life with
Vrischika dasa as per KCD with balance 3 yr 8m 6 d. Meen
dasa snatched away his mother. His mother deserted his
lh th
father when he was a kid. 5 lord Jupiter is placed in the 4
house of Moon - decreasing happiness from mother. A
retrograde planet in the 4"' house of Moon is never welcome
% the welfare}, of mother. Jupiter is his 5lh lord. Aspect of
8 lord on 5* lord also decreased the happiness of his
children. He enjoyed Mithun dasa between 17.11.1984 to
7.1.1993. He completed his education during this period,
and lost both the parents forever, his father died in 1984
while he has passing Venus - Rahu, lost mother at Venus -
Saturn dasa as per Vimsottori. He got married in 1990. He
arranged his own marriage because he had no relative on
this earth (no brother, no sister, no uncle etc). He enjoyed
Neechvanja debilitated Venus dasa in the 11th house
between 11-12-1974 to 11-12-1994. Neechvanja Rajayog
invariably bears fruits. Hence Venus dasa established him
in life. He earned huge money during Venus dasa. The
author has observed that Venus dasa in 11th always helps
its native. 10,h lord's dasa is .always good for native. He
enjoyed Sun's dasa between 11 12-1994 to 11-12-2000. This
is the best dasa in his life time. He got a daughter in 19^10

Example No. 36
Data 11/08/19(52 Time 13 10 00 Day Saturday Lat 12-18*00 North Long 76:37:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:04:26
Balance of Dasa : Mercury 5 Years 0 Months 5 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-CuspaJ
and a son in 1995. he also earned sufficient money in Sun's
dasa. His real sufferings in life started on the on set of
Moon's dasa. He is enjoying Moon's dasa between 11-122000 to 11-12-2010. in KCD also Cancer dasa started from
7-1-1998. Moon is placed in 8 lord Mercury's star. Though
Moon has generated Neechvanga Raja Yoga, this dasa
generated immense suffering in his mind. He and his wife
fought each other from 2000 and ultimately moved to court
for legal separation. 8'" lord is placed in the 10 house from
Moon. In a Gajakeshri yoga. Moons dasa generates excellent
results after 21 yrs of age Neechavanga Moon should hav^ ^

generated good results. But the star lord of Moon, Mercury
changed the dasa results. His wife's appeal for divorce was
granted by the Hounarable Court, and she left the house
in July 2003 while he was passing Moon - Rahu dasa as per
Vimsottori and Cancer - Virgo as perKCD. 8* lord Mercuty
played the crucial role in divorce. He got the custody of his
both children. 7th lord in 1 llh is a divorce yoga. Venus in
11 "’arranges two marriages. Remote control of marriage
is the 3d house. Retrograde Saturn and Ketu spoiled his
third house. Two female planets Venus and Moon are
debilitated and aspected by Ketu and Rahu. So he never
got any pleasure from women. Today he is following the
footsteps of his father and keeping a wide distance from
women. 1 found tears in the eyes of his children's. May
God save them! The author has not understood as to why
his second marriage did not materialize because Venus in
1 1 * arranges two marriages in almost 99% cases. His spends
time by learning astrology.
The 4th house explains home which mainly consists of
spouse, marital harmony or disharmony. Affliction of 4'"
house or the undesirable placement of the lord of 4lh or
occupation of the 9th house by Saturn, the Sun, Rahu or
the 12th lord may cause divorce, provided other factors also
indicate it. 4th lord is retrograde and is conjoined with Ketu.
Retrograde Jupiter in the 4th house brought unhappiness.
Retrograde planets cause some deficiency to the house,
wherever they are located. The wife leaves the native if
the 7lh house is occupied by malefics and benefics both but
the lord of 7lh house or Venus is sufficiently weak. 6th lord
Mars in the 7lh house is aspected by Moon, 7th lord is
debilitated in the 11th Venus. Venus is debilitated and is
aspected by Ketu. So this very reason forced his wife to
leave his house. She discovered that the native is unfit to
play the role of her husband throughout her life. If we take
Taurus as the Lagna of his wife, she left during Moon -
Rahu dasa. Moon is in the 7* and Rahu is in the 3rd. 3-7-11
houses are the Kamatrikona. When two or more planets
form neechvanga rajayogas it gives a boost but disturbs

the roost. Ulka dasa as per Yogini between J6-3-1 964 to 63-1970 and again between 6-3-2000 -6-3-2006 proved fatal
for him. Dasa lord Saturn is placed in the 3rd house with
Ketu. Hence Saturn dasa as per Yogini ruined his married
life. His wife left him. During Ulka dasa in the early period
of life his mother deserted his father. The author has found
the Yogini dasa works well for the people born in the
Northern part of India.
ROLE OF THE 8th LORD ON THE LIFE PARTNER/
DIVORCE : ASTROLOGICAL RESEARCH
EXPERIENCE OF THE AUTHOR,
DR. SJS. CHATTERJEE.
Research by late Z. Ansari of Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan,
New Delhi (vide Journal of Astrology Oct - Dec 1998 P 66)
has been found to be correct in the investigations of the
author regarding divorce/widowhood. The author has
done labourious job in framing astrological subtle rules for
divorce. He has modified the theory of late ArfSari. The
placement of the 8th lord in the girl's horoscope in a bad
house in the boy's horoscope in a weak position is a negative
factor for a happy married life. Similarly if the 8th lord of
the boy is placed in the bad house in the girl's horoscope, it
is a cause of widowhood/divorce. The horoscopes having
similar longevity and similar afflictions are capable to give
longer innings of married life. The 8th lord of the spouse in
Kendra/ trikona does no harm to the native. That partner
will lose in life when his or her spouse's 8th lord occupies
2/3/6/7/8/1 1/12 houses. If the 8th lord of the spouse is
influenced by benefics, occupies own house he or she can
absorb the shock of wrong placement of the 8th lord of the
spouse. 7'" house is both a Marakasthan and a Kendra.
Debilated planet in this house will be considered with fear
(Example - 39).
Houses involved for matching the term of marriage are
2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th and 8lh, 11*, & 12* houses. These are most
baneful houses and these lords participate in yoga bhanga.
Suppose a 2nd lord is posited with the 9* and 10* lords, the
dasa of the 2nd lord will be very painful for the native. Ang-j 3

lack of harmony between the married couple due to any
reason is most undesirable and it creates mental and
physical agony, affects to other family members too (see
example 34), the marital discord may erupt from a minor
conflict, lack of communication, separation, loss of
prosperity, loss of fortune, disease, childlessness or even
death of the partner.
One Should Not Marry When?
Transit Saturn and Rahu should not influence 8th house/
8* lord, and these planets should not influence the 2nd
i th
house.2nd lord of the spouse. In the girl's horoscope 8
house is the house of Suhaag. Thus the 12* from 8* i.e 7"'
from the birth Ascendant becomes the house of loss for
the 8* i.e. Suhaag and the planets related with this 7* house
become marakesh planets for the husband. Similarly the
7* house is considered as he house of wife in a male
horoscope and the 2n from 7* i.e. 8th and 12* from 7* i.e.
6lh are the houses of loss for the female partner. So the
planets influencing 6* and 8* house may kill the female
partner. Let us study some practical cases. All the examples
are from the research diary of the author.
Example 37A : A case of widowhood
37 A . Male : ll-6-1967/4=13PM / Kolkata.
37 B. Female : 30-11 -69/9=30AM/Kolkata.
Capricorn Lagna Mars 25; Aquarius - Rahu; Aries -
Saturn (R) 9°; Cancer - Moon 22 °; Leo - Ketu; Libra -
Jupiter 3; Scorpio - Sun, Venus, Mercury.
8* lord Sun of the female is placed in the 8* house of the
male chart and is not aspected by a single benefic planet.
The 8* lord of male is placed in the 1 T" house of the female
whre we find that Venus has conjoined with 9* lord
Mercury. Any planet in the angle of 9* lord behaves well.
So his wife could dijest the shock of 8* lord Venus. So the
male member died much earlier on 17.3.2003, causing
widowhood to the female native. In Koota Agreement,
followed in modern days, the astrologer can recommend
such marriage, because both of the have same Moon sign,

Example No.37A
Date 11/06/1967 Time 16.13:00 Day Sunday Lat 22:30:00 North Long 88:20 00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanetan Ayartamsa 23:08:29
8atance of Dasa ; Sal urn 16 Years 0 Months 17 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava ChalltCuapal
where Moon is placed in the different quadrants. Matching
points are 29/36. No software in India pay any attention to
the 8* lord. I request them to upgrade their software for
the benefit of the public. They should also consider the
latent divorce /widowhood yogas of the horoscopes. Virgo
is a very sensitive sign when Virgo sign is heavily afflicted
(6* sigh of the zodiac) is heavily afflicted, one does not
enjoy good health. It effects 5th; 7th and 12th house

Example No.37B
Data 30/11/1969 Tima 09 30 00 Day Sunday Lat 22 30 On Nonh Long 88 20:00 Easi
Zone 82:30.00 East Sri Sanatan Ayenamsa 23 10 33
Balanca of Dase : Mercury 9 Years 1 Months 2 Days
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
The native never recovered from the ailments and ultimately
died on 17-3-2003 during' Ketu - Moon dasa. Moon is
placed in the 10th house (8lh form the 3rd house). Jupiter
and Moon in his lO*1 house should have granted a long
innings of life. Did he die for the wrong placement of 8'1’
lord of his wife in his natal chart? I request the future
astrologers of 2020 onwards to answer this question. In
KCD diagram, he had Scorpio as Deha, Pisces - Jeeva. His
Moon is placed in Savya group B 1st quarter. Dangers and
downfalls are as sure as sunrise when Deha and Jeeva signs
are afflicted. Saturn occupies his Jeeva Sign, his Deha sign

lord Mars is aspecting Jeeva sign Son Virgo. Relationship
between Deha and Jeeva Signs are not welcome. It is
always that the lords of Deha and Jeeva sins are not related
in any manner. If a relationship occurs, a great calamity is
sure to follow in life. Here we find his Deha and Jeeva
signs are interrelated through exchange of aspects between
Saturn and Mars. He was bom withlst cycle 45y - 6m -
Od he opened his life with Leo 3y - 6m - 0 d. Aries dasa
ruled him during 11-12-1995 to 11-12-2002. Deha lord is
placed in the 6th house fonn its natal position in opposition
to Saturn. Mars is suffering from placement related
blemishes. Rahu occupies Aries. Dasa of any sign occupied
by nodes is dangerous. So he contacted dangerous disease
in abdomen (Virgo = abdomen). Dasa sequences failed to
produce good results. He died as soon as he opened Pisces
dasa. Pisces is afflicted by Saturn, Mars. So Pisces dasa
killed him. The lady became widow during Venus -
Mercury dasa only 7 yrs after the marriage. They married
in 1994, produced a son on 20.1.1995. Venus in 1 f1 always
arranges two marriages. The lady married her brother-inlaw for the interest of her son in 2003 and she is expecting
a baby in 2006.
Example 38 : A case of Widowhood
38 B. Female - 28-2-51, 12=4)5 PM/Varanasi
The matching points are 1 8/36, there is Nadi Dasha and
Bhakut Dosha. The marriage is not recommended by the
software. 8th lord of the male is Venus, which is placed in
the 11th houses of the female. The Venus is exaulted in her
horoscope and energized by yogakarka Saturn. She never
lost in the marriage. In 2008 she is a very prosperious lady
of the society and is running business worth of crores. 8th
lord of the female is placed in he 6^ house of the male and
is afflicted by Saturn and Mars. So the male partner died
on 13-2-2000, and he lost heavily in the marriage. The
horoscope 38 A is of a male native who become crorepati,
through medicine business within 35 yrs or so. They got a

Example No.38A
Date 10/11/1951 Time 07:00:00 Day Saturday Let 28:39 00 North Lon® 77 13 O0 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayansmsa 22:55:26
Balance of Dasa : Saturn 7 Years 8 Months 1 1 Days
Planets Nlrayana Bhava
daughter in 1977|uneanda son in 1986. The couple
unofficially separated from 1986. Debilitated Venus
hemmed between malefics rained him completely. As soon
as Venus dasa started he developed bitterness about his
wife. He died on the footpath on 1322000 during Venus -
Mercury dasa. The nursing home people threw him on the
footpath for non payment of medical bills. A crorepati has
a miserable end of life. 12th lord in 2,,d aspected by Mars
and Saturn made him a penniless person at the time of
death. Joint aspects of Saturn and Mars are always
dangerous. He died like a rat on the footpath. When Jupiter

Example No.38B
Data 28/02/1951 Tima 12:05.00 Day Wednesday Lat 25:20:00 North Long 83:00 00 East
Zone 82:30 00 East Sri Sanetan Ayanamaa 22:54:51
Balance of Dasa : Saturn 13 Years 10 Months 12 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Pin -R Raal Dagraa R-L N-L Sub S-S House Resi Degrea R-L N-L Sub S-S
Sun Aqu 15:56:51 Sat Rah ven Mar Asc Tau 28:33 21 Ven Mar Sat Ket
Mon Sco 65808 Mar Sat Mer Jup 2 Gem 22 2220 Mer Jup Sat Mer
Mar Pis 5:48 46 jup Sat Mer Ket 3 Can 16:35:48 Mon Sat Jup Rah
Mer Aqu 8:36:48 Sat Mar Mon Sun 4 Leo 14:24.20 Sun Ven Ven Rah
Jup Aqu 24 38.49 Sat Jup Mer Sun 5 Vir 17:37:21 Mer Mon Sat Jup
Ven Pis 11:09:28 Jup Sat Mon Rah 6 Lib 24:05:51 Ven Jup Mer Mer
Sat -R Vir- 7 36:48 Mer Sun Ket Sat 7 Sco 28:33:21 Mar Mer Sat Ket
Rah -S Aqu 26:05:16 Sat Jup Ket Mar 8 Sag 22:22:20 Jup Ven Sat Mer
Ket -S Leo 28:05' 16 Sun Ven Ket Sun 9 Cap 16:35:46 Sal Mon Sat Ven
Ura -R Gem 12 34:40 Mer Rah Mer Mer 10 Aqu 14:24:20 Sat Rah Mer Sat
Nep -R Vir 28:13:58 Mer Mar Jup Jup 11 Pis 17:37:21 Jup Mer Mer Mar
Plu -R Can 25 16:13 Mon Mer Rah Mer 12 An 24:05:51 Mar Ven Mer Mer
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chaltt-Cuapal
and Venus are posited in same sign or in opposition to each
other in dual signs, the married life of the couple becomes
unhappy. All the dual signs Gemini, Virgo and'Pisces are
heavily afflicted in his horoscope. Bhagyapati Mercury is
heavily afflicted by Saturn and Mars and is squared by
Rahu - Ketu axis. So the antardasa of Mercury in he
maindasa of debilitated Venus brought an end to his life.
His 8th lord is debilitated and is hemmed between malefics
even yogakaraka Saturn failed to increase the strength of
Venus. Weak Venus made him unhappy about his spouse.
His Moon was placed in 3 rd Qtr, Savya group B Deha =

Libra, Jeeva = Virgo, Vrischika ruled him as punargaman
gathi between 14-9-1981 to 14-9-1988, which broke his
marriage. When Libra and Scorpio are afflicted one has a
dull married life. He died during Libra dasa, whose lord
Venus is debilitated, afflicted and is placed in the 12th sign,
brought his unnatural death.
Example 39A : Case of Widowhood
39 A. Male 29.8.61, 4=30AM Gwalior
39 B, Female : 20-2- 1964/21 hrs/Gwalior
The matching points are 15/36 and there is Nadi Dosha.
The marriage is not recommended by the software. The
Example No.39A
Data 29/0&'1961 Tima 04:30 00 Day Tuesday Lat 20.12 00 Noon Long 78:09 00 East
Zona 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamca 23 03.30
Balance of Dasa : Mercury 10 Years 6 Months 22 Days
Planets Nlrayana Bhava
Lagna Nlrayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

Example No.39B
D*ta 20/02/1964 Tima 21.00:00 Day Thursday Lat 2612:00 North Long 78:09:00 East
Zona 62:30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:05:43
Balance of Data : Sun 0 Years 5 Months 0 Days
Planets Nlrayana Bhava
Lagns Nlrayana Bhava Chalit-Cuxpal
female native is known to the author from 1995. She is an
M.Sc. in Zoology and is employed as a lecturer in a degree
college. Her S'11 lord Mars is posited in the 3rd house of her •
Engineer husband. Her husband's 8th lord Saturn is placed
in the 6* house in Aquarius in its own house. They got
married on 29-01-1989 and got a son on 21-8-1990. Rahu
- Mercury dasa made her unhappy in married life soon
after the birth of the son. In almost 95% cases Rahu -
Mercury dasa ruins the marriage. She separated during
1992. Court granted the divorce in 1994. Venus - Jupiter
in a dual sign made her unhappy in the married life. Heavy
afflictions of Gemini, Sagittarius - both the dual sig^21

brought the tragedy in her life. She became widow on 2711-1996 during Rahu - Sun dasa. The male native is a civil
engineer who lost heavily in the marriage. Two retrograde
planets in his 7th house ruined his married life. Deblited
planets in 7"' house should be accepted with fear. In 1990
August got a son, and met with a serious road accident
which broke both the legs. He never recovered Iran the
shock of the accident and died on 27-11-1996 during Venus
- Mercury dasa. He never knew that the 8,h lord of his
wife in the 3rd house (death is controlled from 3rd, 8th and
10th houses) will kill him at a very young age. By adding
Lagna, Jupiter Sun "and Moon we find his death point at
Virgo. Saturn was transiting Pisces at the time ofhis death.
He died in agreement with the death formula of the author
(see Cosmic Influences on mind and IQ, 1992 by Dr. S,S.
Chatterjee P 107) His Moon is placed in Savya Group A 2nd
quarter, Deha = Cagjjcom, Jeeva = Gemini. 6/8 relationships
of Deha and Jeeva sfgns is dangerous and is harmful for
health, freedom fr orri jitigations and the like. He started his
life with Tula 2yr 3rftl9d Virgo, Cancer followed him. He
died in Leo dasa. Its lord Sun is his marakesh lord which is
afflicted by Rahu - Ketu axis. Dasa of any sign containing
8"1 lord /Rahu/ Ketu brings setbacks in life.
Example 40 : Illustrious husband disappeared
40 A Male : 21-9-44 at 10AM, Hazaribagh ,
The matching points are 12/36 and the marriage is not
recommended by the software. Thre is nadi dosha, as well
as Bhakut dosha. The chart of 40 A is a highly qualified
person. He passed B.Tech (Mech) from Birla Institute of
Technology, Ranchi and took his MS degree from USA.
He got married in 1971 and got a son (14-10-1972/
14=03hrs/Dalmianger) who is doctorate in Mechanical
Engineering from USA. Son is now settled permanently in
USA. In 1979 he got a daughter (5-5-79/17=00hrs/Delhi)
who is a _LLM from USA and has also settled in USA. He
was never happy in his married life. His Venus is debilitated
and is afflicted by Mars and Sun. T" house of Venus ig22

Example No.40A
Date 21/09/1944 Time 10:00:00 Day Thursday Lat 24-00:00 North Long 85:23:00 East
Zona 82 30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:49:28
Balanca of Dasa : Rahu 6 Years 11 Months 7 Days
Lagna Nlrayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
for a happy married life. He sent his both the children far
higher studies in USA before his mysterious disappearance
from home in New Delhi. Mercury is the 8lh lord of his
wife, which is placed in the 11* house with 6<h lord Jupiter
(lord of litigation) and aspectd by Saturn. His <? lord Venus
is placed in the 7th house of his wife in Leo. So he lost of in
the battle of marriage engineered by God from the Heaven.
On 3.5.2001 he disappeared from home when he was
passing Mercury - Saturn dasa. 8lh lord of his wife's birth
chart played a mysterious role in his disappearance. G'^23

Exampie No.40B
Data 20/00/1951 Tim# 18:48:00 Day Monday Lat 24:40:00 North Long 85 00:00 Hast
Zone 82:30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22 55: 15
Balance of Daaa : Mercury 14 Years 7 Months 26 Days
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
can only answer - what happened to him on that day. I
request the future astrologers to think on this point. In the
chart 40 B we observe her 7th house is hemmed between
malefics. 8th lord Venus of her husband is placed in her
7th house, which is both a maraka and Kendra. She is
bound to suffer more than husband in the wedlock.
Saturn in 8,h always produces grief, suffering, insult,
infamy, hatred from near and dear to any native. Venus
and Mercury in the 7th may shorten the life span of the
spouse. Her 8th lord Mercury is a retrograde planet and
is hemmed between malefics. When Sun is placed in the

7"1 house, such ladies are abandoned by their spouse.
Her 4th /9'1' lord Venus is heavily afflicted and is also
hemmed between malefics. All these unfortunate
planetary combinations brought the tragedy in life. Her
husband disappeared while she was passing Moon -
Mars dasa. Moon is placed in the retrograde 8th lord
Mercury's constellation. Hence her 8th lord brought the
tragedy in life. Her 6th lord is placed in 8th lord's star
forming a Raja Yoga. Opposition Jupiter - Moon and
Saturn is a class one Raja Yoga. Debilitated Mars in the
6lh has generated a Raja yoga. A debilitated Neech vanga
planet gives a boost in life but it disturbs the roost. 6th
lord Moon and debilitated Mars in 6th produced the
greatest litigations of her life time. She is living alone in
Delhi in the house constructed by her husband. When
native star his/her life with the dasa of 8th lord, the life
cannot flow well. If 6"'/8"712 houses of Mars are
occupied by malefics -.married life of the woman would
be dull. Sixth house of Mars is aspected by Ketu, 8lh house
is occupied by Rahu, 12* house is aspected by Saturn.
The lady was destined to have a dull married life. When
3«i / 6th / 9th / 1 2th houses of Chandra Lagna are afflicted
old age travails are indicated. Her 3rd lord of Chandra
Lagna Venus is hemmed between malefics, 3rd house is
squared by Rahu-Ketu axis, 9lh house is aspected by
Mars, 12* house is spoilt by Rahu and Mars. Placement
of 8th lords in each other's horoscope suggests that he
both partners lost in the marriage. It is a unique example
for further research .
Example 41 : Early Divorce
41 B Female : 28-5-78/7=28PM/Delhi
This is a high scoring match making marriage, which
fell apart only after 14 months. The question is why? Present
day astrologers of India do not pay much attention to
divorce yogas present in the horoscope and also do not
give importance to the role of 8lh lord in the stability of

Example No.41A
Date 15/06/1971 Time 23-15:00 Day Tuesday Lat 23 39:0(J North Long 77.13.00 East
Zone 82:30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23 1 1 51
Balance ofDasa : Jupiter 8 Years 1 Months 19 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
marriage. The girl is non-mangleekand the male is a highly
mangleek person. 7th hosue of Lagna of the female native
is occupied by Sun, aspected by Saturn and Rahu. Such
ladies are always abandoned by their spouse. This incident
really happened in her life. Fourth house of Moon is heavily
afflicted. She is destined not to have happiness in life. When
7'1' and 8,h house are afflicted, a natural benefic in the 9*
saves such a women. Alas ! we find debilitated Mars in her
9*h house. 7th lord is placed in die 8"’ hosue with 2"d/5th
lord Jupiter sandwitched between malefics. Such evil yogas
cannot prolong the marriage. She got married in Feb 2004

Example No.41B
Date 28/05/1978 Time 19:28:00 Day Sunday Lat 28:39:00 North Long 77:13:00 East
Zone 82 30:00 East SriSanatan Ayanamsa 23.17 40
Balance of Dasa : Mars 0 Years 2 Months 5 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
during Jupiter - Ketu dasa and filed a divorce case against
her husband in June 2005, during Jupiter - Venus dasa.
Jupiter - Venus or Venus - Jupiter dasas are peculiar to
anybody like Venus - Saturn or Saturn - Venus dasa. Her
8* house is hemmed between malefics and 12th house is
aspected by Saturn and Mars. Sayanasukha or the pleasures
of bed: are controlled fiom the 12,h house. When 8th and
12th houses are afflicted, scandals surface out and according
to Saravali, Jupiter - Venus combination in the 8"', makes
a tyrant, taking pleasure in the sufferings of others and will
spoil others. This yoga hemmed between malefics acquired.

more venom. She is born in Dhanistha 2IK| quarter, in
Apasavya group B in KCD diagram. Her Jeeva is Sagittarius
and Deha is Aries. Her Deha rasbi has been occupied by 8^
lord mercury. Downfall in life is as sure as sunrise when
Deha & Jeeva signs are occupied by 6,h / 811' lord. Incidentally
her 8* lord and her husband's 8*“ lord are the same planet
Mercury. Her husband's 8th lord is placed in the 6th house
coinciding with Deha sign. Her Mercury, in Aries in Sworn
enemy's house brought too much disgrace for her. 8lh lord
in sown enemy's camp brings finaical set backs in life. This
aphorism is as true as the Sun rises in he east. Her 8th lord
is hemmed between malefics. She was born with Vrisha
dasa with balance for 1 1 yrs. Mesh dasa ruled her upto 285-1996. Dhanu dasa stared afterwards for 10 yrs.
Simhavalokam Gathi ruined her completely. In Apasavya
Diagram this Simhavalokan Gati dasa will endanger one's
professional position apart from causing danger to father
or an equivalent - kinsfolik, may fall ill or meet
unpleasantness. Her divorce, put his poor father in an
embarrassing position. In short one becomes an irresistible
bait of destiny when in simhavalokan Gati (KCD) Dasa.
Generally in KCD, malefic dasa in a Savya diagram will
yield bad results whereas in Apasavya diagram, the dasa
of the benefic planets will generate poor results. Hence
Jupiter's dasa in-detrimented position (180 degree away
from its natal position) hemmed between malefiics
produced worst results for her. When the 8th house and 8ti>
lord are hemmed between malefics - such natives suffer
immensely in the general scheme of life. Her 7th house of
Chandra Lagna is occupied by Saturn and this house is
also under papakartari Yoga. All these evil yogas could
not save her.
The owner of the chart 41 A is a dentist and is the only
son of his parents. He was always nervous to get married,
for the fear of torture of his very dear aged parents by his
wife. He broke engagement several times, even one weak
before the scheduled marriage. Ultimately he married a
very beautiful girl in Feb 2004. the matching points weaUp

28-5/36 by Parasar Light Software. Ashtakut Kundli Milan
recommends the marriage highly. He got married during
Mercury - Venus dasa and also separated during this dasa
only. The dasa of 8"' lord started from 23.11.1998, and
engulfed him in unknown fears. His father arranged the
marriage, observing the recommendations of the software
progamme. When a native has Sun either in 0° or in 30°,
suffers in the general scheme of life. In KCD he was born
in Savya group A diagram in 2nd quarter of Moon (25).
Capricorn is his Deha sign and Gemini is his Jeeva sign
producing 6/8 relationships. This relationship is most
dangerous and is harmful for health, freedom for litigations
and the like. Both Deha and Jeeva signs are occupied by
malefics. Dangers and downfalls are always as sure a
Sunrise when both the Deha and Jeeva rasis are ill
occupied. More than two malefics in these sensitive houses
bring unnatural death. His Deha Rasi has Mars and Rahu.
When Jeeva Rasi is afflicted, apprehension, calamity,
anguish, fear, great risk etc are indicated. Most probably
Mars - Rahu in his Deha Rasi provided him the 6th sense
about marriage, but failed to save him from the disaster.
Ultimately at the time of his marriage Satrun was transiting
his Jeeva Rasi Gemini containing Sun in April 2005, again
Saturn came back from Cancer in retrograde motion in
Gemini. Defamation follows when Saturn passes over natal
Sun. He opened his life with Leo dasa (0 yr 2 m 7 d), then
Mithun, Makar, Kumbh, Meen followed him. He is enjoying
Libra dasa form 22-8-2003 for 16 yrs. Libra - Libra dasa
(his Venus is conjoined with 8,h lord Mercury. Dasa of any
planet conjoined or aspected by 8* lord brings disaster in
life) brought set backs in life. Dasanath is placed in the 8th
house from its natal position and is conjoined with 81'1 lord
Mercury and 12th lord Saturn. Any Planet, which moves
3,6,8,12 from its natal position brings, set backs in KCD
cycles. The planet should be free from placement related
blemishes for good results. His 7* lord Sun is an infant
planet and is hemmed between malefics. Mars - Rahu in
the 12"'made him mangleek. He married a non-mangleek

girl and suffered. His 8* house is occupied by Pluto and
Uranus, 12'h house is occupied by Mars -Rahu. Afflictions
of 8th /12lhhouses brought scandals in life. Nobody is
praising him for the court case. Who will lose in the battle
engineered by God? Because S^ord of his wife is placed in
his 4* house, his 8th lord is placed in the 61*1 house in his
wife's horoscope; his wife will be defeated in the court case.
When the lords of 1st and 7th are adversely posited in 2/12,
6/8 or 3/11 positions from each other in a horoscope, it is
a warning sign - look, stop and proceed with matching of
horoscope. His Lagnalord and 7,h lords are in 2/12
relationships. In his wife's horoscope also 7,h and 1S1 lords
are placed in the 2/12 positions. Our modern day
astrologers do not pay any attention on this very adverse
yoga of divorce. These two horoscopes should open the
eyes of astrologers before giving green signal to a marriage.
Astakuta analysis of horoscopes using guidelines of sages
needs up-gradation for the marriage recommendations in
2006 onwards. Due to constant change and rampant
conditions of our socio-economical status it has thus left a
narrow scope for study of such compatibility pattern on
married life using software programs. It is noticed that the
malefic planets and even inimical planets when related
with 7A or 8th house or their lords and karaka planets bring
about crises in maximum numbers of cases in married life.
The trika house and their lords are treated as one of the
important factors for causing crises when they influence
the karaka planets. Deha and Jeeva sings are very sensitive
houses. They should be free from malefic influence.
(Saturn. Rahu, Ketu, Mars 6th lord and 8th lord).
Astro"Logical" Horoscope Matching : Modem Views
Sages have overlooked many important points which I
have discussed in the above paragraph. They should be
introduced in modern-match making procedures using
softwares.
1. One of best things to have in a chart for marital
alliance is a Moon, free of association. Such individuals carry
the tracks of the sign occupied by the Moon. In examplggQ

34 the Moon is new. Sun, Moon, Mercury combination in
the 7th house (house of enemy) made her a heartless killer
who meticulously planned each killing to look like an
accident. However Moon - Jupiter, Moon - Venus
combinations have been praised by our seers. 2. Saturn is
the chronic troublemaker and stands for all that is associated
with drudgery, long drawn illness, manipulation tactics,
indifference or aversion. So when Saturn occupies the
ascendant, 2nd 4th, 7th, 8th or 12lhhe brings these factors into
play in the personal life of an individual denying conjugal
felicity. Look for similar affliction patterns in the other
horoscope. 3. Where a chart has blemishes due to Mars in
the 7lh or 8th from Lagna, the Moon or Venus, if would be
better to look for a similar placement of Mars in the other
chart. For a girl with Mars in the 8’\ it is better the boy too
has Mars in the 8'1’. But if the girl has Mars In 7''\ Mars in
7'1' or 8lh for the boy would be quite okay (AM Feb 2000
P200) 4. Same planet should not be weak in both the
horoscope. If the same planet is debilitated in both the
horoscopes marriage will be floundered on the rocks. In
the example 42 Saturn is afflicted with Rahu in both the
horoscopes where Rahu is debilitated in each horoscope
causing severe problems in married life. 5. A person born
on the new Moon day is different from one born on the
full Moon day, even if their birth stars are same. The
difference of tithis should be less. 6. In case both of them
have same Nadi, the children may suffer from ill-health
(Mruidula Trivedi, AM Jan 2006 P 112). If the Nakshatras
are the same, but the padas are different, their Nadi Dosha
is nullified. If the boy and girl are born in the same Rasi
but in different Nakshatras or born in the same Nakshatra,
but in different Rasis, then Nadi dosha is nullified. According
to the author 2/12 or 6/8 relationships of Moon are not
welcome. 7. Deha and Jeeva signs should not have contact
with 6th / 8"' lords and malefics. 8. Placemet of the 8th lord
of the spouse in a chart should be considered. If this planet
occupies own house or associated with benefics - shock of
the 8th lord can be absorbed. 9. If both them have same

Lagna, then the 8'1' lord will be common. If this 8th lord is
well guarded by benefics in both the horoscopes a marriage
may be recommended even if they score around 1 2 points
or above.
Example 42 A: Male 20-1-1957, 5=44 hrs, Cannanore,
Kerala
Example 42 B : Female 16-3-1968, 00.01 hrs. Cannonore
Matching points are only 17/36 using Lahiri Ayanamasa,
but the same value is 27/36 using Raman Ayanamsa. Sri
K.N. Rao has already condemned Raman Ayanamsa in his
books. When points are less than 20/36, it would be very
very difficult to adjust in real life. The girl's 1st lord and 7"
Example No.42A
Date 20/01/1957 Time 05:44.00 Day Sunday Lat 1 1 51 00 North Long 75:22:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22 59.47
Balance of Dasa : Sun 4 Years 9 Months 12 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

Example No.42B
Date 16/03/1968 Time 00 01 00 Day Saturday Lat 1 1 51 00 North Long 75:22 00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23 0907
Balance of Dasa : Moon 5 Years 11 Monti's 7 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
lords are placed in 2/12 relations. Moon is conjoined with
Ketu. Her both the luminaries are afflicted by Saturn. She
carried a seed of separation in the impure soul. Her soul is
not pious. Inspite of having Jupiter in a Kendra she was
thrown out of the vved-lock. Afflicted Mars added fuel to the
fire. In boy's chart both the luminaries are also afflicted by
Saturn. Aspect of Jupiter on Sun brought some relief.
According to Mrs. Trivedi, there is no nadi dosha. (AM Jan.
2006). So the matching points will rise to 25/36. Conjunction
of Saturn - Rahu in he 12th house of the boy, ruined his
marriage. Two malefics either in 8th or 12,h can break the
marriage with scandals. Moreover, Venus is hemmed between,..

malefics. The girl's 8"' lord Mercury is placed in his Lagna
with natural benefic Venus. The boy's 8"' lord Moon is placed
in the 1 1 ,h house of the female chart with Ketu in direct aspect
of Rahu - Saturn - Sun - Mars. She lost in the battle of
marriage. Her afflicted 5th house/9lh lord, afflicted Mars
increased her masculine characteristics, made her
disobedient, denied her any affection or sympathy for the
in-laws. Conjunction of 8lh lord with 7th lord Venus in 4th,
did not flourish her Venusion qualities. 8,h lord in 4,h will be
source of miseries toihe parents (Practical Vedic Astrology
by Santhanam P 262). I strongly believe the impure soul of
the girl precipitated the divorce for the 2/12 relationships
of Moon. At the time of marriage both of them enjoyed
Rahu Mahadasa. Rahu in both the charts are afflicted and
debilitated. In the boy's chart Rahu is conjoined with
marakesh 2nd lord Saturn. In the female horoscope Rahu is
placed with lst/6"' lord brought many litigations in life.
Afflicted Rahu in both the charts brought the miseries in
life. The girl was bom on a Saturday and boy was bom on
a Sunday. In the long association with astrology I found
• Saturday bom children suffer in the general scheme of life.
An astrologer should never recommend a marriage when
both the partners enjoy Rahu mahadasa, even when the
matching points are high. 5/11* axis heavily in the case of
the female brought long-lasting problems in life. Dasa of a
retrograde planet is never good. Both of them have
retrograde Jupiter. So how can Jupiter dasa provide
happiness to both of them? It is well known that Jupiter is
the lord of happiness. In the female chart Jupiter is aspected
by the 8th lord Mercury which tarnished the image of Jupiter.
I have proved by placement of 8* lord in both the charts -
the female native is the loser.
Conclusions: Modern IITians, Doctors, chartered
accountants and other qualified persons do not have much
time fa- finding their spouse, i'm sure they will get enough
material from this book for selecting a good spouse for them.
No life without wife. For a every successful man, there is a
brilliant woman behind him. I wish a beautiful married life

for the all the educated persons of India. They should
produce brainy children. All these kids should conquer the
glove by 21 00 AD as per wish of the great poet Rabindranath
who was called Gurudev by Gandhiji.
"Bharat Abar Jagat Sahabaya shrestha Asan Lobhe,
"which means India will be again the No. 1 country of the
world. Only 300 years ago India was the richest nation
under the Sun.

Chapter XIH
8thHouse And Financial Down Turn
For each house in a horoscope, its opposite house plays
a significant role to play. When we want to know about
wealth (2nd house) we should examine 8"' house. Actually
judged for pertinent conclusion about a single bhava. It is
well known when the Lagna is influenced by a number of
planets - the native invariably becomes rich; For to be
fortunate in life, lord of lagna should be placed in a friend's
house, should be strong in Navamsa and also should be
aspected by natural benefics. Lord of Lagna in an enemy
camps and 8th lord in sworn enemy's house will bring early
set backs in life. A strong well guarded 8th lord is a must for
acquiring good amount of money. If Lagna and Moon are
unaspected by Saturn and Rahu, the native becomes more
prosperous than his father and surely prosper in life. If Lagna
and Moon are not aspected by a single benefic - the Raja
Yogas do not bear fruits. Strong luminaries ensure great
financial status and happiness in life. According to Sages :
frfc -rmfcl xf ST#) 'Wltg# TgcT #kT I
4ci^n <ticrMla vrj of TO I I
■fierfrr ^FFTTST: TOTA*fft ' fadIR:
fST ■TpJT# #f#TFFT | |
Meaning that if Jupiter is in a Kendra or in a trine in
own house or exaltation and is with or aspected by Moon
or Mercury or Venus, the native becomes a ruler and even
an emperor (now a days they are IlTans, doctors,
immigrants etc), conquering and crushing enemiesj^g

Practical case studies have revealed that the Jupiter in 405
or 9th, particularly in Lagna Kendra, the native survives
many terrible difficult moments of life and come out
miraculously from many nasty situations without any
human adventitious aid and inspite of several lacunae in
the horoscope, if the 8,h lord and Saturn are well fortified
and under benefic aspect can uplift one's financial solvency
throughout life. When the lord of 10 house occupies a
quadrant, a trine or thellthhouse or the 2nd house, and is
aspectedby a benefic, the native will be a merchant. Unless
the 9th house and its lord are strong, one cannot be
prosperous throughout his Life. When the 9th house and its
lord are weak, even born in a good family becomes a poor
man. Too much afflicted 9th house does not provide the
wisdom to plan the future. To be generally fortune in life
the 9,h house, and its lord and its Kendras, the Sun and
Jupiter should be strong Misfortune never comes alone,
only the injured foot is again injured. Such adages become
true in one's life when 9'1' lord is ill aspected by ill placed
6"‘/8,h/l 2th lords. Even if some major financial setbacks
occur in he life of a native, he will be able to regain lost
wealth in his life time, when either 9th house or its lord are
conjoined by Venus and Jupiter, Venus - Rahu combination
in a good house helps to regain the lost power. Smt. Indira
Gandhi had this Yoga. Strong 2l,d lord and Ascendant lord
also help the native to absorb financial shocks. Whenever
Venus - Saturn - Sun conjoins, rags to riches syndrome is
observed provided Venus is not combust and whenever
Saturn - Mercury - Sun combine in a rasi - such a native
generally suffers in the general scheme of life. The author
has observed this malefic combination in the horoscopes
of middle class persons of the society.
Yogas For Financial Set Backs
1 . When 8* lord is retrograde, debilitated, combust in
an enemy camp, 8* lord with debilitated planets elsewhere,
financial set backs crop up in life. Debilitated, retrograde,
combust planets in 8'1' house also curtails one's apple cart
(see example 46)

2. Rahu in transit over 8* lord's vicinity or passing
over retrograde 8* lord anywhere in the horoscope.
3. Saturn, Sun or Mercury in 2"‘78,h
4. Aspect of retrograde planets in the 8"' houses
reduces wealth.
5. Sun - Venus or Sun - Moon combination in /8th
reduce wealth.
6. Weak Moon in 2”d house aspected by Mercury can
wipe out the savings.
7. If weak 12"' lord makes relationship with either 6th
lord or Saturn, destruction of wealth by enemies are to be
understood.
8. When Lagnalord is placed in 6°78lh/1211' is aspected
by malefics.
9. Contact or aspects of malefics in 2lu,/12lh houses
indicate loss through cheating.
10. If the lords of 1 1 * and 2ndjoin the 8* house in aspect
to Mars or Saturn, one will be very poor.
11. If a planet is posited in the 11 "'house in the star of
8"’ orl2"'lord, loss is indicated.
1 2. The lords of 1st, 9"' or 11* are relegated to 8th house,
the native will be extremely poor.
Periods of Set Backs In Life.
In this fast moving globe, life is like a whirlwind. The
modem world is full of complexities, the inhabitants of this
universe are moving round and round to occupy the chair
and become the luckiest to drink the elixir of happiness
and prosperity. Life is nothing but a musical chair race
where some lag behind to possess a seat, at last one becomes
victorious, 2nd and 3rd follow suit. Naturally those
unfortunate once face several setbacks in life. It comes as a
below as lady luck refuses to smile. Life is a dome of myriad
coloured glass, several rays sparkles out of it some are
radiant and some are dark. Setbacks in life dominate when
dark rays engulf a person and so set backs in life in
astrological study and predictions, claim an importing

position. It is definitely important for a person to consult a
competent astrologer to protect himself from the dark days
of life through proper astrological and spiritual remedies.
Yes, a sincere astrologer with his honest pursuit can guide
a person at the time of distress through proper
application of spiritual (observe fasting on the day of 8th
lord. Suppose one has Virgo Lagna fasting on Tuesday
will provide relief) and astrological remedies (Gems of
the Lagna Lord, Kendra Lord and Trine Lords help the
native. Ruby and Pearl can be given to anybody. Gomedh
is used when one faces setbacks in life. Students will be
highly benefited) and remove the stings and pains during
those dark period of setback.
When there are class-one Raja Yogas, Dhana Yogas,
Lagna and its lord are strong, 9 lh lord/911' house are strong
the native experiences happiness throughout his life so far
financial fronts are concerned. Similarly for a poor man,
all the days are equal. He never enjoys happiness in his life
time. All the dasas yield unfavourable results in the case of
a poor man. (a poor man is a person who has no Raja Yoga
in his horoscope and 8th or 12* houses are occupied by
malefics). One should be lucky to enjoy the dasas of5lh/9th/
lords, yoga forming planets, yoga karaka planet's dasa
during hay days of life (20 - 65). Financial stability can never
be achieved where there is no Rajayoga in the horoscope.
There must be relationship between Trine/Kendra lords.
Dasa of any planet aspected by or in relation to 8* lord
gives inauspicious results. Dasa of planets under papakartari
yoga generates inauspicious results. Dasas of retrograde
planets are never good. They fail to bestow 100%good
results to their natives. Dasa of any planet aspected by
9,l,/51h lords generate auspicious results. Dasa of a planet
aspected by another natural benefic planet, yields
auspicious results. Generally dasas of2nd, 3rd, n,l,,6Ul/ 8th
and 12* are bad. Even Kendra lord/trine lord when is
combust, retrograde, under papakartari yoga, 8*/12'from
their natal positions fail to bestow good results. Planets in
2nd/7Ul/8,h house, when combined with marakalord (2nd/

7'h/8th house) will generate inauspicious results. Dasas of
star lords of natal Mars and natal Saturn give adverse
results when their star lords are ill placed, afflicted -
sufferings of the natives will multiply. Planets
longitudinally placed in 0'° or 30 degree also do not auger
well for the native. Failures are the result when Is', 2nd,
5*, 9th, 11* house and their lords are having connection
with 6th/ 8*1' lords. The sub-period of two planets, one
exalted and the other debilitated may have strong
character causing downfall. According to R. Santhanam
the dasa sub-period of Saturn- Rahu, Rahu - Saturn,
Jupiter- Rahu, Rahu - Mercury, Mercury -Rahu and Rahu
Mars introduce severe set backs in professional sphere.
According to Sri KN. Rao, Jupiter - Venus and Venus -
Jupiter dasas are very bad for Libra people. When Jupiter
and Saturn are posited in one sign or exchange aspects
Jupiter's dasa becomes very dull. When Saturn and Venus
are strong in a horoscope, Saturn - Venus or Venus -
Saturn dasa may ruin the life of a native completely. 99%
cases are true. However if they are weak in the birth chart
their dasa may not produce adverse results. But the native
is sure to receive some sad experience in life. One's
fortunes will often be stalled if the 4th lord is in the
company of Sun and receives the aspect of 8th house.
Misfortunes of a greater order will rule in the entire dasa
of a planet with reference to whom the 6*/8*/12* houses
are occupied by malefic, debilitated planets and enemies.
If two or more malefic planets are in one and the same
sign, their mutual dasa and sub-periods will lead to
poverty, diseases, litigation, loss of wealth and fear from
enemies; Mental aberration, troubles from enemies, loss
o/rulership (or profession), strife and loss of energy will
come to pass in such dasa whose lord is inimical to the
lord of the ascendant or the lord of the Moon sign.
8lh house controls much sufferings and death of the
native. Significator of this bhava is Saturn. Therefore when
8th lord and Saturn are strong, the native suffers very less
at he hands of destiny. According to Dr. B.V Ramai240

everybody is born on to this earth with some previous
negative or positive balance of Purva Punya. Those who
are born with position balance of Purva Punya, they come
to this earth for harnessing rich dividends for their
meritorious deeds in their past lives. These people have
strong 5,h/9tjh houses, and strong 11* house (house of
gains). A native is generally lucky when the 11* house as
a natural benefic planet. 6/8 relationships of 5* 19* lords
indicate ups and down in life. All time great singer,
millionaire Lata Mungeshkar was born with Taurus
Lagna. She has been born with Panijata Yoga, common to
all immortals. Her 5*/9* lords are in mutual trines. 8*
lord is placed in Lagna and Saturn occupies 8* house - in
Sagittarius. She was born with Mercury dasa 5* lord's
dasa. Ketu, Venus, Sun, Moon, Mars dasas passed away
smoothly. She will.now enjoy Rahu dasa which is being
aspected by its dispositor, hence Rahu dasa will also
generate excellent results. She failed to get married for 7*
lord in 6th with Ketu, 7* house is hemmed between
malefics, 8* house is occupied by Saturn. We believe she
never suffered from financial insolvency. Great Yogas
assures big money for the native. Sir Don Bradman, the
legendary figure in the Cricket world was born with
Capricorn Lagna, lord of lagna Saturn was in Cancer with
Venus. 811' lord was posited with 6*/9* lord Mercury in
8*. He was also born with Parijata Yoga (Capricorn -
Lagana, Aries - Moon; Taurus - Ketu, Gemini - Jupiter,
Cancer - Saturn - Venus; Leo - Mercury, Sun; Libra -
Mars, Aries - Rahu) with balance Venus Mahadasa 8yr
11m 5d. He enjoyed Sun, Moon, Mars, Rahu dasa. In his
haydays of life, when he entered his name in the record
book in the field of cricket, the most popular sports in
2006. We are sure he never suffered from financial
difficulties in his life time for the strong 8,h lord (any
lord behaves well in the angle of 9* lord) and strong
Saturn. Saturn in 7th acquires directional strength; Venus
helped this factor to grow many fold amounts. Let us
take the example of Zulficar Ali Bhutto, who ruled

Yoga. He had to pay the heavy price for the affliction of
Saturn with Mars, Ketu, 8* lord Venus. 5*/9* lords were
in 2/12 relationships indicating ups and owns in life.
8* lord was aspecting 8* house, 9lh lord was aspecting
its own house. Many planets in 2/8 axis made him free
from financial anxiety. He was born with Mars
Mahadasa with balance of 4yr - 7m - 8 d. Rahu, Jupiter
dasas passed away smoothly. After the creation* of
Bangladesh in 1971, he became the President of Pakistan
for 8 yrs only. Yogakaraka Saturn dasa pushed him high,
and also killed him though a conspiracy during the dasa
of Saturn - Mars. Saturn - Mars dasa became marakesh
for him for their placement in the 2nd house. Dasas of two
malefic planets placed in the same sign is always bad for
any native. Heavy affliction of 8th house by malefics added
fuel to the fire. We shall now discuss the case histories of
5 persons who are also suffering at the hands of destiny.
We shall find out the reasons of their sufferings.
Example - 43 : Very poor career of a chartered
accountant
The native is a mediocre student and has been bom under
Kal Sarpa Yoga. Although Moon is not within Rahu- Ketu,
the author believes Kal Sarpa Yoga is valid for him. It
restricts the individual in functioning in several matters, at
the same time he has been bom with Adhi yoga. Since 3rd
Pakistan for many years but was executed by a man,
whom he groomed to hold the chair of chief of Army.
Bhutto suppressed the hopes of many and elevated the
Status of Zia-Ul-Haq who executed Bhutto, ignoring the
appeals of all 101 head of states, on false murder charges.
Vidyasager of Bengal has written if you do some good
to anybody, he is sure to abuse in public. The words of
Vidyasagar come true in the life of Mr. Bhutto
(Horoscope of Bhutto. Libra - I agna, Scorpio - Saturn,
Ketu, Venus, Mars, Sagittarius - Mercury, Sun; Pisces
Jupiter; Taurus - Moon, Rahu), He was born with Adhi

Example No. 43
Date 26/08/1977 Time 13 15 00 Day Friday Lat 28.39 00 North Long 77 13:00 East
Zone 82.30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:17:02
Balance of Dasa : Sun 1 Years 5 Months 17 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
lord Saturn and 9* lord Moon have exchanged places, it
has generated Khala Yoga. A person bom with this yoga
will be rough in behaviour and he will live in prosperity
and poverty in a cyclic order. Cycle of gentleness and
haughtiness will engulf the native. Both Saturn and
retrograde 8* lord are hemmed between malefics, so they
are weak. Adhi Yoga grants results when Moon is strong
(Astrology Nectar by Dr. S.S. Chatterjee P 83). Here Moon
is heavily afflicted by Mars, Rahu and Saturn. He will be
denied the fruits of Adhi Yoga. 4Ih lord Saturn and 9* lord
Moon have generated a Raja yoga for him. 5,l,/9'^ lords in

6/8 relationships indicate ups and down in life. Author
has found, when 8Ll1 lord and Saturn are weak Kalsarpa
yoga, Kemadhruma yoga etc evil yogas wreck the life of
the native completely. They are the pyramid of failures.
Margaret Thatcher was born with a kal Sarpa yoga, but
her Saturn is conjoined with a natural benefic Mercury in
Libra' Ascendant. 8* lord is aspecting 8th house from Scorpio.
Hence Kal Sarpa Yoga did not bring any unhappiness in
her life. When Saturn is aspected by a natural benefic, its
power to do evil decreases. Abraham Lincoln was also born
with Kal Sarpa Yoga. His Lagna Lord Saturn was placed
in the 10th house being in aspect benign Jupiter. His 8* lord
occupies Lagna Aquarius. Strong 8U1 lord, strong Saturn
did not impose Kal Sarpa Yoga results on him. He was
killed for three detrimental planets. 2/3 determined planets
can bring unnatural death. When a planet moves to 180
degree from its natural position, it gets determinted. Evil
.yogas are worst for the owners of ordinary birth charts. In
the present case, we find three detrimented planets (Moon,
Saturn, Jupiter). Clearly Kal Sarpa Yoga ruined him. He
passed CA in July 2005 and is not getting any job upto
November 2005. He took 5 years to pass group II CA
examination. 9th & 10th houses are hemmed between
malefics. He has to pay heavy price for his weak horoscope.
He is enjoying Rahu dasa which is providing him only
sufferings. Otherwise Rahu in ll'1' is always good to any
native. Karmic planets Rahu, and Ketu are skippers, other
7 planets operate like ordinary players, but they have some
added responsibilities as well. The added responsibility on
the node of Moon is responsible for the operation of the
Kal Sarpa Yoga. So Rahu's dasa is not generating any results
for him. Dangers and downfalls are as sure as sunrise
when 8th lord and Saturn are weak in a horoscope.
Horoscopes devoid of Raja Yogas, Dhana Yogas and when
8th lord and Saturn are weak, they only swim in the ocean
of poverty. Even in dream they do- not enjoy any happiness
in life. 8th lord in retrograde motion with 10^ lord in 10*
add fuel to the fire.

Example No. 44
Date 08/07/1967 Time 15:10:00 Day Saturday Lat28:39 00 North Long 77:13:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:08:33
Balance of Dasa ; Jupiter 2 Years 9 Months 4 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
Example - 44 : Very unhappy soul for the loss of 90
lakhs within 2 yrs. Between 2003 March to September
Whenever 8* lord is sworn enemy's camp, there will
be financial setbacks. His 8* lord Venus is place in enemy
camp with Plato and Uranus is aspect of Rahu. From
my experience I have found Saturday born suffers too
much in life. This really happened in life. He was running
an export garment shop. He started losing money from
90 lakhs during Mercury -Jupiter and Mercury -Saturn

dasa. Combust 9"' lord and sub period of 3, ,/6'1' lord
Jupiter brought financial losses for him. Dasa of any two
planets in 2/12 or 6/8 positon is bad for the native, in
KCD diagram he has Moon Savya group A 4th quarter.
Deha -Cancer, Jeeva-Pisces. He suffered during Libra
dasa. Dasa of any sign occupied by nodes bring griefs in
life. Kal Sarpa Yoga added fuel to the fire. When 8*
lord is placed in 11th house, business loss will be there.
Saturn in the 6th house has been praised by our seers. It
is being aspected by divine Jupiter. Budhaditya Yoga,
Gajakeshni Yoga and Parijata Yoga may help him to
overcome his difficulties. Lord of Lagna is placed in the
9th house, whose dispositer is also in the 9th house
forming Parijata yoga for him. He has Hamsa
Mahapurush Yoga also in his birth chart. On 8lh March
2003, Saturn and Rahu were transiting Taurus. Heavy
afflictions of 8"‘ house, triggered oft' the financial set
backs. When Sun was afflicted by transiting Saturn, he
suffered heavy financial losses. For the various good
yogas in his horoscope, he should come up in life again.
8th lord is shown enemy's camp always brings financial
set backs. His 8th lord is placed in the enemy camp. 5'h/
9th relationships of Deha & Jeeva rains, also speak about
his bright future. When Deha and Jeeva Lords conjoin
in any sign, it is a grisly combination and is to be feared.
A tragedy in life will surely haunt the native we find his
Deha an Jeeva lords in Cancer. The author believes the
conjunction of the Deha and Jeeva lords precipitated is
suffering in financial fronts.
Example - 45 : Reduction of MA (Economics) to zero
level during the dasa of 8th lord.
29-10-1954, Time = 15-10hrs, Calcutta.
This is the story of a man who had good beginning of
life, (son of a medical doctor) but had a pathetic end of life.
He had five exalted and three debilitated planets in
Neechvnga state was bom as the youngest child of a
prosperous medical doctor. His elder brother is an I IT
engineer and is a well placed man of the society. The native

Example No.45
Date 29/10/1954 Time 15:10 00 Day Friday Lat 22:30:00 North Long 88:20:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:57:55
Balance of Dasa : Saturn 7 Years 7 Months 20 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
is MA (Echo.) from Delhi University was employed as an
executive. His decline started soon after marriage in March
1987. Wife left within 2/3 months after conceiveing. He
brought allegations against his wife regarding immorality
and virtually drove her out with the snpport of her parents.
He enjoyed Venus dasa from 5-11-1986. This 8* lord's dasa
in an enemy camp, hemmed between maleics ruined him
completely. During Venus -Venus dasa he got married, got
a son, got separation from his wife, the father passed away
on 12-12-89, all during Venus - Venus das. He lost his job
and was forced to accept inferior jobs. He becomes alcoholic

during this dasa. Let us analyses his reasons of down fall.
In KCD diagram his Moon is placed in Apasavya group B , 3rf
quarter. .Teeva = Gemini, Deha = Capricorn. 6/8 relations of
Deha /Jeeva sign brings ups and downs in life. Malefics in
Deha & Jeeva sign precipitated his mysteries death on 5-1-2005.
He fell down suddenly on 30-10-04 and never walked again.
He had to be kept in an intensive care unit with oxygen supply
tor 2 m 10 days which costed huge money. Whenever Deha &
Jeeva lords combine in a single rasi many sad and untoward
incidents occur in life. His Deha lord Saturn and Jeeva lord
Mercury have conjoined together in Libra with Sun. Both these
planets are combust. Combustion of Deha and Jeeva lords invite
death at an early. His 8th lord is retrograde, is placed in the
enemy camp and is hemmed between malefics. this broke him
financially. Ketu in the 8* from retrograde Venus snatched
away his wife. Whenever Saturn -Sun - Mercury combines in
any sign - the native suffers in the general scheme of life. Saturn
in 8* brought many humiliations in life. Malefics like Saturn,
Mars in the angle of 6* lord brought much litigation in life. In
KCD diagram, he opened his life with 8y7m27d of Cancer
dasa. Virgo, dasa passed peacefully, because dasa lord is placed
in the 2 m house from its natal position. Childradasa of libra
ruined his marital happiness. Scorpio dasa pulled him down
completely, because this house is occupied by the 8* lord Venus.
He earned a meagre salary during Scorpio dasa. Pisces dasa
started from 16-6-1995 with Simhavalokan Gathi. A Lion's
violent jump on its prey portrays the period's intensity. In
apasavya diagram this Gati dasa willon danger one's
professional position apart from causing danger to father or
an equivalent kinsfolk, may fall ill or meet unpleasantness. All
these words of sages came stunningly true in his life. He died
during the ardof Pisces dasa. Jupiter is placed in the 12* house
in Navamsa, and hence denied good results to him. This Jupiter
is also hemmed between Ketu and Pluto, and hence denied
results.
He died as a penniless man. However his last rites were
performed with honour by his aged mother. Elder brother
shouldered the heavy expenses. Afflictions of 3/6/9/12

house of Moon confirm his old age sufferings. Affliction of
Jupiter by Mars Saturn, and Uranus denied him any
happiness in life. Afflicted, retrograde in sworn enemy's
camp - the 8* lord ruined him completely. Two diehard
enemies Sun and Saturn in 8* house give injuries, illness,
diseases and sometime death too. All the prophecies of sages
came true in his life.
Example - 46 : Struggle of a chartered accountant
He started his life with 8th lord Mercury's dasa with
balance 3y6m0d. Obviously he is destined to suffer in the
general scheme of life. He was bom as the youngest child
Example No. 46
Date 01/01/1906 Time 05:30:00 Day Saturday Lat 26 50 00 North Long 80:54:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23 07:17
Balance of Dasa : Mercury 3 Years 2 Months 2 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

among 5 of and IFS officer, with a deep cut mark on the
upper lip. When ever there is a malefic in the 2nd house,
hemmed between malefics, we find some defect of the
speech. His 8th lord Mercury occupies his Lagna with Ketu
with direct aspect of Saturn from Aquarius. Aspect of Saturn
on 8* lord is a grisly combination and is to be feared.
Retrograde Jupiter in the 8,h house added fuel to the fire.
Retrograde planets in he 8th house, brings financial sat backs
and also curtails longevity. He passed B.Sc. and C A ini 994;
after several attempts in his unsuccessful Civil Servant
examinations. He lost his father in 1988, who died of liver
infections. His elder brother too died in liver infection in
1988. he lost his mother on 1-12-2004 during Moon - Rahu
dasa. He married in Nov. 1996 but his wife left him within
4 months, legally separated in 2003. Venus hemmed
between malefics, afflicted by Mars and Rahu denied him
happiness from wife. His down turn in life started as soon
his wife left him. He lost his prestigious job in AIR SAHARA,
and started decaying from Jan 1997, during the childradasa
of Venus. Sun's dasa broke him financially (Sun is placed
in the S'*1 house in Navamsa). He had to dispose off his
house, for the ailing mother. Moon's dasa (in the star of 8*
lord Mercury) is also not providing any relief to him till
Dec 2005. He is drawing only 18 thousand /month in 2005/
which an ordinary clerk earns in a public sector company.
He met me several times in 2005 for knowing his future,
about 2nd marriage prospects and so on. In KCD diagram
Moon is Savya Group A, 4th Qtr. Deha = Cancer, Jeeva =
Pisces. Contact of Deha lord in Jeeva Rasi ruined the
prospects of the horoscope. Placement of Delia lord in Jeeva
sign curtails longevity and it is accepted with fear. Dasa -
Antardasa of Deha and Jeeva lords may also bring calamity
in life. He opened his life with balance Cancer 5yr 11m 16
d. Leo, Virgo passed away smoothly. His father and elder
brother passed away in 1988 during Libra dasa. His
marriage was also ruined during this dasa, declined
financially. Venus occupies 6“h house in navamsa, and in
birth chart, it is heavily afflicted and is hemmed between

malefics. Tula dasa fined him heavily and ruined him
completely in all respect. Vrischika dasa started from 2002
Jan. Dasa of any sign occupied by nodes and 8* lord cannot
bestow good results. So a bleak future is forecast for him.
Afflicted 8 01 lord in Lagna indicates a stunted life for the
native.
A goldsmith without touchstone and an astrologer
without sufficient fruitful research experience travel in the
same boat. Since we will always be found in new
circumstances, with each and every horoscope, we should
grasp newer and newer permutations and combinations
benefiting the astrological world. According to the author
Kal chakra dasa is the most accurate dasa in forecasting
doomsday of life.

Chapter - XIV
Dasa of 8 th Lord, the Dasa of Planets in 8th
House and Its Effect on
Deha & Jeeva Signs
Malefics in 8th are said to effect one's health, will be short
lived. Benefics there in will give plenty of money, longevity
and much courage. Malefics in 8th will not affect the
Person's longevity if Jupiter or Venus occupy an angle. But
if the 8* house is connected with a malefic planet by virtue
of its own nature or lordship (for example Venus is a malefic
for Pieces ascendant), troubles through specified sources
will occur. The sources of troubles are: Sun - fire. Moon -
Water, Mars - Weapons, or Vehicles, greediness, Saturn -
hatred from others, poverty, unpopularity. Even if Jupiter
is in angle while Saturn is in the 6lh/8lh, the native will
have medium length of life. The weakness of the lord of
ascendant bring down the life span - if he is strong, there
will be longevity of the higher order.
Should a person start his life with the dasa of either the
8,h lord or of the ascendant lord, the dasa will produce
intense difficulties. Both of them joining in an angle and
also the dasa of the above planets start initially, the native
dies very early. The sub-period of 8th lord is usually very
very dangerous. It brings grieves calamities etc. in life. Let
us study one example.
Example 47. Death in infancy due to brain cancer
7-5-1992, 3.=39am, Delhi . Pisces - Lagna, Mars,
Mercury, Aries - Venus, Sun; Gemini - Ketu, Moon; Leo -
Jupiter; Capricorn - Saturn; balance Rahu 4y 3m 25d

Example No. 47
Dale 07/05/1992 Time 03:39:00 Day Thursday Lai 28:39 00 North Long 77:13:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:29:20
Balance of Dasa : Rahu 3 Years 11 Months 21 Days
Planets
Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
It has been mentioned in the literature, weak Moon does
not allow to live more than 32 yrs. He died during Jupiter
- Venus - Rahu dasa or) 1 8.10.2005 at 12 midnight for the
brain Cancer. From Sept 2003, he was suffering. When 5 th/
11,haxis is not influenced by benefics (they are the Kendras
of the 8dl house), long lasting diseases crop up in the body.
His 5lh/9,h lords are heavily afflicted by Saturn. Sub period
of 8lh lord in the main period of Lagna lord eliminated him
as a kid. 6/8 relationships of Saturn - Jupiter does not
allow anybody to grow well in life. For the absence of any
Purvapunya - his mundane journey was cut short by God.

His heavily afflicted 8th house by Mars Ketu and Saturn,
affliction of Mars (controls head and blood) by Saturn in
Lagna generated long lasting cancer disease in the brain.
His Moon is placed in the 6"' house in Navamsa. Dispositor
of Moon is debilitated, and is afflicted by Mars, Saturn andis
further squared by Rahu - Ketu axis. Both the luminaries
are devoid ofbenefic influence and the Kendars ae devoid
ofbenefic influeance. 8th lord has landed in an enemy camp.
Debilitated Merucry in Lagna added fuelto the fire. Such
planets create some deficiency wherever they are located.
The dead enemy of 8* lord Venus, Jupiter became his killer
planet as per Santhanam.
The dasa of a malefic or debilitated planet which is placed
in lsl/2"d/4,ll/5tl'/7'll/8,l'/9lh/orl2thbouses is to be known as
Chidra Dasa or death dealing dasa. in chapter 2 of
Jyotisharnava Navanitum (ch2. Pill by R. Santhanam) we
find Chidra dasa is not the junction of two dasas but of a
chidra graha. Chidra graha may be located among one the
following seven planets.
a) The planet in the 8* house.
b) The planet ruling the 8,h house
c) . The planet associated by aspect or conjunction with
the lord of the 8th house.
d) The dead enemy (by 5 fold relationship) of the 8th
lord
e) ' The lord of the 22nd decante.
f) The lord of the 6'1' Navamsa
g) The planet aspecting the 8,!i house.
These planets ruling chidra dasas are unique trouble
makers and everyone of them may not always trust death,
for in a horoscope. One may generally find more than one
Chidra Graha. •
When lord of Lagna, 8th lord, lO* and Saturn are placed
in the trine/quad rants or in the IT1' house, one gets a long
innings of life. 6lh/8,h/12 lords or other malefic planets
related with 5th/9*'' lords gives auspicious results. K

however the 8"1 lord joins the 9* lord gives either
unfortunate or ordinary results, as emphasized by
Bhavartha Ratnakar and Uttarkalamrita. When Rahu is
placed in 8th, in his dasa on will suffer in financial matters,
liability of debts, heart trouble, accidents due to gas or
electrical devices, explosives etc. (AM, May 1994 P 399)
If malefic planets (6th/8lh Lords, Sun, Mars or Saturn)
are posited in a trinal house from a particular planet, then
during the dasa of this planet and the sub period of the
malefic planet, one suffers in life for various reasons. His
father also suffers. In the example - 47, 8th lord Venus is
placed in the 9th house from Jupiter. Hence during the dasa
of Jupiter - Venus he died and his father suffered mentally
for his death in infancy.
If the 6t,'/8t'1 house of a particular planet is occupied by
8th lord, Sun, Mars, Saturn, Rahu, Ketu or a debilitated
planet, then during the dasa of the above and the sub period '
of the malefic planet in 6,h/8lh from it one suffers from
serious illness enemies and from the wrath of the
government.
The dasa results of planets in 6"'/8l),/12'h or in enemy's
camp or hemmed between malefics will be as follows. This
is as per Bimala Kanti Lahiri in his Vimsottori dasa book
written in Bengali.
1. Dasa of lord of Lagna may imprison him, suffers
from serious illness, deep mental anguish, death in the
family, professional setbacks and other various sad
incidents in life may occur. The author lost his father in his
infant days during the dasa of Saturn - his lord of lagna.
The prophecies of sages came true in his life.
2. In the dasa of 2nd lord, one tells lies, many sad
incidents surface out, eye disease, huge expenses and wrath
of government may be there.
3. In the dasa of 3rd lord, brother or a brother like man
dies, suffers from loss of honour and secret enemies may
harm him.
4. In the dasa of 4"' lord - mother suffers, danger from

water, domestic unhappiness, death of parents may take
place, loss ofproperty etc. If the 4th lord is very strong, the
native enjoys all kinds ofhappiness in life. If the 4th lord is
malefic and strong he earns huge money in his dasa.
5. In the dasa of weak 5'" lord - loss of a child,
abdominal disorders, wrath of the employer etc. In the
dasa of strong 5"' lord the native enjoys all kinds of
happiness in life. A native is said to be fortunate when he
opens his dasa of 511' lord during 21 to 65 years of life,
having Raja -Yogas in his horoscope.
6. In the dasa of 6th lord - fear from thieves, enemies,
scandals, loss in business, unsuccessful efforts, and desire
to do illegal work. Many litigations corp up in life. Changes
in career take place during the sub period of the 6th lord.
7. In the dasa of 7th lord - loss of wife, danger to sonin-law, danger from females, disease in the sex-organs and
many unwanted travels. In the dasa of strong 7th lord one
flourishes in business and he overpowers the enemies.
8. In the dasa of the weak 8th lord brings infamy sexpleasure through illegal ways, poverty, debt, scandals and
serious illness or even death. (Exa. 54) Dasa of strong 8lh
lord brings unexpected gains. It helps in discoveries and
inventions. The author enjoyed 8"' lord Sun's dasa (See
example 14) between 11-9-99 to 11-9-2005. Saturn is
posited in the 9rt house from Sun. So during Sun - Saturn
dasa he lost his father like elder brother on 16-10-2002 (18
yrs elder to him). He wrote seven books in the filed of
astrology during the dasa of the 8"' lord. 8th lord in 9th helped
him to write books in the filed of religion. Astrology is
indeed a branch of religion because it helps to grow higher
level of spiritualism in the minds of great astrologers. In
India all great sages do posses some astrological skills. That
is the reason the ancient sages of yore framed thousands
of subtle astrological rules for benefit of man kind. The
author believes that those sages were active while they
were passing 5,h/8lK/9th dasa lords in their real lives.
9. In the dasa of weak 9lh lord - danger to family

members, poverty, death of father or an father like person.
In the dasa of strong benefic 9th lord one can dive deep
into any subject. He enjoys all kinds of happiness. Only
the fortunate persons can enjoy the dasa of benefic of 9ltl
lord during 21-65 years of life. A planet aspected by
benefic planets yield benefic results and when aspected by
malefics refuse to provide any good results. This is true for
all the dasa lords placed in any house.
10. In the dasa of weak 10'h lord -all fruitless efforts,
loss of honour, foreign travel, many sad incidents, desire to
do illegal work, harm to younger co-born etc.
11. In the dasa of ll’1' lord - loss of son or son-in-law,
mother or father cheating by others, disease of ears etc.
12. In the dasa of 12"' lord - no bed pleasure, loss of
honour, loss of wealth, disease of sons, many diseases may
surface out.
It is to be anticipated that planets under papakartari
yoga or in 6lh/8"'/12'h house will behave in a very bad way
to the native. Planets in 6"l/8lh/12,h houses bring financial
setbacks in life. Dasa of the planet under papakartari yoga
will always produce evil results, even if it is aspected by
benefics.howover, when an evil lord occupies an evil house,
its dasa may gnerate good results (example - 4)
If the lord of the 8 th house is posited in the 8th house itself
and is combined with or aspected by beneficial planets,
Dasa ofthe8"' lord may give beneficial results in consonance
with the benefics influencing the 8th lord. During the
currency of Dasa of the 8 ^ lord with other auspicious yogas
in the birth chart, the native may get wealth, power,
conveyances, comforts, and gifts from the government. If
the 8th lord is weak, effects may be feebile or poor. If the S1*'
lord occupies 6"'/8"'/12"' house in Navamsa chart, results
may be again poor. If the 8"' lord be combined with malefic
planets, the native may experience trails of misfortunes in
Dasa of the 8'" lord. According to Shiva Jataka, 8th lord in
the 8* house in its own dasa or in dasa of its dispositor
when posited in other houses must confer on its native good

effects of Raja Yoga though the native may experience some
dangers to life. According to Styacharya 8lh lord in 6'1' may
cause worries, fear and troubles from enemies in the dasa
of the 8'1' lord. In 12* its dasa will increase expenditure. If
the dispositor of the 8'1' lord be posited in a Kendra or a
Trikona house and is associated with benefics, it may give
good results. During the Dasa of the 8* lord the author
wrote seven books (See example - 14) in astrology It's
dispositor is placed in the 10* house. A benefic planet in
association with 8* lord will produce bad results, whereas
a malefic on the other hand produce good results
(Vimsottari Dasa by KK Pathak P 83). Even a benefic planet
in trines/quadrants in combination with the 8,h lord and a
malefic planet there will produce bad results in the dasa of
the 8* lord. It may cause unhealthiness to the native and
his relatives. It may give disgrace to his wife. If the lord of
the 8,h house be a natural benefic or if it owns Lagna, 5th or
9"' house, stigma of the 8th lordship is considerably reduced
as in the case of Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra and Aquarius
Lagnas. If the dispositor of 8‘" lord combines with 8th lord,
dasa bhukti of its dispositor may cause sorrows, misery
and poverty. In the case of ordinary charts dasa of 8"7
12lh/afflicted4thlord may cause sudden misfortunes like a
bolt from the blue. Affliction of the 4'h house is always
detrimental for happiness of mind, progenic happiness,
patrimony, capital formation and professional stability.
Periods and sub-periods of 6lh/8u,/12,h lords are always
inauspicious in nature. Dasa. Antardasa of Kendra/trine
lords are generally auspecious when they are not afflicted;
3rJ and 11th lords produce less inauspicious results
compared to 6lh/8lh/12lh lords. The higher the affliction of
6lh/8th/12,h lords - the higher is ths level of sufferings in
life. In a good horoscope we accept, these lords to be
aspected by benefic planets like divine Jupiter, Venus in
Vargabal, strong moon or strong Mercury. Afflicted 8* lord
is the most dangerous. He brings calamities in life. It is true
that the same afflicted 8,h lord will not produce the same
results in all horoscopes. That iS the reason that the twins

born at an internal of four minutes experience different
result in real life. If the 9,h lord is placed in 8th, one does
not get fame in 9th lord's dasa, but if the planet is Jupiter
one gets fame. One gets fame during the dasa of Jupiter
placed in 3ril/8,l,/or 9'".
Dasa of any planet is auspicious, when its 9th/10,l,/Hlh
are occupied by benefics. The author visited Germany, USA
as postdoctoral fellow in Ketu's Mahadasa. Its 9th, 10'1', and
11th houses are occupied by Sun, Mercury and Venus.
If 6,l,/8,h houses are occupied by Sun, Mars, Saturn,
Rahu or Ketu, during the dasa of above planet and subperiod of the planet placed either in 6th/ 8th, the native will
suffer from serious disease, enemies and set backs will come
in profession. According to Horasara, the dasa of the 8th
lord posited in an angle will prove auspicious. Should he
be, while being so, eclipsed or in the company of Rahu,
according to the wise, death is inflicted. Should there be
doubts about the Ascendant Lord or a planet in the 8,h
house killing the native it happens only at the end of the
dasa of the said planet. Rajiv Gandhi died at the fag end of
Rahu dasa placed in the 12* house. If Jupiter, Venus and
Mercury be in 6th or 8* forming Adhiyoga, their dasas will
yield god results . During the dasa of a planet that is
inimical to lord of Lagna or the dispositor of Moon sign,
one will be wandering, banned form his country and will
be insulted by enemies when seeking their protection.
When malefics are posited in 5,h / 9l,‘ (Saturn, Mars, Rahu,
Ketu, 8lh/6lh lords) from any planet, during the dasa of
such a planet the native will incur griefs. When two planets
are in 2/12 position, during their dasa - antardasa one
will lose wealth. Where there are Adhi Yogas, Parijata
Yogas, Raja Yogas, Gaja Keshri Yogas etc, the dasa of any
planet does not produce much sufferings to the native
provided Lord of Lagna and Ascendant are very strong.
Jupiter in a Kendra, benefic planets in the 9th house save a
man. Those who do not have any Raja Yoga or class - I
yogas in their horoscopes, they really suffer. Those who
have weak 5ll,/U'11 axis, they also suffer very much in the

general scheme of life. Afflicted 5,h/lll1' axis generates
chronic illness in the body (Exp 48). People with enough
Purvapunaya come to this earth for harnessing good results
in this present incarnation without grace of God one does
not excel in life. Strong Moon, strong Sun, strong Jupiter
assures a glorious life provided the lagna or the Moon is
aspected by the divine Jupiter. Benefic planets in quadrants,
trines and in the lllh house rescue a man from litigation. It
is always better to have a benefic planet in the 1 1th house.
The basic rule for dasa analysis is that the planet involved
should be well placed in Navamsa. When trines or 6th/8th
houses from a particular planet are occupied by malefics -
the native suffers during their joint dasa-antardasa. Should
a planet be in debilitation, or in inimical house, at the same
time being in its retrograde motion in such dasa, one will
indulge in bad deeds, will be reuind by his relatives, live in
foreign countries and be dependent upon others. In the
dasa of planet in a malefic's Navamsa, the native faces
hindrances of his education in the boyhood. Should the
said navamsa lord be a combust / or retrograde planet,
the said effect is undoubtedly certain. Suppose Mercury is
in Libra Navamsa, when Venus is combust, in Mercury's
dasa education will be spoiled (example - 48).
According to Brahma Sounda :
\JvPi<ii‘T dilcd I
n w i i
One born with superior yogas live with happiness and
wealth. Adverse combinations will only produce
inauspicious effects. If the Moon or the 8fl lord is in the8th
house, Saturn's transit there upon will bring forth untold
miseries. The dasa of any planet in close conjunction with
Ketu in 8/12 will be very bad. If Rahu is placed in 6tl,/8th/
12lh and aspected by these lords, Rahu's dasa would be
Mrityupada or death giver for the native. According to R
Santhanam Rahu in 8lh/12,his a liability. The dasa of the
planet which is with Rahu in 12th is not helpful for the
native. It will continue to bring disappointments and

obstacles according to its power and the concurrent evil
transits. Generally Rahu dasa is bad for people born with
Asvini, Makha or Moola as Janma Nakshtra. When Rahu
and Ketu are placed in 6Ll,/8ll,/12lh from their dispositors,
they give very bad results. If two or three malefic planets
are in one and the same sign, their dasa and sub-period
will lead to poverty, disease, litigation, loss of wealth and
fear from enemies. There will be evils in he sub-period of
the dispositor of the 8th lord. The occupants of the 8th house
will also do the same thing during their sub-periods. There
will be destruction of money through vices, conforming
enemies and diseases. The sub-period of the 8th lord related
to the 9th house can effect a person either in respect of his
own fortune or may cause an unexpected event concerning
father like ill health, danger, reversal. The dasa of Ketu
occupying Spouse confers long and frequent travels, name
and fame, strange dreams and astral experience. If it is
aspected by Mars or Saturn death may occur. Any planet
in 3rd / 6th / 8th / 1 2th from the ascendant of the divisional
chart (1 19 or 1/10) gives bad results in his period. Even an
exalted planet in these houses is powerless in bestowing
favourable results. Navamsa Lagna or Dasamsa Lagna,
hemmed between malefics will encourage the planets to
give inauspicious results. The benefic results are expected
when these Lagnas are hemmed between benefics. The
dasa of any planet D 1° or in 30° will bring inauspicious
results. When the 8th lord is in 30°, one's life span can be
affected adversely. In case of females, the additional effect
is short lived marriage. Rahu placed in the 8lh/12lh giving
marriages in his dasa just don't prove happy experience.

The dasa or sub-period of the Navamsa dispositor of the
8th lord may bring widowhood. An ill reflected Jupiter is
the index of many inauspicious events authored by God of
Destiny. That is why classical texts highly praise a single
favourable Jupiter in preference to the other eight planets.
6lh/8ll‘ relationship of Jupiter and Saturn does not auger
well for the native. Actually the 8th house of Moon, Sun
and Jupiter should be occupied by benefics Shakta Yoga
forming 6,h/8lh relationship of Moon and Jupiter is not
inauspicious. This Shakta Yoga is found in birth charts of
immortals like Shivaji, Sonia Gandhi, Naraseema Rao etc.
A planet even in 6th, 8th or 12'\ if in his own sign or in
exaltation and well aspected by a powerful benefic becomes
auspicious. Sub-period of8,!l lord is always bad. The author
lost his first wife during Venus -Sun dasa on 20.10.1983
(see Exp. 14)
Deha and Jeeva signs are very sensitive in nature. 1
request the astrologers to study these signs. When 8* lord
is posited in Deha or Jeeva Rasi, the dasa of the 8"' house
will prove fatal for the native. Smt Indira Gandhi had
Saturn in the Cancer Lagna, Cancer was her Deha, Pisces
= Jeeva. She died during Pisces - Cancer - Leo dasa where
Mars was posited in the house of Leo. Dasa of Deha and
Jeeva lords always bring calamity in life. If 8"' lord occupy
either of these signs death may occur at an early age. We
shall study seven cases to find out the influence of 8th lord
on Deha, Jeeva signs and its impact in real life.
Example : 48 REC Suratkal gold medallist turned to be
a piece of vegetable
This is the story of the unfortunate man who became a
piece of vegetable though a tragic accident. Long lasting
diseases are controlled by the 8* house. He is in coma from
11-1-99 at 545 AM. Ironically it was his last day of Rahu
Mahadasa. Dasa of Rahu Mars, is bad for 99% persons of
this earth. Jupiter dasa prevailed on him from 12 — 1 —
1999. Jupiter is heavely afflicted in this horoscope. So the
dasa of Jupiter produced immense sufferings in his life.
He passed computer Science with first class first possioj262

Example No. 48
Date 3 1/05' 1975 "Time 10:00 00 Day Saturday Lat 14:46 00 North Long 75:26:00 East
Zone 82.30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23-1505
Balance of Dasa : Mars ft Years 5 Months 23 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Cha1it~Cuspai
He went to the Kennedy International airport' for dropping
someone there. On his return journey to home he met a
violent accident on 11-1-99 and became unconscious
forever. He can sleep/can eat food, but cannot talk, does
not remember the past. He tries to speak but no body
understands him. Can we feel the agony of his aged parents
at Bangalor? No astrologer told them about this sad
incident. God only writes a sad episode about a person
who's Jupiter is found weak in a horoscope. His Jupiter is
afflicted by Mars, Saturn and Rahu. Jupiter is posited in
almost 0°0' retrograde Mercury's star. Mars and Satun^gg

are exchanging aspects. When the angles of 6,h lord are
occupied by Saturn. Mars Rahu, Ketu - a man suffers horn
much litigations in life. His 6,b/9,1' lord Jupiter's angles are
occupied by Mars, Saturn and Rahu. Jupiter -Jupiter dasa
brought the tragedy in his life. His Jupiter is debilitated in
Navamsa, whose dispositor Saturn has conjoined Sun in
the 8* house in Navamsa. So Jupiter's dasa did not allow
him to completehis education, as per the prophecy of sages
of yore. Good people visit the earth only for harnessing
rich dividends for their good work in their previous lives.
His both 5'V9,h lords are heavily afflicted. Rahu - Ketu
passes through his 5"'/ll,h axis. Saturn occupies the 8"’
house fern 5lil house, Uranus occupies the 8th house from
9'1' house. So he has spoiled 5*/l 1th houses and also 5,l'/9'1'
lords are afflicted, so he did not enough purvapunya for
pushing forwards. Long lasting diseases corp up in the
body when the 5,h/1.1"' axis is highly afflicted. They are
the quadrants of the 8,h house. His 4"'/1T1' lord Venus is
in 30° and is placed in Gemini Navamsa, whose dispositor
is a retrograde planet. Such a native never completes his
’education. All the Kendras of Moon are vacant, which tells,
that he has no career. His Moon and Sun are devoid of
.benign Jupiter's aspect, which did not auger well for him.
In KCD diagram his Moon is placed in Apasavya group B,
1st Quarter. Cancer is his Deha and Pisces is his Jeeva. Deha
= Physical frame, Jeeva = Life's force. His Jeeva sign is
highly afflicted. Deha of Jeeva signs are very sensitive
houses. Too much afflictions of Deha & Jeeva signs does
not allow the life to flow smoothly. He opened his life with
Cancer Dasa 17yr 2m 13 d. He was passing Meen dasa at
the time of accident (which is heavily afflicted) Meena dasa
maimed him forever. Dasa of any sign aspected by the
deadly 8th lord cannot be good. 8"' lord Saturn is aspecting
Pisces from Gemini. Lord of Pisces Jupiter is in opposition
to Lord of death, Pluto. In Apasvya diagram dasas of
benefic planets will generate poor results. •
Example : 49 : Premature end of an illustrious
Mechanical Engineer (DOB : 15-6-1953,6=11 AM, Patna).

Example No.49
Date 1 5/06/1 953 Time 06 11:00 Day Monday Lat 25:37 00 North Long 8512:00 East
Zone 82 30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanemsa 22 66.46
Balance of Dasa : Saturn 7 Years 7 Months 20 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit’Cuspal
The native is well known to the author for the last 15
years. He died as per his forecast. He was occupying very
high chair in NTPC, Noida and breathed his lust on 20-102004 just before the Dashera Festivals, due to a throat
operation in a prestigious private hospital in Noida. His 8th
lord Saturn is retrograde and is aspected by Mars and
Saturn. Retrogression and affliction of 8* lord cuts short
one's Mundane Journey. He left behind a son, and of course
his widow for performing his last rites. Sade sati of Saturn
proved costly for him. He died during Venus - Ketu Dasa
ll,hlord's dasa and the planets in the 11th house bring man^'

bad news for the native. Dasa of two plants posited in
mutual angles always generate inauspicious results
(Advanced Predictive Astrology, Vol. 2 by Dr. S.S.
Chatterjee). Affliction of 8"' lord, 3rd lord, weak 10"' lord/
1 O'1' house did not allow him to cross 52 yrs. In Kal Chakra
diagram his Moon is placed in Savya Group A, 3rd Qtr. Deha
= Taurus, Jeeva = Gemini, Jeeva sign is occupied by two
natural malefics and is aspected by Saturn. Influence of 3
malefics in Jeeva sign, curtailed his life's force. One has
unnatural death when Deha & Jeeva signs are influenced
by malefics by two or more malefics. He opened his life
with Is’ cycle 58 yr 1m 6d. Meen, Kubrnbh, Makar, Dhanu,
Mesh, Vrisha passed away smoothly. He was enjoying
Mithun dasa from July 2002. Heavily afflicted Mercury
killed him.
Exp. 50 - Mysterious disappearance from business
He was a prosperous businessman for the exchange of
2"‘710Hl lords. He had Mercury, Sun, Jupiter in the 10lh
house. 5"' lord in 10"' is a Raja Yoga. Though the both sides
of Moon are vacant, the evil Kemadruma yoga has been
cancelled for the position of Venus in the Kendra of Moon.
4,l75',, lords have generated a Class 1 Raja Yoga in his 10"'
house, but 8"711'1' lord spoiled his yoga. Whenever a Raja
Yoga is spoiled by a yogabhanga planet a sad incident in
life is sure to follow the native. We have observed this in
the birth charts of Rajiv Gandhi, Lai Bhadur Shastri,
Richard Nixon etc. He was bom with Jupiter's Mahadasa
with balance of 4yr.5m 8d. Since he started his life in 8"'
lord Jupiter's dasa - as per astrological dictum, his flow
of life could not be smooth. Yogakaraka Saturn has
energized the entrie horoscope through its placement
and signs. So astrologers predicted an illuminous future
for him. He mysteriously disappread fomi his business
area around 12 noon on 7-10-2003 druing Merucry -
Venus dasa. Mercury/Venus dasa has generated 2/12
relationships and hence this dasa proved fatal for him.
Merucry is his 2"" lord, which is placed iin the 6'" house

Example No. 50
Date 13/03/1974 Time 10.45:00 Day Wednesday Lat28:39 00 North Long 77 13.00 East
Zone 82:30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23' 14 08
Balance of Dasa : Jupiter 4 Years 1 Months 13 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
in Navamsa with Saturn in oppoisiton to Mars. This
meructy is debilitated in Dasamsa in his 10* house. Since
6"'/ 1 2lil lords are not related kidnapping is ruled out.
Vimsottori dasa is unable to unfold the truth. In KCD
diagram we find Moon is placed in the 3rd quarter of his
Vishakha constellations. It is placed in Apasavya Group
A. Kumbha = Deha, Kanya= Jeeva. 6/8 relationships of
Deha and Jeeva signs is most dangerous and is harmful
for health, freedom from litigation and the like. He
opened his life again with Sagittarius dasa (8,h lord
Jupiter's dasa) in KCD also with a balance lyr4m 2d.

Makar, Kumbha, Kanya, Singha passed away smoothly.
He disappeared during Cancer - Gemini dasa. Antardsa
of a sign occupied by nodes and other malefics cannot
be very good. Mercury has conjoined 8"' lord Jupiter,
Moon is in 30°. The dasa of any planet in zero degree
and thirty degree is dangerous. Both Sun and Moon are
influenced by 8th lord Jupiter. A malefic in Lagna spells
trouble for the native. His Lagna lord is hemmed between
malefics. His 81*1 house is heavily afflicted by Rahu, Ketu,
Saturn and Mars. An unnatural death is not ruled out.
For suicide we have to see the Moon - Mars - Ketu
connection, for murder we have to find similar
connection between Mars - Saturn - Ketu. On the
falefulday we find from transit, a connection between
Saturn - Mars - Ketu, so he was murdered. Deha and
Jeeva signs in 6/8 position gives a chequered career and
a stormy and abrupting ending of life. Dangers and
downfalls are as sure as sunrise when Deha and Jeeva
signs are ill occupied. Placement of Deha lord in Jeeva
sign and vice versa curtails longevity and is accepted
with fear. His Jeeva lord is placed in Deha sign, where
we find 8th lord Jupiter is afflicting Jeeva lord. So
Mercury signs got the killing power. During the dasa -
antardasa of Deha and Jeeva lords, a great calamity in
life surfaces out. We find an exchange between Saturn
and Merucry. When a dire malefic like 8th lord Saturn
occupies either Deha or Jeeva rasi, the dasa sequences
in KCD will fail to give highly favourable results, for
Saturn is all out to keep the person unhappy throughout
life. 8th lord Jupiter occupies Deha sign in Saturn's house.
We can guess the contact of Saturn in his sensitive Deha
sign. Cancer - Mercury dasa killed him (we can guess)
for the afflicted Mercuty as explained above. 3rd lord
Moon is placed in the house of 61’1 lord. So most probably
his enemies killed him. What happens to the deadbody
is judged from the 4 lh house. It is aspectd by Saturn and 8th
lord, 66 lord is hemmed between malefics - we can guess
he had many enemies. Afflicted 4th house, 8'1' house and

12th house (Moksha Trikona) eliminated him through
mysterious circumstances. His dead body was never found
by police or his relatives. Contact of 8th lord, Delia lord
and Jeeva lords in Deha sign brought a sudden calamity in
life without warning. So KCD dasa is much better than
Vimsottori(?).
As per his aged and ailing parents, on 7-10-2003, he
went to office with a normal mood. There was no trace
of depression in his mind. He talked to his elder sister
around quarter to twelve - from 12 Noon, onwards his
mobile was found switched off. His car was found intact
in the parking ground. It is never desirable to have 8'"
lord in Deha, |eeva signs, and one should not start the
life with 8"' lord's dasa. In both Vimsottori and in KCD
he started his life with 8lh lord Jupiter's dasa and hence
suffered in life.
Example : 51. Long lasting kidney dialysis and loss of
career.
This birth chart is similar to 33. both of them took birth
in rich families but suffered immensely through hands of
destiny. Rahu and Jupiter dasas passed away peacefully,
9,l,/10"' lord. Saturn Dasa trapped him in a bitter disease
named Diabetes Mellitus. It started as soon as he opened
Saturn dasa in Vimsottori cycle, in 1994. When Sun, Moon,
Venus, Jupiter Virgo and 6,h house are afflicted they may
produce diabetes mellitus. 6"' house lord Mars is hemmed
between malefics, Rahu afflicts Virgo, Jupiter is squared
by Rahu - Ketu axis and is afflicted by Saturn, Sun, Moon,
Venus are all hemmed between malefics. Both the Jum inaries
are aspected by Aturn. Hence he was trapped during 9''7
10'" lord Saturn's dasa placed with the 8th lord Jupiter.
Dasa of any planet incontact with 8'1' lord brings setbacks
in fife. He is a married man having no kid. His father died
in 1984 in heart failure. (Jupiter - Mercury dasa) Mother
died in 1999 in cancer (Saturn - Mercury dasa). His elder
brother, known to the author, supported him by selling all
parental properties running into crores. He is sick from
1994 onwards and 60 lakhs have been spent on him in last

Example No. 51
Date 26*02/1960 Time 12:20:00 Day Friday Lat 28 39:00 North Long 77:13:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:02.23
Balance of Dasa : Rahu 17 Years 0 Months 3 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
1 1 yrs . His both Sun and Moon are afflicted by Saturn and
they are hemmed between malefics. When 5','/ll'h axis is
poor, one catches long lasting diseases . Rahu - Ketu passes
through 5,h/ll,h axis and the Karmic control planets are
placed in the evil 8"’ /lVh houses. Debilitated Mercury and
Ketu in 11"' did the maximum damage to his horoscope. In
KCD diagram his Moon is placed in Apasaya group B,lsl
quarter. Cancer = Deha, Pisces =Jeeva. 5/9 relationships
of Deha and Jeeva signs opened his life in a nice manner.
He opened his life with Kumbha 1 yr. 6 m 13 d. Makar,
Dhanu, Vrishika dasa passed peacefully end of Libra dasa
trapped him. Its lord is afflicted with Mars and is hemmed

between malefics Venus is the Karaka planets of diabetes.
So as per KCD dasa he was demolished by God. Deha and
Jeeva signs are very sensitive houses. Ketu and debilitated
Mercury in Jeeva sign went hell bent in reducing his life's
force (Deha = physical frame, Jeeva = life's force). Jeeva
lord Jupiter has unfortunately become his 8'h lord. So we
find an indirect contact of H"4 lord in the Jeeva sign..
Presence of 8,h lord in Deha and Jeeva sings are never
welcome. He suffered immensely during the dasa of Kanya
between September 1997 to September 2006. Leo dasa will
prevail on him from September 2006 for 5 years. 8th lord
should never join badhaka lord or other malefics. Its
potentiality to do more harms increases in manifold
amounts. Fortunate person's 8th lord is always under guard
by natural benefic planets. Dangers and downfualls are as
sure as Sunrise when Deha /Jeeva signs are influenced by
8* lord. 8th lord in provided him a poor career and it
spoiled the yogakaraka completely. Cycle of life is actually
controlled by some invisible force called destiny. One cannot
change fate and the things happen according to the time
indicated by the planet, not desired by the person. The
horoscope is like a musical instrument. Even an
inexpensive instrument like a flute, can be made to stir the
depths of the hearts of millions and hold them spell bound
depending on how skillfully the flutist harnesses the flute.
So an astrologer who understands the game of planets can
well decipher even for mutually contradictory phases of a
given life. It is the moral duty of the astrologer to guide a
man when he is passing the torrential part of his life. When
8th lord is posited in either Deha and Jeeva Rasi, the dasa
of the 8,Jl house will prove fatal for the native, when either
of these rasis are occupied by a dire malefic like 8* lord
Saturn, the dasa sequences in KCD will fail to give highly
favourable results, for Saturn is all out to keep the persons
unhappy throughout his life. His Yogakraka Saturn's dasa
ruined him completely. When 8'1' lord occupies Deha/Jeeva
signs Vimsottori dasa also fail to bestow good results. He
has to suffer from kidney disorders so long he is alive.

Example No. 52
Dale 27/10^1976 Time 00:30:00 Day Wednesday Lat 26:50 00 North Long 80 54:00 East
Zone 82:30 00 East Srt Sanatan Ayanamsa 23' 16:20
Balance of Dasa : Ketu 6 Years 10 Months 27 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
aspecting Deha Rasi. (DOB : 27-10-1976/00.30/Lucknow).
We have already observed that contact of 8"' lord in
sensitive Deha & Jeeva signs brings calamities in life. Here
Moon is in 4"' Qtr. Jyestha Nakhatra, 4"' Qtr. Deha = Aries,
Jeeva = Sagittarius. Ketu is posited in Aries and is aspected
by 8lh lord Saturn from Lagna. So downfalls and setbacks
are bound to surface out in life. He is BA LLB and is
employed in a private company. His downfall started, from
next day after marriage on 27-11-2004. (Sun - Mars dasa)
on 28-11-2004, his wife's 40,000.00 worth gold ornaments
were stolen. His son was bom on 4-10-2005, he did not 0^72

for 4 yrs, hence his brain was damaged for less oxygen
supply. The baby had to be kept in the intensive care unit.
He himself met a motorcycle accident on 29.10.2005, (Sun
- Rahu dasa) and was thrashed by the public. Facture
developed in his left leg. Why so many sad incidents
occured within 12 months. His sun is in deep debilitation
cancelling all Raja Yogas in his horoscope. 5'1' lord Mars
and 4th lord Sun have exchanged places forming a Raja
Yoga. Moon - Venus - Jupiter in mutual angles have
generated Mudrika Yoga, Sun has generated Neech Vanga
Raja Yoga in an angle. Yogakraka Mars has energized,
Sun, Ketu, Jupiter, Saturn, Venus and Moon by its aspect
and placement. All the planets yield favourable results in
the angle of 9th lord. Ketu in 10* is never welcome. It brings
set backs in career. Saturn in lagna brings many sufferings
in life. He started debilitated and afflicted Sun's dasa from
1.122003. Sun is his marakesh. Dasa of a afflicted and
debilitated planet is never good. This dasa will end on
1.122009. 10"' lord is aspecting 101’1 house and hence he
may not loss his job. He met accident and was humiliated
by public during Sun-Rahu dasa. Dasa of two malefics
posited in the same house generates always inauspicious
results. When Saturn passes over his natal position - sad
incidents occur in life. His Saturn is now passing over his
natal Saturn. Since two malefics are posited in his 4lh house
(Public is judged Horn he 4th house) he was humiliated by
public. When Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn signs and 2"rt, 6L\
10”' houses are afflicted one gets fracture of bones. Taurus
is aspected by Mars, Virgo is aspected by Saturn, Capricorn
is aspected by Saturn, Mars, 2"iy611' houses are aspected by
Ketu, 10lh house is spoiled by Ketu in direct 10* aspect of
Saturn. Saturn is the karaka of all bones. He is squared by
Rahu - Ketu axis. Hence he was destined to have bone
fracture. A debilitated planet causes harms to the house
wherever it is posited. Retrograde Jupiter in 1 1 * brought
fracture of legs during Sun - Rahu dasa. Sun, Mars and
Rahu are also responsible for bone factures. So Sun, Rahu
dasa brought the tragedy. Debilitated Moon is 5th caused

the anxiety for son. Debilitated Sun in 4th, brought public
wrath. In KCD diagram he opened his life with Capricorn
2yr 6m. Then Sagittarius, Scorpio followed him. He opened
Libra dasa from 27.4.1996. In Apasavya diagram dasa of a
benefic planet will be poor. Dasa of sign occupied by node is
not good. Because his 5,,,/lll11 axis is strong - he will get
help from heaven. Aspect of 8* lord on the sensitive Deha
sign brought accident, humiliation, danger to son etc.
Example : 53. Dasa of 8"‘ lord brought set backs in career
He is an MCA and was employed with a multinational
company. His Venus - Venus dasa ruled him between 18Example No. 53
Date 12/12/1964 Time 12 44.00 Day Saturday Lat 25 37 00 North Long 85: 12.00 East
Zone 82:30:00 Easl Sri Sanalan Ayanamsa 23 0G:24
Balance of Dasa : Jupiter 0 Years 7 Months 28 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

Immediately he started a consultancy firm with a partner
which also closed down in May 2005. He lives in a rented
house with his wife, daughter and aged parents. So we
can understand his agonies in life. Since Venus is with Ketu
th
and is aspected by Mars, the afflicted 8 lord Venus, brought
great setbacks in his career. So we should be grateful to
our seers for understanding good days and bad days of an
individual using the golden subtle astrological rules.
Retrograde Mercury in 10th also helped the 8"1 lord to
produce worst results tor him. A retrograde planet does
harm to the house wherever it is located in th'e birth chart.
Venus is placed in the 8"' house is Navamsa. A planet in a
weak house is Navamsa invariable cuts the apple cart of
the native 6/8 relationship of 5"'/9lh lords produced ups
and down in life. His Moon is placed in Savya Group B, 2n
quarter. Aquarius - Deha and Virgo - Jeeva. 6/8
relationships of Deha and Jeeva signs produce a chequered
career. So the subtle astrological rules framed by our seers
came true in his life.
Example : 54 - Case of suicide in the Dasa of 8th lord by
This chart is similar to 33,52. Here Yogakarak Mars has
been spoiled by 8th lord Jupiter and aphorism 60 under 8th
house and Yogas is valid. This is the horoscope of a most
unfortunate soul, who had to commit suicide for bankruptcy
on 24-11-05 at 4.00 AM during Jupiter - Mercury -Sun dasa.
He left behind one married elder sister and aged widow
mother. He was a bachelor at the time of his sad demise. He
passed only high school level and earned his living though
small business, mostly trading type. He lost his father on 411-89. (Rahu - Saturn dasa) His tragedies may be explained
as below with help of Kal Chakra Dasa, which is a much
better tool for the identification of the doomsday of life. Deha
Rasi is Scorpio occupied by the Neptune and Rahu. Jeeva
Rasi is Pisces containing Mars and 8th ford Jupiter. Dangers
and downfall are as sure as sunrise when 8* lord occupies
Deha and Jeeva signs. His Moon is in the 1st quarter of Chitra

Example No. 54
Date 18/06/1975 Time 10:10:00 Day Wednesday Lat 28.39.00 North Long 77:13:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Ssnatan Ayanamsa 23:15 12
Balance of Dasa : Mars 6 Years 9 Months 9 Days
Planets Nlrayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chatit-Cuspal
Nakshatra which falls in Savya group B. He opened his life
with Varischika dasa for 2 yrs, then Libra, Virgo and Cancer
opened. He died in the cancer dasa because Moon suffers
from placement related blemishes. Any planet which moves
to 3RV.6,h/8,1'/12'1' from its natal position, becomes weak.
His Moon is aspected by 8°' lord Jupiter and Mars, hence
Cancer dasa killed him. Killer planet is usually the antiplanet
of the 8* lord. But why? Nobody knows the principles of
KCD. How the sages fixed Deha and Jeeva signs it is
unknown to us. These signs put --ogether exert suitable
influence on one's status, health and life span. These two

signs and their lords decide primonily the following: the time
and misfortunes, health and ill health, moral and immoral
nature, life span and death. If these two signs and their lords
are ill disposed, only strong favourable yogas can subdue
them. If these two signs and their lords are healthily found,
other evil yogas can be effectively controlled. For the
horoscopic indications to flourish the Deha and Jeeva Rasis
should be well placed and occupied by benefics i.e. Jupiter,
Venus, Mercury and strong Moon (the distance between the
Sim and Moon should be more than 72°). These with good
lordships and without debility in these two signs, are not
harmful to longevity and health. If these are occupied by
Mars, Saturn, Rahu, Ketu, particularly 6,h/8,h lords, the
native will suffer misfortunes. His life span and health is
under severe threat and the dasa sequences in KCD fail to
bestow good results. 8* lord conjoined with yogakaraka
Mars in Jeeva Rasi proved fatal for him. Life's force ceased
to function on the fateful day. According to Mridula Trivedi
(P &F, Jan 1999 P 42) Jupiter and Mars do not play as good
friends. Mars is a dangerous friend of Jupiter. Jupiter lias a
sanity and religious out look while Mars has a criminal and
violent nature. Jupiter will not speak to Mars even if the
house of Jupiter is being damaged by theplacement or aspect
of Mars. Mars gets much liberty to destroy the objects when
placed in Jupiter's house or sign because he gets the
protection of Guru. It is well known that afflicted planet's
dasa cannot bestow good results. His Jupiter is afflicted by
Saturn, Mars and Rahu. Uranus in the 8ln house of Jupiter,
decreased the benefic energy of this divine planet. God only
writes sad episode about a person whose Jupiter is found
weak in a horoscope. So weak and afflicted 8* lord Jupiter
killed with the help of Marakesh Lord 2nJ lord and lord of
Lagna. His death during Jupiter - Mercury -Sun is in
agreement with astrological principles. The reasons for
suicide are (Cosmic Influences on mind & IQ, by Dr. S.S.
Chatteijee P 85)
1 . Weak Jupiter (his Jupiter is debilitated in Navamsa)
and afflicted by malefics may denote an attempt to commit

suicide due to financial bankruptcy. It would be, necessary
to examine the position of 2ntl/ll,h house. He had weak
and afflicted Jupiter and 2,,d/ll,h house were heavily
afflicted. So financial bankruptcy is the cause of death on
per the sages of yore.
2. When Saturn and Mars aspect each other, death is by
hanging or suicide. This aphorism is true when the 8* house
is involved. Really in his case 8th house has contact of Rahu,
Mars, Saturn on the S11 lord Jupiter posited in the 8* house.
Dasa of 8th lord placed in a quadrant house in Navamsa
Snatched away his life. 8th lord should be weak in Navamsa
for better results. When Jupiter is weak one does not have
any desire to live on this earth. Jupiter provided the hope
of living. With his divine grace nothing can be achive. Only
Jupiter is to be assessed properly in any horoscope. The 8’“’’
house of Jupiter, Sun, Moon should never the occupied by
malefic. 8th lord in $*' provided him a poor career. Ketu
and retrograde Mercury in 10* added fuel to the fire.

Chapter XV
Parivartan Yogas Of 8th Lord
There are 12 Bhavas in a horoscope. For the interchange
yoga, we need two bhavas at a time. The lords of 8th house
occupying anyone of the remaining house (except 1 2th / 6,h)
and the lord of that particular house in 8th will produce
total 9 Dainya Yogas. The people bom in Dainya Yoga will
be wicked and mean minded and will commit sinful acts.
They will not complete any task they undertake, will suffer
at the hands of their enemies and speak harshly. They do
not have balance of mind. There will be several
impediments to all their undertakings. Dainya Yoga is not
wholly evil. It puts certain obstacles in the way of success,
because of enemy's actions, if strong and well aspected, the
native will be able to overcome his enemies and to dislodge
obstacles.
Exchange of 1st and 8th : In Sir Jagadish Chandra Bose's
horoscope we find 1st and 8th lords interchanged involving
benefic planets and all the prophecies of sages came true in
Lagna, Jupiter, Cancer - Saturn, Leo - Ketu; Virgo - Mon,
Scorpio -Sun, Sagittarius - Venus, Mercury; Capricorn -
Mars, Aquarius - Rahu). For this unique Parivartan Yoga
6'1* /II 1,1 houses become weak (Astrology Nectar, by Dr. S„S.
Chatterjee P 28). Two natural benefics in the 8th house
provided him deep research caliber. Strong 8'" lord, and
strong Saturn (Saturn in 3rd house is excellent) made him a
successful man of the society. For the weak 6'" house, he
became a victim of cheating. His discovery results of
Wireless was published by Mr. Markony of Italy, who " °^yg

Sir Jagdish chandar Bose's
Date 30/11/1858 Time 17:00:00 Day Tuesday Lat 23.43:00 North Long 90:28:00 East
Zone 90:28:00 East SriSanatan Ayanamsa 21:37:37
Balance of Dasa : Moon 2 Years 9 Months 6 Days
the Nobel Prize, thus denying this prestigious prize to this
illustrious soul. He brought revolution in the science of
Botany by proving scientifically that planets also behave
like other living beings such as human beings. He invented
seismograph. Strong 8th house /8th lord contributed to the
wonderful discoveries by him. We know for discoveries are
should havee contact ofRahu with 8111 lord. Rahu is posited
in the 10th house of Jupiter thus both these planets are
influencing each other. So Rahu also contributed in
inventions. Well fortified Moon made him a man with
international fame and recognition for his contributions,

for unveiling the mysteries of nature. Now scientists in USA
are considering seriously to honour him with a Nobel Prize
posthumously. Markony by chance met Mr. Bose in a
ship and got all the idea for inventing wireless system. With
his shroud brain and commercial instincts he made a patent
which ultimately showered Nobel Prize on him. Exchange
of 1st and 8th involving malefic planets make anybody
gambler, valiant, cheat and stubborn (for Capricorn Lagna).
Malefic planets in Lagna spells trouble for the native.
Exchange of Saturn and Sun for any Lagna does not provide
good results. In Sant Meerbai's horoscope Moon and Saturn
exchanged places. She had a Cancer Lagna. It is generally
believed that the 8* lord destroys any house where ever it
is placed. In 3rd/6,h/8,l>/ 12*, the position of 8* lord alone is
very beneficial. 8lh lord should not be conjoined with
benefics in Kendras, it affects health. It gives great troubles
and anxieties in the native's life in 5lh/9'\ In 10'hhouse, one
may have permanent incapabilities in life, failures, troubles,
obstacles etc. in exalted state in the 10lh house it provides
good career in police, Military and other government aided
lines. Afflicted 8"' lord in Lagna provides a stunted life. If
S'*1 lord is placed in 6,h/8th/12lh in Navamsa, the evil effects
are considerably reduced. However the dasa of 8th lord in
such position will not bestow good results.
Exchange of 8* and 2nd lords: it is a Duryoga. Financial
crisis, unhappy domestic life, eye and dental problems. He
will lead a mean life in general. It the said planets are
benefic, his deeds will be good (for Gemini, Scorpio). It is
be malefics, his acts will he highly contemptible and he
will incur the wrath of others. This is a yoga for indulging
in evil rituals.
Exchange of 8Ul and 3rd lords
It is not a Khala Yoga. Timidity and unknown fears grow
in mind. Long lived, but there may be ear troubles. It grants
longevity. Malefic planets in 3/lllh assures long life. If 8*
lord is a malefic, his younger co-bom will suffer from
health problems. A benefic in this case will destroy the
diseases of his co-bom. The native will be devoid of fratern^j ^

happiness, be indolent and devoid of servants and strength.
Exchange of 8th and 4th lords
It is a Duryoga. Not a good configuration for good family
life, education-or for possessing vehicles. It effects the health
of the mother. If the 4lh lord in 8th be a malefic, the subject will
be in the grip of diseases and he will always involve in mean
calling. If the 8th house be a benefic sign, one will eke out a
respectable living, shunning evil means. His father will gain.
The subject will be a source of misery to his parents.
Exchange of 8lh and 5lh lords
Very famous astrologers are bom with this Yoga.
However 8lh lord in trines generate terrible mental
sufferings. Sri DayaShankar, U.K. Jha are eminent
astrologers of modern India. Both of them have written
astrological books in English. They possess this yoga in their
horoscopes. They have Gemini Lagna. 8"' lord in 5th is Putra
Arishta. 5th being 10th from 8th, it provides great intelligence
to the native. 5* house deals with Mantras and Tantras.
Association of 8th lord ip 5th, and any involvement of Saturn
takes place, Saturn could make the native adept in mantras
etc. and one may practice the same in profession. Sri U.K.
jha is deeply interested in Tantras, Mantras and deep
research in unearthing of hidden things of nature. Shri Jha
basically a mechanical engineer, is prolific writer in the field
of astrology.
Exchange of 8lh and 6Ul lords:
It is a Vipareeth Raja Yoga. They are self made. Rise in
their life are sudden, steep and unexpected, but lasts only
for a limited period of life. Most of the time they are engaged
in dreaming a bright future, but in practice they are
pyramid of failures.
Exchange of 8th and 7lh lords :
If a female horoscope it could mean separation from her
husband, while in a male's horoscope it could mean that
the income of the spouse could be affected. The 7lh house
is the 12,h from 8Ll, but it is also a malefic Kendra. Malefic

th
planets in malefic house become strong. Therefore 8 lord
in 7"' will gain strength and confer prosperity and success
on the native. In spite of all the lacuna in horoscope. If 8
lord and Saturn are strong, the native will invariably come
out in life, wife may be sickly.
Exchange of 8th and 9th lords
Inherits father's property, father's health affected, lack of
fortune. 8lh lord in 9th indicate that the person will be having
high intuitive powers and will be able to foresee things. It
indicates early death of father or separation from father. 8th lord
in 9lh makes a native to good work for others; his own wife
behaves badly with him. Strong 8,h lord may help him in the
field of inventions. He will have enough astrological skill.
Exchange of 8,h and 10 lords
Impediments in business/profession, partners likely to
deceive, fair and foul means in profession. The native who
th th
has 10 lord in 8 will be constantly troubled by diseases
which will be mainly bilious and windy in nature. He will
also have diseases relating to the right side of his body. 8
lord in 10'" may provide a troubled mother. It 8th lord is
placed in 6th/ 8th/ 12"’ in Navamsa, evil effects are reduced.
But the dasa of 8"‘ lord will not bestow good results.
Exchange of 8th and lllh lords
Fortunes affected, faces ups and downs, unhappiness
from elder co-borns and friends, inheritance problems etc.
the elder brothers of the native may go through problems
or difficult l.imes. Business may also suffer. Benefic influence
on the 11 house will help the native overcome troubles
th th
through support of elders and friends. 8 lord in 1 1 will
produce difficult childhood while later on happiness will
call on him. The major period of the 1 1 * lord placed in 8 ,
will bring untold miseries to the native.
Exchange of 8"’ and 12th lords
It is Vipareeth Raja yoga. Role of various lords in 8*
house have been written in the 8th house and longevity
chapter, now we will discuss the role of various planegj
in the 8'1' house:

ROLE OF PLANETS rN THE 8™ HOUSE
Planets in the 8* will be influencing Dhana Bhava in
the same way as planets in the 2nd Bhava will be doing.
Jupiter, Venus, Mercury and an increasing Moon unless
afflicted and weak end in 8* house will make a wealthy
person whereas a malefic 8th house unless it owns the 2nd
house will stand in a way of one's prosperity. In many cases
planets placed in the 81'1 feel themselves handicapped in
bestowing wealth, whereas benefics in the 2”J house show
easy way to acquisition of wealth. Jupiter in 2nd helps one
to gain money slowly, as Jupiter does some harm to the
bhava wherever it is posited. Benefics in 8th house assure
that we can grow rich through hard work. Adhi Yoga
involving 6tll/7,l,/8,h house will give plenty of money
provided Moon is strong. If the 5th and 9th houses are the
treasures of our previous bad deeds, the 12lh house shows
our coming involution on the basis of our present nature
of Karma. According to Uttarkalamrita, when Jupiter hold
the ownership of 8th house as in the case of Taurus or Leo
Lagna or when it occupies the 8th house, it becomes quite
auspicious and gives good results. Bansi Lai, Ex Haryana
Chief Minister (26-8-1927, 6.00 AM, Bhiwani) has Jupiter
in Pisces, who has Leo Lagna. Venus gives good results
when it is in the 6lh house. According to the same authority,
the house occupied by and aspected by the 12 lh 8"1 or 6th
lord is weakened. If however, 12^8 occupied by Venus, 8th
is occupied by Mercury and 6* is occupied by Jupiter, they
all give happiness of all kinds. It means that Jupiter will give
auspicious results both in 12* and 6lh houses and Mercury
will provide auspicious results only in the 8th house. Itmeans
that benefics are more welcome in Trika houses in
comparison to their malefic counterparts. Benefics in 1st/
2"V3'‘V4lh/5'i'/6'l'/7"i/9",/10,Vn,h would prove to be
auspicious. Malefics will prove to be auspicious in 3rd, 6*,
10lhand II*. The Sun and Saturn will be favourable in 9*.
Role of various planes may be as follows:
1. Sun : Sun is the ruler of success in life and in the
significater of the 9* Bhava. without strong Sun and strong

Ex-Haryana Chief Minister Bansi Lai
Date 26/08/1927 Time 06:00:00 Day Friday Lat 28:50:00 North Long 76.10:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:35:10
Balance of Dasa : Mercury 6 Years 8 Months 16 Days
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
Jupiter it is not possible to do well in one's mundane
journey. The Sun in the 8lh house is exaltation or in a friendly ■
sign or in own sign or with benefic's aspect may confer
long life, abundant fortunes, paternal inheritance and a
position of power. Else without such untimely danger to
the life span of the subject, particularly when it is debilitated
and afflicted in the 8* house. Strong Sun in the 8* house of
the child helps the father to earn good money after his birth.
If the Sun is hemmed between malefics such a father will
gain initially but will suffer financially in his old days. Let
us analyses the bolywood silver screen of Mumbai Queen.

Example No. 55
Date 17/10/1955 Time 17 30:00 Day Monday Lat 18 34 00 North Long 73:58:00 East
Zone 82:30.00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:58:44
Balance of Dasa : Rahu 0 Years 4 Months 4 Days
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
Example : 55- SmitaPatil. (DOB : 17-10-1955/17=30/
Pune). Adhi yoga made her very famous (national award
winner) and a wealthy lady. Dasa of lllh lord is always
malefic in nature. 11th /12th lord Saturn is exalted in the 8th
house. 6th/8th/12th lords joined together in the 8*11 house
forming a highly malefic combination. Moon (5 1)1 lord) is
afflicted by all the trika lords. Her 8lh house is hemmed
between malefics. Jupiter provides hope for living. Alas, it
is squared by Rahu -Ketu axis . Sun is in zero degree and is
debilitated. Both Sun, Moon are hemmed between malefics.
Saturn dasa proved fruitful for her at the beginning, but
the same dasa lord killed her in a very gruesome mannen

Affliction of 8"' ford precipitated her sufferings in life. Sun
and Saturn in 8"' always shortens life span. Very famous
astrologer and the founder of Times of Astrology in 1985,
Shri Santhanam had Saturn in the 8lh house, hemmed
between malefics. He died in Oct 1997 in heart attack
without any warning to anybody. So, 811 house Saturn,
when afflicted does not promote longevity. According to
R. Santharam, Saturn in 8lh provides danger to life in 35
yrs. which came true in the life of Smita Patil. One with
Sun in the 8hhouse will be fond of living in distance lands,
be devoid of many things (essential for happy living), be
troubled by hunger and diseases and bereft of others'
affection. One's life will be a store house of many miseries.
Frequent financial and professional reversals will occur.
The Sun in the 8"' house generally confers a span of life
between 50-60 yrs, which come stunningly true in the
example 45 . If Sun is in cancer, in the 8th house it makes
the life full of obstacles and long-drawn struggles. It is
believed that Sun in 8th harms the father. But according to
Parsai (Predictive Astrology by K.B. Parsai P 220) Sun in
8"' house is helpful to father with regard to his health,
longevity and source of income. Sun helps in very cordial
and helpful relationship between individual and the father.
According to the author, the debilitated Sun or Sun placed
in an inimical sign will not help the father. Exalted Sun in
811’ really helps the father. Father of example (Exp. 45)
declined in life after the birth of his youngest son, with
baneful combination in the 8th house. In an interesting
examples I found that natives with Sun - Mercury in Taurus
hemmed between malefics with Libra Lagna made their
fathers a penniless at the end of their lives. When Sun is
hemmed between malefics in 8,h, it will spell evils for the
father. This debilitated Sun will help the father, when it
from Neech vanga and Vipareeth Raj Yogas. When it is
hemmed between benefics, it will boost the prospects of
the father. Sun, hemmed between malefics in 8"' encourages
any body to commit sins, because 8th house is the house of
sins (randrahsthan). Sun in 30° in Aries is much better than

Sun in 0° in Taurus. Sun in the house of Venus in either
zero degree or thirty degree will not auger well for the
native. Hema Malini, the most successful dancer and
actress of Mumbai has Sun in 30° in Virgo opposite to Moon
in Pisces. It proved to be beneficial to her. Had it been in
zero degree in Libra, it would have spoiled her life.
Debilitated Sun in the 8th house is too dangerous for
anybody. N.T Ramarao, the founder of Telegu Desam party
had Sun - Mercury combination in the8thhouse in Taurus.
Sun is in the enemy camp. He had to leave this world with
a broken heart through a critical circumstances during
Venus - Jupiter dasa (8<h lord - 6lh lord). He won the general
election with a huge margin, but was dethroned by his
son and son-in-law. His 2” marriage proved too cosdy for
him. ll’Mord is the Son-in-law. 11* lord Sun is in 8‘ . So
Son-in-law became instrumental in his sad demise. His 5th
th
lord Saturn is in the 12 aspected by Mars. So sons also
ditched him heavily. Sun in the 8th house in an enemy camp
brings untimely danger to the lifespan of the native, strong
Sun and Moon in the 8,h are the bestowers of long life.
2. Moon : Exchange of Is1 lord and 8 lord involving
Moon and Saturn generates excellent results. We find this
combination in the birth chart of saint Meerabai who forced
Lord Krishna to appear before her through her constant
appeals using her melodious tune. Bhajans created by her
will never die in the coming thousands of centuries. Her
Bhajans and devotional songs are unparallel in the history
of music. Her 3rd lord Mercury with exalted Jupiter in
Cancer Lagna provided her a melodious voice. Moon in 8
house gives a man a touch of famine qualities, habits,
tendencies while it provides masculine qualities to an
women. When Moon is in the 8 house, the individuals '
often desirous of repeated travel abroad, ultimately leading
to settlement in a foreign land for some years or
permanently. For a day birth-increasing Moon and for night
birth a decreasing moon in the 6"’/8tl' will protect the native
akin to his mother. In case of a female, the Moon in the 8lh
may make her blame worthy. She may have problems in

the eyes/breasts/vagina. A native with Moon in 8th may
have danger through water, liquids, wrong medicines. He
will be financially ill placed. We, however do feel that an
exalted Moon or a Moon in own sign in the 8th house
aspected by or combined with benefics may give beneficial
results, while the Moon in inimical and debilitated sign
under malefic influences may give adverse results. This
position of the Moon is bad if it is weak in debilitation.
The Moon in Scorpio not only brings about separation with
mother early but also creates problems in the married life.
If the 8’J’ house Moon is placed in earthy sign with Saturn
or Mercury, or aspected by them, the native becomes a
cheat. In airy and fiery signs, the Moon in this house gives
good results but some reverse take place in the middle age.
An exalted Moon in the 8th house makes the life of native
one of grim struggle and success after many failures. For
Virgo Lagna Moon in 30° in Aries is much better than 1° in
Taurus, lfboth Sun and Moon are placed in this house, if
Moon is ahead of Sun longitudewise, the native will be a
brilliant scholar. Bankim Chattopadhyaya had Moon and
Jupiter in the 8th house in Leo. Moon is ahead of Sun. He is
the composer of our "Bande Mataram" national Song and
wrote many Bengali Novels. He was a district magistrate
and became a legendary figure in his own life time. Moon
afflicted by 12” lord Jupiter, Mars and Saturn killed him at
a very young age. Afflictions of Saturn and Mars on the 8*
house is never welcome. Concentrated force of Saturn and
Mars destroys the bhava. Afflictions of Moon or Sun in the
8th house is never welcome. Dharma Karmadhipati yoga
elevated his status in the society. Weak Jupiter in 8l|\
aspected by Saturn and Mars did not protect him for a
longtime. Superstar Dilip Kumar has Moon in the 8th house
in Leo. He was born in Peshwar, but 8Jl house Moon helped
him to settle in a land other than his birth place. Jupiter in
10th, Venus- Mercury - Sun combination in ll,h shaped his
destiny in a very nice manner. Dr. Manmohan Singh, the
present Prime Minister of India in 2006, has Moon - Venus
th th
- Mars in the 8 house in Cancer. His 9 lord Sun has

conjoined with 1 0'1' lord Mercury in the 10,hhouse. 8l1' lord
in 8'1' with natural benefic Venus did not curtail his life
span. Exalted 10th lord granted him long life. Mulak Raj
Anand, the Indian born native became world famous
writer of English language. When Saturn is strong, one
can learn the foreign languages easily. He has Saturn -
Ketu in 5th in Aquarius and Moon. Jupiter in the 8th house,
Taurus. He was bom with Parijata Yoga, a common yoga
for immortals. Lord of Lagna is placed in Scorpio, whose
dispositer Mars is exacted in 4th, whose dispositor Saturn
is placed in 5th forming this unique yoga. From Moon Lagna
we find Adhi yoga, a yoga fa- easy financial success in life.
Moon in strong condition in the S^is not bad for any native
because Moon is Sampath Karaka planet. Without strong
Moon it is not possible to get nation wide fame.
3. Mercury : Readers will ponder over the fact that
celebrities do not take birth with Mercury alone in the S*
house. This the finding of the author. Though Saravali has
praised Mercury in the 8"' house. R. Santhanam disagrees
with his views and says that a person bom with Mercury
in 8lh will have many defects. Saraswati Yoga (yoga for great
learning) yoga arises when Mercury, Jupiter and Venus
occupy 12,4,5,7,9,10 * house in any manner. Mercury is
the ford of intelligence. So it is a difficult position for
Mercury to be in the 8^ house, irrespective of the Rasi in
the 8lh house, people with inferior brain power are bom
with Mercury in 8th. If they are typists, stenographers,
clerks and juniors assigned to drafting or copying they do
not hesitate to keep work pending and going in arrears
unless someone is rigidly supervising their work. Mercury
in the 8lh’will be deemed strong if it is a Vargottam planet
or otherwise should occupy a good Varga. Mercury is a
boyish planet, so fickle minded persons are bom with
Mercury alone in any sign. It shouldbe aspected by another
planet for yielding good results. Aspect of Mars on Mercury
is benefical, but Saturn increases the evil tendencies of the
native. Mercury in the fiery sigr and also in airy signs
gives sharp intellect with a flail' for mathematics. In watery

signs it is not very happy and blunts one's intelligence,
under other sources of strength occur in the Navamsa or
via strong aspect and association. In Pieces of he gets
Neechvana, he gives a flair for Mathematics and related
disciplines. Mercury in Vargottam position makes one
highly intelligent even if he is in £>h. According to Horasara
(AM May 1973 P470). Mercury joins Sun in the 4th or 8th
the native will possess kingly qualities and be wealthy.
Personally I have observed exalted Sun with Mercury or
Sun hi a friendly sign with Mercury in the 8th house
produces top class intellectuals. Many planets, including a
mixture of benefic and malefic planets in the 8* makes a
man very rich and the native flourishes in a life, where his
education plays no role. Amitabha Bachhan has Mercury,
Venus, Sun, Mars in the 8lh house in Virgo. Bhagawan
Rajneesh had Moon, Mars, Mercury, Venus, Saturn in his
8* house in Sagittarius. Daya Shanker, the honourary
consultant editor of TOA has Sun, Mercury, Rahu and
Venus in his 8"' house, in Capricorn. A great Scholar of
Vedanta Swami Ramdrtha had Ketu, Mercury, Moon and
Sun in Libra in his 8th house. Mercury in the 8"' in an
inimical sign joining a malefic planet may reduce one's life
span and gives a downfall for which the native may blame
none but himself. Sex-scandals, cheating, forgery,
defalcation misappropriation, or brain-crimes and
sometimes also mental diseases may upset the whole life
and career of such person. Prophecies of sages came true
in the life ofRajaneesh. He was jailed in USA 2/3 yrs prior
to his death in Poona. According to Mridula Trivedi, if
Mercury is afflicted, weak or under papakartari yoga or
associated and aspected by malefics in 8lh house, the wife
may kill her husband (Predicting Marriage P 528).
4. Venus : According to R. Santhanam Venus in the
8'" house in a benefic sign and related to benefics (See
Jagadish Chandra Bose's birth chart) may lead to a long
lease of life where as a weak Venus in the 8* in a malefic
sign or inimical sigh joining a malefic planet may reduce
one's life span. A well placed Venus in the 8th house ma^

grant a life span of 75 yrs or so. Further, one with Venus in
the 8111 house may have a favourably disposed spouse. His
prosperity will too often be chequered. He will be orthodox
in his food habits. He will make a wealth but will be
troubled by debts. He will incur inheritances and liabilities
as well, from his ancestors. All these come true in the life
of Jagadish Cahndra Bose. Famous lawyer of India Ram
Jethmalani has Rahu, Mars, Sun and Venus in his 8^ house
Leo. Ma Nirmala Devi a spiritual healer ofNoida has Venus
in her 8* house, in Capricorn. She has been born with
Parijata Yoga, Mudrika yoga etc. she can mesmerize the
audience with thousands of persons wither sweet tongue.
Her 21'd/ll'1' lords have conjoined and are aspected by divine
Jupiter from Libra. Exchange of 4th lord Mercury with 9th
lord Mercury generated a formidable Raja yoga in her birth
chart. When many Raja Yogas are there Venus in 8L'1 house
will not harm the native In Taurus and Capricorn the native
works assiduously to make his fortune and is a great extent
successful. In the sign of Aries and Leo the native get same
legacy after great exertion, but his expenditure always
exceeds his income due to which he may fall in debt. In
Leo he is unfortunate in respect ofhis children. The father
and sons are not on good terms. In 8* house in Sagittarius
with Venus, the wife is sickly. If Venus be in the 8"’ in fixed
signs, there may be miseries galore. A female with Venus
in the 811' may be devoid of wealth. She may cheat others.
Her married life will be miserable and short. Morarji Desai
had Venus - Mercury - Mars in his 8th house. in Capricorn.
5. Jupiter: Jupiter is the most benevolent planet in the
zodiac. It is significator of money, deep intelligence, wisdom,
happhiess, recovery power etc. it provides hope of living.
Its strength is a must for a glorious life. Any planet in own
sign, in good Navamsa, in exalted condition behaves well
with the native. So Jupiter for Leo in Pisces, Jupiter for
Taurus in Sagittarius, or Jupiter for Sagittarius in Cancer
will help the native in all respect. If it is associated or
aspected by another friendly or Yogakaraka planet, it
should be rembered that 8th lord in 8th produces anxieties

in career (see exp. 22, 33,52,55) Jupiter alone in 8th house
will try to provide best results for the native. Jupiter does
some harm to the house where it is posited. 8til house is the
store house - house of sufferings. So even well placed
Jupiter in 8* will soak the native in the sufferings for which
no justification can be given. Exp. 52 speaks this point. Dr.
Ganguly is asking help from heaven for his transfer to USA
from India, where his family members are suffering (Exp22). It is a admitted fact that no planet can become exalted
in the 6th, 8*1 &' 12ll,house and cannot produce results with
'100% efficiency. Adhi yoga is the exceptional case. So
Jupiter in 8111 house will lose some strength. R - Santhanam,
even got surprised when exalted Jupiter for a Sagittarius
man did not produce good results. U.K.Jha suggested that
Jupiter failed' to produce results because it has travelled 8th
house from its natal position. Usually a planet loses some
strength when it moves to 3/6/8/12 from its natal position.
Author is of the firm opinion, until or unless Adhi Yoga is
clearly visible planets in 6th /8,h /12th will fail to deliver good
results. This situation will completely change when a
number of benefic and malefic planets occupy either in
8"7 12th house (four or more). That is the reason 4/5 planets
in 8fh or 12lh makes anybody very rich. When a benefic
planet becomes retrograde it loses some strength, therefore
retrograde Jupiter in 8’1' is never welcome. It curtails
longevity and also produce ups and downs in life. He will
always have futile results in respect of increasing fortunes.
According to Saravali if Jupiter occupies the 8"' Bhava, the
native will be insulted, long-lived, be a servant, will serve
his own people and be pitiable. R. Santhanam says that he
may be devoid of intelligence and reasoning. He may be
bereft of fortunes, happiness, progeny happiness and the
like. According to Hora Ratnam, one with Jupiter in the 81h
house will not have intelligence, learning, wisdom, splendor
and impact. He may be wicked or deceives others. Jupiter
in 8* house, having a malefic planet will lead to illicit terms
with members of opposite sex right from young age which
is true in exp. No. 52.. Holywood actress Mariline Monroe

had Jupiter-Mars in Aquarius in 8* house. Satya Saibaba
of Sriddhi had exalted Jupiter in his Chouse. When Jupiter
is debilitated in the 8'1' house of Moon, legendary rise in life
occurs. Debilitated planets in the 8th house forms Raja yoga.
Benefic planets in the 8th house, makes a female native
sexually principled. Dr. Murali Manohar Joshi, the great
physicist of Allahabad University who enrolled his name
in the BJP has Jupiter in 8* in Virgo. He has produced more
than 100 Ph.Ds under him, also become the central Minister
under Atal Behari Bajpai between 1999 - 2004.
6. Saturn : Saturn prevents the growth ofthe ordinary
natives for rising peak high in life and often cuts the edges
after some high gain. That is why ups and downs are
common for ordinary mortals. Bill Gates, steel giant Mittali
and other billionaires are exempted from the wrath of
Saturn. It is a planet which creates limitation in life. Eighth
house is a house of limitation, obstacles and course of
hidden wealth and hidden activities. Saturn in the 8th house
remains in its true colours. If Saturn is aspectedby or is in
the association with Jupiter or Venus, the native has a long
life. If afflicted by malefics the life is shortened and the
native dies of some lingering diseases. If as lords of 4*, 7*
or 11th, Saturn is placed in 8th, the individual might be
accused of petty thefts, within the house in childhood and
bigger theft/embezzlement or pilferage m adulthood. It is
the duty of he parents that if they find such a position of
•Saturn in the birth chart of an infant, they should inculcate
into the child, good qualities ofhonesty and truthfulness.
They should let the child know the risks and dangers
involved in the bad habits of theft, embezzlement and
pilferage. If Jupiter and Saturn are in 6,ll/8th/12,h, the
individual might be accused of tax evasion, directly
smuggling or giving shelter or other accommodation or
financial support to smugglers'. This position poses scope
tor scandals and seizures, Enquiries, investigations and even
legal action against the individual may be posible. Royal
Bengal Tiger Dr. ShyamaPrasad Mukherjeehad retrograde
Saturn and retrograde Jupiter in his 8* house. Sagittarius.

Pandit Nehru put him in Kashmir jail without any valid
reason, where he died at a very young age in mysterious
circumstances, while his mother wept bitterly for the heavy
loss. Saturn is capable of causing invalidity or ineffectiveness
of any limb or part of the body. But it has to be carefully
noted that Saturn in the 8th house normally grants longlife to an individual, notwithstanding any kind of disability,
invalidity or ineffectiveness to any limb or part or
functionary of the body. Individuals with Saturn in 8* house
should keep away from freelance attitude with regard to
the opposite sex, and also avoid extra-marital affairs or
casual contacts with opposite sex for clean and comfortable
health. According to Hararatnam, Saturn in an inimical
sign or with a malefic or inimical planet will spoil one's
family happiness and give poverty and short life (Exp.45).
Saturn in 8th in a sign of a benefic planet will give an
obedient spouse and the native will be fortunate in many
respects. He will be troubled by disorders of blood, bereft
of intelligence and be inquisitive of others' affairs. Lata
Mangeskar, the immortal musician has Saturn in her
8"'house in Sagittarius. Saturn in Jupiter's house in 8LS
behavas well with the native. Ma Anandmoyee has exalted
Saturn in 8"'. Late Madhavrao Sciendia, ex-Maharaj of
Gwalior had Saturn and Rahu in 8th. Nargis Dutt, mother
of Sanjay Dutt, Bollywood hero had Saturn in 8'1' in
Capricorn. Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose had Saturn in
Scorpio in his 8th house opposite to Mars in Taurus.
Affliction of Scorpio with Mars, Ketu and Saturn killed
him in an air accident.
7 . Mars : One with Mars in the 8th will not enjoy good
health. He will find no happhiess in his marital life; will
incur disorders of urine, blood, heart and danger from
vehicles. He will only enjoy a medium lease of life and will
prove inauspicious for his spouse, near and dear. Maneka
Gandhi has Mars in 8*. Her father died in a mysterious
circumstance soon after her marriage. She also became
widow at a very young age. Mridula Trivedi believes Mars
in 8th house of a female native is graveyard for her. Cto

experience has proved that Mars in 8th house is so bad that
even exalted Mars in the 8th has not been able to improve
one's economic position or spare its nature from bodily
injury. According to Saravali, Mars in 8,h makes the native
suffer from diseases. It may even cut short the native's life.
One positive point about Mars in 8th is that it is always
favourable for income and earnings irrespective of the sign
in 8lh. Even an excellent tally of gunas (points matching
system based on tally of 36) would not help. Mars and
Mercury in 8th produce adverse effects on the grasping
power of the child in school. Mars and Jupiter in 8th (Exp.-
55) also as confusing as that of Mars with Mercury. Mars
and Venus in 8'h house makes a person master in the
knowledge of love, romance and it gives an aptitude or
inclination tor more than one relationship with the opposite
sex. In 2006 we however observe that 60% girls are losing
their virginity between 16-20 years, irrespective of planets
in the 8 house. The girls of the21sl century of India (60%)
do not believe in the virginity theory as a pre condition
before marriage. They want only safe sex. Boys are more
worried for pregnancy than the girls before marriage. What
we can conclude is that girls with Mars - Venus in 8th will
lose virginity in almost 100% cases, before marriage after
20 or so. Parents of such children should be cautions about
the approach of their children. Mars - Saturn in 8th house
make expert dacoits, smugglers, and dealers in contraband
goods, arms, ammunition and weaponry. Some of them
manufacture unlicensed weapons, while some others
undertake sale and distribution of such weapons. These
individuals are vulnerable to oft-repeated injuries from very
childhood, but they keep on growing physically and
habitwise as well as naturewise on the lines mentioned
above. Women having this combination in 8th may
terminate pregnancy. Mars - Rahu in S* provides
unconventional sex-desire. They are able to keep a guarded
secret of their extra-marital affair or a love affair, they are
of angry disposition. The combination of Mars - Ketu in
the 8,h gives the same results of Mars - Rahu, but in reduced
degree of effect. But they rarely rash and rough toward^gg

others in the behaviour. Sir, Edmand Hillary has Mars and
Pluto hi the 8th house, in Gemini. Sir Garfield Sobers, the
th
uncrowned king of cricket world has Mars - Ketu in 8 in
Gemini. George Washington has Mars in the 8 in Scorpio.
J.F. Kennedy had Mercury - Mars in Aries in his 8th house
and had many extra marital relationships. Lord Curzon
who divided Bengal in 1905 had Mars - Rahu in 8 in
Aquarius. The world Heavy Weight champion Mike Tyson
visited jail for rapg charges. He has Rahu - Venus - Mars
in Taurus in his 8 house.
8. Rahu : Rahu is a shadow planet and is capable of
giving concrete results only when it is in conjunction with
any planet of the zodiac. If the lord of 8lh house is strong
and occupies a trine or quadrant place, Rahu and Ketu
provide good results. The native has a fairly long life! He
earns money by all means possible. If Jupiter aspects 8*
house/orits lord, the native does not adopt unfair or illegal
ways of acquiring wealth. Rahu in 8 may sometimes cause
untimely and gruesome death of one's progeny particularly
'when 5th lord or Jupiter is in the 8th with Rahu or Ketu.
According to Shuka Nandi Jyotish published by TOA,
§T, cprft tjjfA
SRrf I So Rahu in 6lh/8'hand Venus in Lagna generates Raja
Yoga. Rahu in (?’ is praised by all savants of astrology, but
the opinion of Rahu in 8s differs widely. A horoscope should
be studied in a whole taking into account the sum total of
the effects of all the planets and should never be interpreted
on the basis of isolated or individual combination. Rahu
and Ketu act as agents to the planet to which they are
conjoined. If they are not conjoined with any planet, they
give the results of the planet who aspects them. Only when
they are neither conjoined with nor aspected by any planet,
they represent the lord of the house in which they are
posited. Rahu and Ketu occupy a unique place in Hindu
Astrology and the interpretation of their results in often a
very difficult task. They either aggravate the evil or
accentuate the good to the great extent. Rahu governs
material advances and Ketu signifies spiritual progress.

According to Bepin Behari (in Eoteric Principles of Vedic
Astrology) Rahu in 8,h/Ketu in 21"1, such individuals often
display tremendous energy which they utilize to achieve
extra-ordinary results. They make their mark in the society.
Under favourable planetary conditions they create a niche
for themselves and may became great scientists, exceptional
police officers, politicians or doctors. This combination
confirms long life and not short innings of life wrongly
interpreted by astrologers. In practice, the results of Rahu
in 8* are difficult to predict because the range of the unseen
world which this house represents is very extensive.
Richard Nixon had Ketu in 2nd and Rahu in 8th in Pisces.
Rahu's dispositor is placed in its own house in a trine Rahu
in 8th spreads scandals. He had to resign from the post of
Presidency for the Watergates Scandals. Chetan Sharma's
cricket career was ruined when Javed Miandad scored a
over boundary firm the loose last ball, and won the cricket
match against India at Sarjah. He has Rahu in 8th in Gemini
and Ketu in 2,Kl forming the Kal Sarpa Yoga. His 8* lord
was placed in 6lh forming Vipareeth Raja Yoga and Saturn
was in his own house. When 8lh lord and Saturn are strong
one does not get the evils of Kal Sarpa Yoga. The famous
lady IPS, Kiran Bedi has Rahu in 8ft in Aries and Ketu in
2nd in Libra. She was invited by President Bush to have
breakfast with him. She won many International Awards
and Prizes for her services, but was caught in the Medical
college scandal for the admission of her daughter in a NE
State. Famous Bollywood star and congress MP Sunil Dutt
who died in 2005 had Rahu in 8th and Ketu in 2nd. His son
Sanjay Dutt was arrested after the Bombay blast case and
was chained even in hospital. His appeal to Narashima Rao
for the release of his son yielded futile results. Saturn in 5*
and Rahu in 8* brought anxious moments in life. World
famous scientist (The best scientist in the memory of
civilization) Albert Einstein had Mars - Rahu in 8* and Ketu
in 2nd in Cancer. He did not marry his girl friend in college
level, whom he made pregnant. A daughter was bom, but
nothing is known about his daughter. Early scandals in life

ruined his marital happiness. He lived alone at the time of
his death. Rahu in Sf*1 provides research caliber and helps
the native in inventions provided he has many Raja Yogas
in the horoscope.
th
9. Ketu In 8 - Bad health, mysticism, occultism
partnership with unscrupulous persons, all round
unsuccessful, disease of private parts. 8lh house Ketu makes
gays or lesbians. Mars - Ketu, Sun - l£etu. Moon - Ketu,
Saturn - Ketu, combination in the 8 house is quite a
dreadful position for any native. According Santhanam in
Hora Ratanam, he will be addicted to vices and sinful
th
means. Elizabeth Taylor has Ketu in 8 in Aries and Rahu
in 2nd Libra. She changed her husbands as frequently she
changed her shoes. Controversial tantrik and God man
Chandra Swami has Ketu in 8th and Rahu in 2nd from his
Chandra Lagna ,Jln Aquarius. Nelson Mandela has Ketu -
Venus in his 8 house from Chandra Lagna Libra. He
divorced his wife at the age of 80 and married again. Swami
Snatan Shree has Ketu in 8lh and Rahu in 2n from Chandra
Lagna. Ketu in 8"' house from Moon immersed him in ocean
of spiritualism* Father of Indian Astrology Dr. BV Raman
had Ketu in 8 in Virgo and Rahu in 2" - Pisces. Karmic
control planets Jupiter and Mercury are occupying his
successive Kendras. Saturn - Moon - Jupiter generated
Mudrika Yoga 5th lord Mercury, 9th lord Venus and 10 lord
Mars formed a formidable Raja Yoga in his 7lhhhouse. Ketu
is a mystic planet. Strong Saturn and strong 8 lord shaped
his destiny in a very nice manner. Gaja Kashari yoga made
him world famous (See Exp 8) when Jupiter is placed in
the 8lh/12lh from Rahu or Ketu, he won't have any riddance
from the adversities in life. Lower middle class persons are
bom with this yoga. Debilitated 8th lord with Rahu or Ketu
is highly dangerous. Rahu and Ketu's dispositor are karmic
control planets. Rahu's dispositor speaks the future
regarding the house wherever it is posited. Ketu's dispositor
speaks about past links and latent potentialities of house
where it is placed. Albert Einsteius Rahu's dispositor. Saturn
is placed in his 10 house, so he had a spectacular career,
is placed in his 10 house, so he had a spectacular careej.gg

Ketu's dispositor Moon was placed in Scorpio in his 6lh
house. This Moon was reminding him about his glorious
past life career. Ultimately Moon's dasa helped him to win
Nobel Prize.
8* and 1 ^ lords should be strong in the birth chart, 6th
lord promotes litigations. It should be aspectedby a natural
malefic or should be debilitated or should occupy in weak
house (3rd, 8th, 1 ih). When 6th house is occupied oraspected
by a benefic it behavas as a Upachaya House, a malefic's
presence or aspect makes it a trika house. Benefic planets
in 1 ]* and in trine/quadrants save a man from litigations.
Those who occupy top ranking positions in life, Venus will
be found strong in those birth charts. Without strong Venus
it is not possible to get air-conditioned office, luxury cars,
very comfortable life style. Often it has been found that
they have strong 9lh/10,h house and their lords. Relationship
betweenlOlh and 8th houses make IAS officers. Sun or Moon
must occupy 1st, 8th, 9th or 10th. For a big position in life
Karmic control planets should have connection with 9th/
10°' /Sun/ Moon. In 2006 we find very bright students want
to work in a prosperous land. In DR.' Ganguly's chart (Exp.
22) we find 8th and 1 0fh lords are exchanging aspects.
Rahu's dispositor Sun is placed in the 4 Scorpio, the house
of Yogakaraka Mars. Mars has energised his entire
horoscope. All the nine planets have contact with Mars.
Planets in the angle 019* lord behave well with the native.
Mars is using it sign and the contact of other planets to
read the all the planets of the horoscope. His 10lhlord has
generated Neechvanga Raja Yoga. Venus- Mercury - Jupiter
has generated Mudrika Yoga. A person born in a poor
family becomes a famous man with this yoga. Gaja Keshaii
Yoga, Parijata Yoga, Dharnta Karmadhipati Yoga etc made
him a very big man of the society.
Rahu behaves well with exalted planets and planets in
its own house. It can provide a new idea in some one's
head ina flash. Mars provides rationality. Mercury provides
reasoning, Saturn - the common sense, Ketu - reminds
latent potentialities. So it is anticipated Sun, Moon, Mercurv,

Rahu, Ketu, Mars, Saturn will provide good ideas when
three or more mixture of benefic and malefic planets occupy
the 8* house/or 12* house. Saturn, Mars, Rahu in 8th, will
provide criminal tendencies to the native. If exalted benefic
planets are in 8th, the native will be highly intelligent. For a
big person of the society, at least one of the Sun or Moon
may have a concern with Lagna, 8 lh, 9th or 10th house or
Karmic control planets make relationship with the above
planets, house and their lords. In Pandit Madan Mohan
Malaviya's horoscope, Mercury and Jupiter are the karmic
control planets. Both of them are joining the luminaries.

Chapter XVI
Death By Explosion
A simple child penetrates from its mother's womb and
lightly draws its breath, it starts feeling its life in every limb,
is completely ignorant of death. But by the rules of the
Destiny, from the day from its birth the innocent child is
paving its way to the path of death. Death is an inevitable
occurrence in a person's life but people infatuated by the
spell of Maya (illusion) forgets the blatant truth and sinks
into worldly activities. Death has innumerable ways to take
its exit. The great dramatist Webster after Shakespearean
age rightly says in the play "Duchess of Malfi" that one
may be short to death with a pearl, be cut one's throat with
diamond, death has ten thousand doors to take its exit.
One of the greatest Romantic poet Shelly said "Death is
here and death is there, death is busy everywhere" . Form
last part of the 20th century to the dawn of the 21 sl century
a new door has been constructed for the death to take its
exit is death by explosion. This novel phenomenon is the
birth of terrorism with its poisonous hood stinging here
and there round the globe in 2005. According to lord
Buddha, "Life is a Journey, death is return to earth. The
universe is like an inn. The passing years are like dusts".
Poet Milton has said, " Death is the golden key that opens
the palace of eternity".
Global terrorism is increasing at an alarming rate. India
was very much disturbed by frequent attacks from terrorists
from Pakistan between 1947 - 2001. In Sept. 9, 2001 God
helped India indirectly. These terrorists killed hundreds of
persons in India, attacked American Embassy in Kolkat^*

attacked our Parliament for killing 540 MPs and VVIPs.
All efforts to seek help from USA and other civilized
countries brought futile results till September 2001. Not
only USA denied help but also helped Pakistan with lethal
arms and cash dollars encouraging terrorism. India is land
of Gods. On 11.9.2001, some terrorists of A1 Quida group
(leader is OsmaBin Laden, a half-mad, eccentric billionaire
of Saudi Arabia) destroyed World Trade Centre (Twin
Tower) using a trick, which is unthinkable to any body.
This magnificent 102 storey building was wipedout from
the map of New York forever. One person named Md.
Atta of Egypt, an engineer from West Germany engineered
the entire episode of mass destruction. They used oil as
fuel bombs. It is not known how they hijacked fire to six
Aero planes of USA and was successful to enter Pentagon
Area and the twin towers on 9.1 1.2001 around 10:30 AM.
Fire destroyed these two buildings and thousands of
innocent American lost their lives. George Bush, the then
president of USA look a vow to retaliate it will all might.
So far between October 2001 to October 2005, Americans
have killed thousands of Talibans (Ruling party members)
of Afghanistan and destroyed Iraq. Thousands ofAl Quida
persons were taken as Prisoners of war to an Island in West
Indies where they are treated like animals. Under the
guidelines of Osma Bin Laden Talibans formed A1 Quida.
These A1 Quida persons trained all the Pakistani Terrorists,
blasted two wonderful Buddha Paintings on mountains
(tallest Buddha structure in the world) in 2001, hijacked
one Indian Airlines plane and killed one newly married
passenger. Lord Buddha took Tevenge soon, because all
actions have its equal and opposite reaction, this is the
natural rule, so they are getting right treatment for their
sins. Osma Bin Laden could not be caught till October 2005.
He is avoiding arrest with the help of Pakistanis. Attacks
from Pakistan, terrorists in India in 2005 is almost negligible.
Our border security forces are doing marvelous jobs. A
person cannot understand the pains of a snake bite till he is
bitten by a snake. Osma Bin Laden indirectly helped India

by giving orders of mass destruction in USA. America learnt
a lesson from terrorism on 9 6 September 2001 . This day is a
red letter day in USA. All the countries of the world are
benefited for curbing tenorism.
In July 2005, the entire London city was rocked, when
Pakistan-born UK citizens busted bombs in underground
railways. Several hundred persons lost their lives. In the same
month, these terrorists attacked a port city of Egypt. So the
terrorists are attacking even the Muslim country. Any body
may lose life any where in the world through bomb explosion.
When we scan history books we find Rajeev Gandhi,
Indira Gandhi, Mujibur Rehman of Bangladesh, President
Abraham Lincolln, Sanjay Gandhi, Netaji Subhas Bose, John
Kennedy etc famous persons lost their valuable lives through
explosion or fire arms. In the present article, I shall describe
the astrological yogas which kills a man though firearms,
bombs, explosions etc.
Explosives were unknown to India only 500 years ago.
Gun Powder was brought down to India by the Moghuls
in thel6th Century A.D. Shershah was the first important
personality to fall a victim of explosion in is bid to capture
the Kalinjara Fort. He died of burn injuries. His death
changed the course of Indian history. Humayun returned
to India from exile for the continuity of Moghul Empire,
set up by his father Babar. Akhbar the great is the illustrious
son of Humayun. Who fled away to Iran after his defeat
at the hands of Sher Shah. He sent his child Akhbar to
Kandahar which was then ruled by Kamran, the uncle of
Akhbar. Kamran lent no help to Humayun in regain his
lost empire. Through the help of Shah of Iran Humayun
invaded fort of Kandahar. Kamran played a trick. He
placed child Akhbar, the only son of Humayun, on the roof
of the fort at such a strategic point that the child could
have been blown off through cannons of invading army.
But the fort was conquered without any injury to child
Akhbar. We shall discuss his chart, for unearthing reasons
of avoiding burn injuries or possible death. British fellows
conquered entire India through cannon power.
The Namdhari Sikhs known as "Kukas" in the

annals of India are rightly called, 'Torch bearer of India's
freedom struggle". Namdharis revolted against the practice
of cow killings. They raided the slaughter house at Amritsar
on IS^June 1871 and then Raikoton 15lhJuly 1871. The
British Government reacted quickly, but had no motive to
arrest real persons who had raided the slaughter houses.
Guru Ram Singh, a noble soul and the founder of the
Namdhari sect ordered the real culprits to appear before
the judge. Three Namdharis were hanged on 5.8.1871 at
Raikot, four at Amritsar on 15,hSept 1871 and two at
Ludhiana on 16,h November 1871.
In retaliation, under the leadership of S. Hira Singh and
S. Lehna Singh, Namdhari Sikhs attacked Malerkotla on
15th January 1872. There was a fierce fighting. The Kukas
fought bravely, persons from both the sides were killed. S.
Hira Singh also lost his left arm. In the evening, this group
of Namdharis went to village Rarh. S. Hira Singh addressed
the group : " We had achieved our target. We had conveyed
our feelings to the British Government that now the Indians
had woken up. They would neither to tolerate foreign rule
nor hurt to their religious sentiments and self respect".
Then all of them resolved to surrender before the authority.
Then all of them resolved to surrender before the
authority. At that time, the ruler of Malerkotla state was a
minor. Mr. Cowen was working as a superintendent of
the council of Administration. He immediately sent the force
to bring all these arrested Namdhari revolutionists to
Malerkotla parade ground. He has got nine cannons from
the neighboring States. He had made up his mind to blow
all the rebel Namdharis with Cannons. Mr. Cowen himself
was present in the execution ground. Hundreds were blown
to pieces using explosives.
Subhas Candra Bose said that, ''The banner for freedom
given to Indians by Satguru Ram Singh and the sacrifices
done by Namdhari Sikhs will be a matter of great pride for
the Indians. The Namdhari Sikhs experienced for three
quarters of a century for their peaceful non co-operation
Movement, are expected to carry forward the banner of
freedom in the fire front and will encourage sacrifices. Guru

Ram Singh is the fist leader of the peaceful non co-operation
movement in India" . Main purpose of this article is to caution
public about their involvement in a sudden bomb blasts.
APHORISMS INVOLVING DEATH THROUGH
EXPLOSDN
1. According to Parasar, Rahu in 6th /8 th / 12th may
cause displacement from position and also death through
conspiracy specially in its Mahadasa. Rajeev Gandhi died
during Rahu Mahadasa placed in the 12lhhouse. Tamils of
Sri Lanka hatched the conspiracy of his sad killing. Only
one hour prior to his death he was in Allahabad in the
General Election campaign. He flew to Tamil Nadu only to
be executed by a group of ladies who were waiting with
garlands. As soon as Rajeev Gandhi come out from the
plane these Tamil girls garlanded him with hidden bombs,
masked inside flowers, were triggered off through a remote •
control procedure by an unknown man (Shivaraman).
Rajeev Gandhi was blown to pieces on 9.5.1991 at
Perampedur, along with 19/20 other persons, including
the cameraman who photographed Rajeev Gandhi. We
shall discuss the birth Chart of Sri Gandhi later on in detail.
2. According to Jataka Parijata, if Mars aspects the 8*
house, death through weapon is possible. Malefics in’ 8lh
house or malefic aspects on 8th house or 8th lord may cause
painful deaths. Sun in Lagna in Rasi or Navamsa of Mars
accompanied by Moon and Rahu may cause
dismemberment of body at Naval point. 8lh lord aspected
by Venus and Sun or Saturn combined with Rahu may get
a person beheaded. According to Parasar, Saturn in
proximity to Lagna devoid of benefice aspect may cause
dismemberment of body at Naval Pohit if Sun, Moon and
Rahu combine is also present in the birth chart.
3. According to Brihat Yavan Jataka, Saturn's aspect •
on 8th house cause danger from weapons or water aspect
of Mars on 8th house causes fear of death through weapons
or criminals with injury at nai 1 pohit. Rahu in 12lhmay
cause end of life through strife or through fall from height.
4. According to Parasar, Saturnian association in ^Qg

6,h/8"712"‘ houses or their lords may cause death through
flow of blood or trouble from weapon, poison or fire,
Martian association with 6lll/8'h/12"' house may cause
wounds through weapons or fire.
5. Mahadeva in his Jataka Tatwa has given to
combination for death or injury through explosion. If the
7th, 9th 1st or 2nd house be aspected by Mars and the Sun,
the native may have danger from explosion, wicked people
and the wounds. Similary if Gulika and Mars occupy the
Ist, 12,h 6th or 7th house and be aspected by the Sun, the
native may have danger from fire, explosion, wicked people
and wounds. Rahu or Ketu or 9th lord when associated
with 6th lord/6'11 house may also cause danger from fire.
Association of Mars and Saturn with evil houses cause
danger from fire, explosion, wounds and wicked people.
The Sun in V, 7th or 8th when aspected by Saturn or Mars
may cause danger from fire, wicked people and wounds.
Mars in Lagna if associated with or aspect by a malefic
may give risk from fire. If Saturn and Mars are associated
with the 8th house, death may be ca vised through blood
shed. If waning Moon, Sun, Mars and Saturn be in 8,h/
1 0th, Is', 4,h, or ^ house there may be smoke fire, blasts etc.
6. According to Jataka Parijata, if several planets
combine with Lagna lord and 8th lord, such persons die
along with many other. Rajeev Gandhi had this Yoga in
his Horoscope, Mars and Rahu were within 30° from the
Sun and the 8th lord Jupiter.
Clean 6/12 houses does not allow somebody to die through
explosion. In case of Akhbar, 8th house of the zodiac occupied
by Sun and squared by Rahu Ketu axis produced the tense
moment in his life. Morarji Deai did not die, though he was
involved in an air crash. He has also clean 6th /12'1' axis. Mars
in 8'1' produced near death experience to him.
Ex. US. President Jonhson is a Leo born native with Sun,
Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter in Lagna, Venus, Rahu in
Gemini, Ketu in Sagittarius and Saturn in Pisces. As 6 “/
12lh houses are clean Johnson did not face the same fate
like Rajeev Gandhi. Both of them have similar horoscopes.
Johnson's 8th house is occupied by Saturn and aspectojloy

th
by Mars. His 8 house is also squared by Rahu - Ketu
axis. Rajeev lost his life for the spotting of 6,h/12,h houses
by the deadly Rahu-Ketu axis. The student of astrology
should be very careful in forecasting accidental deaths.
Even severe afflictions of 8,h house does not provide a
guarantee of an accidental death provided one has clean
sixth/ twelfth houses.
Horoscppe of Lai Bahadur Sastri (See ExmpleNo.7)
If the 91 , 10th, and ll'h house from Janma Lagna are
occupied by planets, such a native may come up in life
from an ordinary background. He was born in a poor
family. Through Sheer dint to labour, honesty and sincerity,
a man with very short height acquired proximity to the
portals of power (he was a central Minter in Nehru
Government without portfolio). In Saturn - lupiter dasa
(Feb 1982 to Aug 1964), quite suddenly and unexpected
by he was chosen to be Prime minister, Govt, of India
following the sudden demise ofJawahar Lai Nehru. Both
Jupiter and Saturn were retrograde, instilling a further
element of uncertainty and suddenness. Dasa of a
retrograde planet, cannot bestow 100% good results.
Saturn is his 2nd/3rd lord, and an antiplanet of his Lagna,
is a highly malefic planet. He was bom with Parijata Yoga.
Lord of Lagna is in the trine house, whose dispositor, Mars
is placed in another trine house, whose dispositer Sun is
placed in his 10lh house, forming his unique Yoga. Jupiter,
Mars and Sun are planets which shaped his Parijata Yoga.
So we are not surprised to observe that a Golden Gate was
opened before him during Saturn - Jupiter dasa.
A person born in Parijata Yoga will have a kingly status,
will be happy in middle and later portion of life, respected
by king, fond of war, will have means of conveyances, will
be dutiful and of a compassionate disposition. Persons bom
in Parijata Yoga are bound to have a high status in life and
a prominent career. These persons have to struggle for a
longtime in early part of life. After hurdles and delays, such
native is bound to settle in middle part ofhis life.

Alexander the great, prophet Mahammad, Saint Kabir,
Aurangzeb, Shi vaji, Abraham Lincoln, George Washington,
Ram Krishna Paramhansa, Vivekanand, Einstein, Bento
Mussolini, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, Lata Mungeskar, Tej
Bahadur Sapru, General Manek Shaw, Margaret Thatcher,
Narayan Dutt Tiwari, Late Mrs. Bandernayakof Sri Lanka
and may other eminent personalities were born with this
rare yoga.
Lai Bahadur Shastri had Dharma Karmadhipati Yoga
in his lCfh house. 8th lord Moon also participated in this
Raja Yoga formation. This 8lh lord allowed to occupy the
chair of Prime Minister through suddenness and death,
because this Raja Yoga is conjoined with ruler of death.
He had also Bhadra Yoga but Sun spoiled this Yoga.
Whenever Sun occupies a Mahapurush Yoga - it brings
many ups and downs in life. Mercury is also his Badhaka
lord. It is debilitated in Navamsa. S*11 lord Moon is a combust
planet, which actually decreased his life span. 8lh lord
Moon bestowed power to Mercury to kill him silently in a
foreign land. Mercury - Mercury dasa killed him suddenly
in Russia (Tashkent) where he went for the negotiations
with Ayub Khan of Pakistan over the fate of lndo-Pakistan
war in 1965. Dasa of a debilitated planet in Navamsa
invariable cuts the apple cart.'
WHY HE DIED IN THE END OF 1966?
Dr. S. S. Chatterjee invented the death formula in 1990
and published his findings in his famous book, "Cosmic
Influences on Mind & IQ" in 1992
- O'* 3“ 56' by adding all these we get his death pohit 9s 0° 6'.
Death occurs when this death point is aspected by
Saturn in transit. Dasa should be of marakesh /badhaka
lord. On 21.12.1966, Saturn entered Pisces and started
aspecting his death point. All the political leaders and great
personalities of this earth should know his death point and
probable time of death through the magic eye of Vedic
Astrology.
So whenever a Raja Yoga is destroyed by a Yoga Vanga

planet (23,6,7,8,11,12 lords) one should be cautions about
a sad incident in life, If the dispositor of the Lagna lord is a
malefic and occupies quadrant/trine, the native faces
insurmountable resistances in life. His dispositor of Lagnesh
is Mars (a killer planet) is further afflicted by Rahu in 9th
house. Foreign countries are dented by 9lh house. One
suffers in a foreign land, when 9th house is afflicted. So we
are not surprised to observe his sudden demise in Russia.
Example-56. Horoscope of Rajeev Gandhi
Date of Birth : Aug 20,1944 at 7.11hrs. Mumbai
We have observed in the horoscope of Lai Bahadur Sastri,
that various benetic Yogas do have negative features, lying
latent in the horoscope. They bring out sad moments of
life suddenly. Fierey planets are posited in Lagna, and
further they are aspected by Saturn. Lord of Lagna when
conjoins with many natural benefics his name and fame
spreads throughout the globe. We find Lagna lord has
conjoined with all the four natural benefics. 1“, 2nd , 3'd,
5th, 8th, 10th and 12th lords are posited in his Lagna aspected
by 6'h lord (enemies, sudden attack etc.) Saturn. Union of
lsl/2"dlords give ap ower to earn quick bucks-, 5th / MX" teds
have generated a Class one Raja Yoga, 1" lord & 10* totfdte
have generated Dhana Yoga. All these Dahna Yogas ami
Raja Yogas have the contact of the 8'1’ lord, 12* lords
provide a formidable malefic combination. The adverse
houses, the sixth, 8* and 12,h also known as Trikasthans,
are supposed to spoil the houses that they get linked to. .
Here we find all them exerting negative influence in Lagna
(his body). Since his Raja Yogas have the contact of 8th lord,
he attained high position in life following the death of his
mother with suddenness.
When Raja Yogas are conjoined with 6 Ul, 8,h, 12L*’ lords,
mystery, enmity and intrigue this characterize the several
Raja Yogas and Dhana Yogas. In addition, the Raja Yogas
and Dhana Yogas when are hemmed between malefics
Rahu and Mars, do not find free expression.
Gaja Keshari Yogas in a Lagna is a great Yoga for name
and fame. Rahu in the 12* house of Moon fonns Mahashakti

Example No.56
Date 20/08/1944 Time 0711.00 Day Sunday Lat 18:58:00 Nortn Long 72:50:00 East
Zone 82:30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22 49 23
Balance of Dasa : Venus 14 Years 7 Months 10 Days
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
yoga and shapes a man for gigantic purposes. All the benefic
planets in Lagna has generated famous Mudrika Yoga, a man
bom even in a poor family becomes a well established man of
the society. Such is the influence of all natural benefics in
Lagna. 8th lord in Lagna was preparing a ground for him to
inherit in a big way. His mother died on 31.10.1984 all on a
sudden, opening a golden prosperity for him. A pilot became
the Prime Minister of India.
Wind falls are judged from the IT1’ house and its lord.
8"’ lord granted his blessing in this regard. 11 "'lord Mercury
in association with 8"' lord, 12* lord (lord of Losses) Mooi^ ^

aspected by Saturn. When one gets suddenly under these
circumstances, should be prepared to lose it only after a
few years. November 1984 to May 1991 was the period of
good luck tor him.
Inauspicious planets should be posited in inauspicious
houses. In such a case malevolence power of planets reduce
drastically. He had to pay the heavy price for the affliction
of 8'V12,h lords by 6* lord Saturn. 8' lord in Lagna aspected
by malefics produce wound in some parts of the body.
According to jataka Parijata if several planets combine in
Lagna lord and 8'1' lord, such a person dies along with may
others. Actually head is controlled by the lsl house. On
21.05.1991 at 10=15 PM" he was beheaded by a highly
explosive bomb, hidden inside a garland. A Srilakan lady
garlanded him at Perumpedur in Tamilnadu containing
the bomb - and an undisclosed man (Shivaraman)
triggered off the bomb through a ‘remote control
procedure. At least 15 - 20 persons were tom to pieces
including the cameraman who took all the pictures before
the massive explosion. There was a Shockwave
throughout the world within 15 minutes.
Afflicted 12th lord also curtails longevity. He died during
Rahu - Mercury dasa. Mercury is the 2nd/ 11th lord, a highly
malefic and a killer planet. Everybody experiences some
fear complex during Rahu - Mercury or Mercury - Rahu
dasa. Any marriage which takes place during these dasas
will generate disharmony immediately. Rajeev Gandhi died
as a result of a consequence of intrigue, enmity and
conspiracy.
In a classic paper Late R. Santhanam has writer the
malevolence power of the 1 1 * house, IT1' lord (TOA, Aug.
96 P 2), planets posited in the 1 11*1 house. According to him
in case of four movable-ascendants (Aries, Cancer, Libra,
Capricorn) 1 1th the Badhaka House. So the dasa of the 1 1 *
lord, his companion and the occupant of the 1 1 * house for
these four ascendants will inflict intense harm and far less
good, rather very insignificant good like a perpetually
starving man being well fed just on a festive occasion.

11th lord Mercury in presence of 8th lord Jupiter, 12th
lord Moon, 3rd/10lh lord Venus aspected by 6th/ 7th lord.
Saturn forced Mercury to behave as a killer planet. Any
afflicted planet will produce intense sufferings for the
native in its dasa - this is as per Sage Parasar. According
to Phaladeepika by Mantreswara.
cfc-rifeicbH ftreFlj ^ wrmvT :
PF^TlfSrq: VgcCT^fl,
^cpcrr fctfcienfcr
vxTTcTq; TWcTTTTTTT 77 fcfgcRfTPi: | |
meaning that, if the quadrants (l51, 4th, 7th, the 10th) are
free fiom malefics and if the 8th also free from malefic and
if the lord of lagna and Jupiter are together or associated
in quadrants, the native lives long, free from disease,
doing good acts, earning merit. Likewise, another sloka
says if the lord of lagna is very strong, free from malefic
association or aspect and enjoying the benign aspect of a
powerful benefic, posited in a Kendra, the active lives long,
averting all blemishes of premature death, with
permanent prosperity.
When Sun is aspected by Saturn, one falls from power.
His 4,h house is aspected by Rahu, 4* lord is afflicted by
6lh/8th/12lh lords, 4th house is squared by Rahu - Ketu
axis. Mars is posited in the 4* house from 711' lord Saturn.
8th lord is afflicted by Saturn; Saturn, Mars and Rahu
are concentrating evil forces on the 8lh house. All these
evil planetary configurations killed him when he was
very young.
Longevity and luck are the two vital and all important
requirements for a satisfactory life's journey. Longevity
depends on Lagna, lord of Lagna, the 8* house and 8m
lord, the 10* hose and lOh lord and Saturn, Ayush Kanaka.
Lord of 8th should not be stronger then the Lord of Lagna.
Lord of 8th is best in the 3rd, according to Pulippani-Muni.
He confers long life (above 60) and power to conquer
enemies. Malefics should not be in 8* or the 10* or Lagna.
If the lord of 8* is strong in a Kendra, where the lord of

lagna is devoid of strength, the native has short life. Lords
of Is' and 8* together give longevity with lot of difficulty.
Even more than longevity, luck is important. For, mere
longevity by itself is a doubtful blessing. Old age is a
handicap. Old age weakens the body and limbs, it effects
one's power of sight, hearing, memory and one's earning
capacity. The 9* house and its lord are for more important
than Lagna. A natural benefic or the 9* lord in 9* or in a
quadrant or in the 11* indicates good fortune. Destiny is
controlled by the 9* lord and 9* house.
In Rajeev Gandhi's horoscope, 9* lord has travelled 6* house
from his natal position. 9* house is however aspected by the
Yoga Karaka Mars. Any planet when moves to 3,d/6th/8lh/or
12* from its natal position becomes weak. Mars, Rahu, Ketu in
the angle of 6* lord promotes litigations in life. Actually we
find his Yogakaraka Mars in placed in an angle (4* house)
from the 6* lord Saturn. This weak 9* lord sealed his destiny
forever on the fateful day in South India (look, Mars indicates
Southern Side). At 8=15 PM. he was alive at Allahabad, at
10=25 PM he was reduced to pieces by bomb blasts (Mars =
fire, bombs) in South India. So the weak Yogakaraka Mars
played the dirty trick, brought him to South India and killed
him through a conspiracy (it is in the angle of 6lh lord, the lord
of conspiracy). When 9"' lord is ill placed everything evaporates
in air.
Square position of Mars and Saturn passed on Maraka
potentialities to Mars also. We should be grateful to our
ancient seers who invented so many golden rules for reading
one's destiny pattern from the map of heavens at the time
of birth. Rajeev Gandhi will ever be remembered for the
advanced technological revolution in India. When a tme
genius appears in the world, you may know him by this
sign, that the dunces are all in confederacy against him.
By SWIFT, Thoughts on various subjects.
Was he destined to die on 21.5.1991?
The answer is yes. By adding longitudes of Lagna - 4s
3° 50', We get the death point at 6s 17° 10'. Saturn was in

transit at 9s 13° 4', aspecting death point, favouring his
death as per the formula developed by Dr. S.S. Chatterjee.
There is a golden rule in astrology, whatever one earns
during Rahu dasa, it will evaporate in air at the fag end of
Rahu's dasa. This aphorism is 90% true to the Knowledge
of the author.
For the Muslim Youths and perverted youths of the
world 1 shall quote one paragraph from Earnest
Hemingway, Notes on the next war :"They wrote in the
old days that it is sweet and fighting to die for one's country.
But in modem war there is nothing sweet nor fitting in
your dying. You will die like a dog for no good reason.
Example - 57. Severe bum injury in infancy of a
young girl. DOB 16.08.1987/1 1=30 AM/Delhi
It was holy Deepawali day. She wore a Sari along with
her sister at 9=30 AM and was about to set out for a temple
with the mother. An airborne rocket fail on her body and
busted into' flames. In India it is a social custom for bursting
crackers on this holy festival. She was badly mauled at the •
hands of destiny. Her face and hands and all the 10 fingers
of the hand were burnt, with permanent damage on the
fingers. She recovered after 6 months, and could manage ■
to continue her studies with burnt face and twisted fingers.
In 2005, she passed XII CBSE Board will flying colours.
She was passing Moon - Mercury dasa on the fateful day.
Saturn and Mars are exchanging aspects and 8* house is
aspected by Saturn carrying the influence of Mars with it
and Ketu. 6* house is occupied by Rahu aspected by Mars.
Ketu occupies her 12* house. When 6,h/8,h/ 12th of any
bhara or the planets are in affliction, the bhara or the?
planets suffers annihilation. Aspect of 61*1 lord on Lagna
added fuel to the fire. Her Lagna is also under Papakantari
Yoga. Lagna controls appearance, stature, personality,
childhood, beginning of life, physical body, self, vitality and
vigour. Whenever lord aspects Lagna - the native suffers
at every stage of life.
Lord of Lagna Venus is a combust planet. It is also her
8* lord. Dispositor, of Venus has joined the planet of injug^^

Example No.57
Date 16/08.1987 Time 1 1 30:00 Day Sunday Lat 28:39:00 North Long 77 13:00 East
Zone 82 30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:25.23
Balance of Dasa : Sun 5 Years 3 Months 14 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chaiit-Cuspal
6th lord in Arires. Combust Lagnesh gives weakconstituion.
Dispositor of Lagnesh is of great importance. Strong
dispositor raises level of a weak Lagna and weak dispositor
weakens a strong Lagnesh.
In a Gaja Kesha ri. Yoga Moon generates worst results
when the native is less than 21 yrs old. Emperor Aurangzeb
enjoyed Moon Mahadasa in infancy. He become emperor
when Jupiter Mahadasa commenced in his life at the age
of 40. Here Moon is again in the star of 11* lord Sun (a
fiery planet), a highly malefic planet. Moon - Rahu are in
6/8 relationships. Therefore Moon - Rahu dasa brought

the greatest trangedies, for the affliction of 6th /8th /12th
house, and for Papakartari Yoga around her Lagna, and
for the aspect of 6th lord in Lagna. Aspect of b'” lord in
Lagna is a grisly combination and is to be feared.
According to Brihat Yavana Jataka, Saturn's aspect on
8th house causes danger from weapons or water. Here the
airborne fire rocket acted as a weapon for destroying her.
One becomes unlucky where there are malefics in the
12* and the Lagnesh very weak. Her Lagnesh is a combust
planet and 12th house is occupied by Ketu. For the freedom
from disgrace and scandals one's 8’1' /12th houses should be
vacant. Her 8th/12,h houses are heavily afflicted.
On the fateful day (25.10.1995), Moon, Sun Venus and
Rahu were passing her Lagna, Libra. Jupiter and Mars was
in Scorpio, Saturn was in Aquarius, Ketu was in Aries,
Mercury was in Virgo, Saturn and Mars exchanged places.
Here we find 6* house was hemmed between malefics and
6* lord Jupiter and Mars were throwing joined aspects on
her 8th house. This Jupiter + Mars set her on fire. Because
9'h lord was in its own house - she did not lose her life.
Example - 58 : Sanjay Gandhi.
Malefics in 6,l'/8lh/12lh will grant short life. If 8*
house, 8* lord are afflicted, malefics occupy 1 2th house -
one dies early. His 6th house is hemmed between malefics,
8* house is squared by Rahu-Ketu axis, Mars is posited
in a dual sign in his 12* house. 8"' house is hemmed
between malefics, 8th lord Sun and 9* lord Mercury are
seriously afflicted by incendiary planet Ketu 5*/9ti'/
houses are afflicted.
Generally, afflictions to 3rd and 9,h houses/ or their lords
in the birth charts (especially by the 8th lord) are symptoms
of travel disaster by air. The Langana lord in connection
with 3rd lord/3rdhouse in birth chart keeps life intact inspite
of serious injuries in the disaster (Astrological Magazine
1990, Feb. 19'1’). His 3rd house was afflicted by Mars and
Ketu, 9,h house was afflicted by Saturn, Ketu. Mars throwsj^y

Example No. 58
Date 14/12/1946 Time 09:27:00 Oay Saturday Lat 28:39 00 North Long 77:13 00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:51:20
Balance of Dasa : Ketu 0 Years 3 Months 20 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
the influence of Mars (fire).. So his air crash on 23.06.1980
is in agreement with astrological principles.
He died during Moon-Mercury-Satum dasa. The dasa
lord Moon is placed in the 8*, sub-lord Mercury is afflicted
by 8* lord Sun and Ketu, Saturn is aspected by Mars. Saturn
devoid of benefic influence triggered off the tragedy.
Death Point = :Long of Moon + Long of Sun +. Long of
Jupiter + ASc = 4s 6° and Saturn was in 4s 27° on 26.6.80
influencing his death pohit. So Sri Gandhi died in agreement
with Famous Formula invented by Dr. S.S. Chatterjee. 318

His dispositor of Lord of Lagna is placed in the 8th house
(death house) and is squared by Rahu-Ketu axis. The very
negative pohit cut-short his mundane journey inspite of
the fact that he has two natural benefics in a Kendra (10*
house). Heavily afflicted 8* lord, 8th house under Papa
Kartari Yoga added fuel to the fire. 6* house bemmed
between malefics." Mars in 12*, destroyed the beauty of
the horoscope for a long life.
Example - 59 : J . F. Kennedy, President-ofUSA
The karmic control planets Jupiter and Mercury are
Example No. 59
Date 29/05/1917 Tima 14.51:00 -Day Tuesday Lat 43:22:00 North Long - 71:08:00 West
Zone • 71 :08:00 West Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22.26:35
Balance of Dasa : Venus 3 Years 2 Months 0 Days
Planets
Nirayana Bhava
Lagna . Nirayana Bhava Chatit-Cuspal

conjoining in the 8 111 house, the house of legacy. His father
groomed him from his early childhood to become the
President of USA, which he did in fulfilling the cherished
ambitions ofhis illustrious father. He became the President
at the age of 44 (1961)
Most charismatic and young President of USA in last two
hundred years died through a conspiracy. Leo Harvey
Oswald killed him using firm arm in 1963. When lord of
Ascendant and 8th house combine the native dies of road
accidents. At the time ofhis death he was on the road in an
open car. Lord of Lagna, 8th lord, 3ralord, 4th lord, 76 lords
have conjoined together in the 8* house in the Nirayan
Bhava. Conjunction of4*/8* lords indicates road accidents.
The fourth house rules vehicles and 8th house longevity.
If these two houses are related then road accident happen
while undertaking a journey during the period related to
these houses (AM, 1990,423). If airy fiery, watery and
earthy signs are involved, the accident may be due to air
crash, fire, water or on he ground respectively. Since these
planets are in a fiery sign he was killed through fire arms.
We are astonished to see the accuracy of our seers in
farming subtle astrological rules.
6* lord and Mars are the planets of injury. According to
learned teachers of Indian Institute of Astrology, Calcatta
Scorpion and Gemini Ascendant people (in both the cases
6* lord is Mars) and persons having Mars as the anti planet
of the ascendant lord are susceptible to road accidents.
Accident occur generally during the major or sub-spouts
of planets related to 6,h/8lh/12th houses in a horoscope, in
which 8* house (house of accident and death) plays
dominant role. Rahu and Ketu, Saturn these two
detrimented planets added fuel to the fire. When three or
more planets are detrimented, one dies through accidental
death, (moves 180° away from its 'natal position) Three
Detrimented planets in the birth chart of Seikh Muzibur
Rehaman destroyed him along with his family members.
Smt. Indira Gandhi had four deterimented planets (Saturn
Mars, Rahu and Ketu). o*

PART - 2,
MYSTERIOUS THIRD HOUSE
Chapter -I
Introduction
3111 house is the eighth from eight house, and hence very
mysterious in nature. Our longevity is controlled from the
3rd, 8* and 10* houses. 10* is actually 8* from 3rd, Benefics
in Kendras grant a long innings of life. 8* house of 2nd is
9*, until or unless 9th house its lord, the karaka planets of
9'h house (Bhagasthan) Sun and Jupiter are strong,
everything evaporates in air. A natural benefic in the 9th
bhava in its own sign will definitely boost the prospects of
the native when the 9th house is occupied by a benefic happy
events in life should be foretold.
Marriage is the most vital issue for anybody because
offspring come out as a bye-product from the wedlock.
Children are like flowers - the nature's gift. They look
shining as they are free from pollutions. Pollution of mind
make so many permutations and combination of human
criminal tendencies hidden inside the man. If the 3rdhouse
and Mars are afflicted one is sure to entertain destructive
thinking.
A unique nature of the 3rd bhava alone is that from the
3rd bhava one can delineate the whole chart. 3rd house is

the Kama Kona. It indicates the sexual behaviour of the
person. Whether the person has any abnormal or prevented
sex inclinations or has normal sex urges, are reflected from
this house. Therefore 3rd house governs the key to a
successful marriage. This house acts as a remote control of
marriage.
3rd lord in the 8* house with the Venus denotes sexual
disease, sexual/perversion of sexual non performance,
impotency and person will not have normal sexual
behaviour. This happen when the 3rd lord in the 8"' house
is associated with different planets. If the sexual perversion
is due to Venus then the person may like to be flocked. All
these happen when the 3rd lord is in the eighth house.
The 3d house should not have any connection to a planet
that is debilitated, eclipsed or lost in a planetary war fir it
will then show a Purva Janma Dosha One with
Purvapunyabala will be born lucky and will have extra
ordinary good success in life. This is achieved when the 3rd
house in the fifth house. The third house is the eleventh
house from the 5'h house. Therefore the association of the
two (3d & 5* lords) indicates extra ordinary good success
and will gin happhiess from progeny.
3rd house is actually overlooked by the savants of
astrology, because it is a hidden house. 3r , (s’, 8tl’/12lhhouse
are baneful houses and sages have not praised these houses.
Success revolves around trines; quadrants. Because 3rd
house (lower mind) stands opposite to 9* house, a well
fortified 3rd house helps the native to enjoy the life
immensely. We shall discuss the various fields which are
governed by this 3rJ house. Marriage, children, happhiess
in life, vastudosha, criminal mind, interest in perusing
higher education, short journeys etc. all are buried in this
mysterious 3rd house.
The first house has a very decided influence over the
physical body as a whole govern! general temperament.
Its bases are 5th (house of Purvapunya and intelligence)
and ninth house (house of super intelligence and luck

factor), these being offshoots of the Is' house. The 2nd house
has considerable sway over the emotional and desire
nature, wealth eagerness to learn, smoothness in career,
relationships with kith and kins. Speech is controlled by
this 2nd house, 3rd house controls our mind (alert mind, lazy
mind, miserliness, criminal mind, timid mind, rough
behaviour, instant thinking about a sudden critical
situation, power to do laborious work, desire to provide
hard labour, communication skills etc.) For generating
wealth we will have to put labour, Instruments of labour
are our arms and ears-which are also governed from this
3rd house. It rules all affairs that seriously affects the mind,
the mental tendencies. However, honesty and dishonesty
of heart is judged from the 4* house. An afflicted Mars
cause the fall and strong Venus recovers from falling.
If Mars, Saturn or Rahu is posited in the 4* house and
when this house and it lord are afflicted by other malefics,
the native has a deceitful mind. Benefic influence on the
3rd house will decease the evil effect. Afflicted Mars denotes
rashness, loss of temper, quarrelsome nature, extremists
activity, unconventional sex way, liar and thievish nature.
Ladies who have afflicted Mars- are always denied a
blissful married life. When Mars and Mercury (3rd lord of
the zodia)are influenced by Rahu, Mars, Saturn and Ketu
criminal tendencies crop up in mind.
Sage Parasar says that lords 3,7,11 are strong malefics
while the lords of 2,6,8 and 12 are simple malefics. The
former excel the latter indulging a subject to do wrong
especially when they are natural malefics having afflictions
from their counter parts. The malefactors also vary with
each ascendant.
Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesh Concept of Houses
There are twelve rasis in the zodiac. The Is* house is the
generator of a particular trait, the trait of 2nd house is the
protector and third house's trait is its destruction. Thus
the lsl house acts as "Brahma", the creator, the 2nd house
as the developer, the "Vishu". 3rd house acts "Mahesha"-
the destroyer. Heavily afflicted 3rd house of criminals arj23

always afflicted by malefics. Take the 4* house "(Brahma)"
which stands for pleasure and comforts. Pleasure reach
their peak in the 5th house, which relates the highest
pleasure of cinema, the lady love etc. thus pleasure bom in
the 4th house get to its maximum in the 5‘h house (Vishnu)
and is destroyed in the 6* house (Mahesh)- the house of
enemies, and hurdles where you can expect least pleasure.
The sexual urge is bom in the 7,h house, which reaches its
peak in the 8'1' and is destroyed in the 9* house the house
of morality and spirituality where the sexual urge is the
least in evidence. Heavily afflicted 9th house will generate
immorality. The native will lack foresight.
Raja Yoga is destroyed by functional malifics (2"d/3rd/
6*/7*/8*/ll*/12* |orcjs Sapta Samyukti). Best place for
evil planets is the 3ri house. For a glorious career the
Badhaka lord should be placed in trines or in 3rd/6/8/12
house or in its own house. Badhakalord crates obstacles in
career.
Malefics in 8lh/12'h forces the native to lead a disgraceful
life. For avoidance of injury, infamy and scandals, 8* and
12'1' house should be vacant. 3rf house is highly a mysterious
house because both growth and decay are controlled from
this house. This house acts an a remote control of marriage.
For a happy married life, 3rdhouse should not be afflicted.
For a long life, 3rd lord should be weak. Malefics in 3rd/8,h/
12 ’ house provide stiff resistance in earning money.
Since 3rd house is a hidden house. Sages did not pay
much attention to this house. Lord of 3rd in a trika house,
or aspected by or conjoined with malefic, a very
inauspicious yoga named Meerati Yoga is formed. Such a
person is vanquished by enemies, no brothers, devoid of
strength and courage, excited temperament, and has
improper action.
As per sage Parasar, 3,6,10 and 11 houses are known as
Upachhaya house (house of growth). If all the benefic
planets are located in them, the native becomes a very
wealthy person. If 3,6,11 houses are aspected by malefic
planets-the native lives very long. So we understand thaij,-,,'*

the both malefics and benefics are god in upachayasthanas
- malefics for longevity and benefics for wealth and
prosperity.
3rd house stands opposite to 9* house (Bhagyasthan), the
house of super intelligence faculty, 3rd house controls lower
mind. Malefics flourish the lower mind, but benefics increase
the super intelligence faculty. It is well known the bhavas
get boost when they are aspectd or occupied by natural
benefics (waxing Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus). So
theoretically benefics is 3 rd house should make one very
intelligent. Butmalefics also have something to say in this
house, which will be discussed also in great detail.
Details of the Third House
A bhava lord produces good results when it occupies
trine/quadrant or the 21'1' or 11th from the bhava itself. All
the planets bring much money for the native when they
are placed in the 2nd house from their natal positions. A
horoscope becomes very strong when 2/3 planets occupy
the 2nd house from their own house.
Example 1 - Horoscope of Margaret Thatcher (the
former British Prime Minister). DOB 13.10.1925, 9.00 A.M.
Grantham, UK
We find four planets, Moon, Sun, Mercury and Venus
are placed in the 2nd house from their own houses. She has
an adorable family life, a loving husband, a powerful
professional position, a fine sense of diplomacy, adept in
refinements of culture and above all God's grace.
A malefic 3rd lord in 2"d is worst, which produces
bankruptcy when further afflicted.
This house indicates gain from learning and progeny (11th
fiorn 5th), gain from wife (921 from 7*) and father-in-law.
Food, drinks, friends, music(entertainment) are most
essential ingredients of human lives which are governed
from this 3rj house. 3rd house is actually 2nd of 2nd, hence
whether one will be able to retain the earned money is
judged from this vital house. Money needed for food, drink
and entertainment.
3rd house controls bravery, mental inclination and ability, __

Example No.1
Dale 13/10/1925 Time 09:00.00 Day Tuesday Lat 52:55:00 North Long - 12:07 00 West
Zone - 12:07:00 West Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:33:36
Balance of Dasa : Kelu 3 Years 7 Months 7 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
eagerness to team new things, short journeys, friends, food
fame, hobbies or subsidiary occupations, ear and arms,
younger co-bom, neighbours, communication, friends,
music, lower mind. (9* house stands for post graduate,
and higher studies), happiness from the house. 3r“ house is
the 12* from 4*. So an afflicted 3rd house does not provide
the native a comfortable house for living. Writers and
writing caliber, artistic talent (3rd lord in angles and trines
provide some artistic talent and much writing caliber),
publishing, confusion of mind, short travels etc are also
judged from this house. 3rd and 11th house are the arms,

and ears. So the 3rl house is also judged for friends. Friends
are like aims of the native. Afflictions of 3rtiand 11 * houses
create deficiencies of the auditory organs. Reasons of
deafness are studied from this house.
3rd house represents the thirst for life that is the other
aspects of prowess and courage. The 2nd house provides
the basic impulse of death and so does the 8th house. A
fortified and strong 3rd house imparting powerful current
of thirst for life will very much reduce the impulse of ill
health and death. So any weakness of the 3rd house couples
with weakness of the ascendant and the 8"' house and their
lords does not augur well for the longevity of the native.
The following horoscope may be used to illustrate this pohit.
Actually weak 3ra lord promotes longevity. But weak third
house is not welcome.
Example 2 : death in the middle ages.
He was the eldest son of an advocate of Noida. From
1999 onwards his business caused deep anxiety in mind.
He is survived by two sons, wife, aged parents and even
the grand parents. His mother met me for knowing the
exact reason of his death on 28-12-2003 at 8.00 AM.,
though she did not tell me that her son had already expired,
she was satisfied with my prophesies regarding his future
and longevity.
The dictum in respect of natural benefics in apoklimo
heenabalasyat, meaning that in places like the 3rd,6th, 12*
and in 9 , they are very weak. Indeed Venus is bad and
weak in the 3rd and the 6U| unless he is ahead of the Sun
and in own house. Natural benefics in 3rd are very weak.
Jupiter in 3rd is bad for wealth, bad for commanding respect
etc though a younger brother may, in some cases, be
prosperous or famous. But this rule should not be applied
mutatis mutandis to Jupiter, say, for Capricorn Ascendant,
in the 3rd in own house in Pisces, for the lord of 3rd and 12th
may be in the 3rd.
For Leo Ascendant, the late S. Srinviasa Iyengar had the
Sun and Mars in Lagna, Mercury in the 2nd in Virgo and

Example No.2
Date 13/1 1/1957 Tima 18:33.00 Day Wednesday Lat 28:39 00 North Long 77:13:00 East
Zone 82:30 00 East SrtSanatan Ayanamsa 23 00 28
Balance of Dasa : Saturn 9 Years 4 Months 1 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
renowned as an Advocate General and then as a President
of the Indian National Congress. For Capricorn Ascendant,
Venus in the 3 rd in Pisces and if with Saturn or Mercury,
and unsullied, is found to give the great prosperity. Venus
in the 3 in Gemini with Mercury in the 3 rd in Gemini in
his own house, Gemini, for Aries Ascendant is passable
though not very good. Expect in such cases, Venus in the
3 rd is very weak and bad indeed; Venus in the 6,h is even
worse as in such a position he said to cause grief, disease
and fear; shokarogabhayapradha.

Two or three malefics in 10th, 2nd 4th, 5,h, 7th or 9* will
spoil brothers (2'"' is the 12* from 3rd, 4* is.2'’dfrom 3rd, 5th
is 3rd to 3rd, 10th is 8th from 2nd, 9th is 7th from 3rd, 7th is trine
from both 3rd/ lVh), see example 3.
3rd / 6th house will act as Upachayasthan, provided they
are not aspected by evil planets or by an enemy planet of
the lord of that house.
Venus or Jupiter in 6th produces both Lagnadhi (a Yoga
for scholarly achievements) and Vasumathi Yoga (yoga for
financial success). However benefics in 3rJ house are weak
planets.
From the above discussion it is clear Moon in the 3rd
house of Janma Lagna and Jupiter in the 3rd house are weak
planets.
Yogas for medium longevity
th
1 . When Lagnapati and 8 lord are posited together
one may live upto 48 yrs.
2. Saturn and Jupiter in any sign assures medium life
since all the four spiritual houses are in control (Capricorn,
Sagittarius, Aquarius and Pisces.)
3. Benefic in 2"d/3,d/U’h indicate a medium life.
4. Benefic in angles and trines, Saturn powerful and
malefics in 6,h/or8"' medium life.
in
5. Ascendant lord and lord of 8 are in quadrants.
6. If Atmakaraka planet is in 3r , it denotes medium
longevity,
We find the aphorism 3,4, & 5 are stunningly true in his
life. He lived only for 47 yrs because Lord of Lagna and 8*
lord are in mutual quadrants, weak 3r house, weak 8
lord Jupiter, afflicted 6* house reduced his life as per
astrological dictums framed by seers of yore. Malefics in
3rd/llth houses do increase the longevity factors.
The native of the horoscope died in Venus Jupiter Dasa.
Mutual Kendra position of planets always produce malefic
results for the native.
Let us study the one important horoscope for knowing
the reason of unhappiness in married life, and for knowing
the reasons of loss of brother for the afflicted 3rd house.

Example No. 3
Date 02/04/1957 Time 02:15:00 Day Tuesday Lat 26:30 00 North Long 88:50:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:59:57
Balance of Dasa : Ketu 3 Years 11 Monihs 29 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
Example 3 : Why there is no happhiess from wife? DOB
: 2.4.1957, 2=15 AM, Jalpaiguri
This is the horoscope of an DT chemical Engineer (New
Delhi) who is currently working in a high post in a Govt,
undertaking firm in Delhi.
In Feb 1980 (Venus- Ketu dasa) he lost his father. He got
married in Dec. 1985, but his wife left his house in Feb
1988. the couple separated legally in March 2003 through
court. They have no issue.
Khalisthan Terrorists sprayed bullets on public in
Durgapooja Pandal in CR. park, New Delhi Unfortunately

his younger brother died in Oct. 1997 in this tragic incident
while he was passing Mars-Rahu dasa, Mars-Rahu or
Rahu-Marsdasa is always bad for any native.
He has three malefic planets in 3rd,5l1’ and 10th house. 3rd
lord Jupiter is placed in 8th lord's star (loss of brother),
where 8* lord is placed in 3rl house. For Capricorn Lagna,
Jupiter is never is benefic planet. Aspect of 12,h lord on 8th
lord Sun, 10* lord Venus (here Venus is a combust planet)
in the 3rd house spoiled his brother, Uranus in the 3rJ house
of Mars added fuel to the fire. Combust planets are never
welcome in 3rd/6th/8lh/12th houses. Misfortune engulfs the
native.
His 8* house (marital bond) is vitiated by the direct aspect
of Mars and Saturn. Combust Venus with 8* lord Sun in
the 3rd house added fuel to the fire. The 7* lord Moon has
conjoined with 6* lord Mercury and is hemmed between
malefics.
If 6th/8th/ 12th lords make any relationship with lsl/9lh/
10,h lords - one faces terrible resistances in life. His 10*
lord is conjoined with 8* lord and is further aspected by
12* lord Jupiter.
When Lord of Lagna is the enemy camp (here his
Lagnesh Saturn is placed in the house of Mars) and is
aspected by Mars. So the private life of the native ruined
completely.
If the 6* lord is placed between two malefic planets, the
subject will have trouble from his foes. His 6* lord is
hemmed between Sun and Mars.
Until or unless one has a benefic ll'1' house and strong
Venus end marriage is never blissful. His all attempts to
get married again has generated futile results upto
December 2005.
He is now living with his aged mother conjunction of
Mercury, Moon, presence of mars in the 5* house forming
Mahayoga with Saturn (4* lord Mars is exchanging aspect
with Lagnesh Saturn forming this rare yoga), Sun is
hemmed between benefic longitudinally. These auspicious
Yogas made him an intellectual genius.

9* lord in 4* is a Raja Yoga. Such a native inherits
property from his father. Indeed he has inherited a good
house in Delhi from his father. Jupiter in the 9'h house, 9th
lord in an angle bring various types of fortunes
(materialistic life)
Venus in the 6lh house in combustion or in an inimical
sign will produce a scholar of repute (Fortune and Finance
by Dr. S. S. Chatterjee P. 37).

Chapter - II
Raja Yoga and Dhana Yoga
Indian astrology is based on Raja Yogas and Various other
Yogas found in a birth chart or map of heavens at the time
of birth. Until or unless trinelords make any relationship
with a Kendralord financial stability can never be achieved.
Dharmakarmadhipati Yoga, formed by the union of 9* and
10"' lords produce eminent statesman and ever victorious
people. According to seers, Kendra sthanas are Vishnu
sthanas and Trikonas are Laxmi sthanas. Without the grace
of God, a native cannot harness best results in his mundane
journey to this beautiful planet earth. Therefore in a handful
of horoscopes Kendra and Trikona lords participate in a
Raja Yoga formation. According to sage Parasar (father of
ancient Indian Astrology) if Moon or the Lagna is devoid
of any benefic aspect or the Sun be in the maximum
depression (10° of Libra) the results of Raja yogas will be
mitigated, same will be result when 10th lord is placed in
the 3rd house. According to Sri M.N. Kedar, an astroscholar
in modern India, the Kendras are like the inside of the fort
being guarded by the malefic houses, 3ld, 6 , 8* and 12"'
(all malefic houses) are the check posts of the fort situated
on the boundaries. In between these are situated the 2nd
house (house of wealth), the 5* house (house of
Purvyapunya), the 9th house (house oflady luck).
The quadrants are the only houses around which the
whole life of thenative revolves. Success, comforts, name
and fame of life depend upon the position of the
quadrants. The natural benefices in these houses give
gentle and kind nature; make the native literate and

liberal. A benefic, particularly, Jupiter in a Kendra
destroys thousands of Dashas (blemishes). The Trikonas
(1, 5, 9) and Upachaya houses (3, 6, 10 & 11) enhance
the good results of the Kendras.
An afflicted 3rd house forces a man to change his place
of residence often. A strong 3rd house or well-fortified 3rd
house gives creation though knowledge, one may become
a writer if a strong Jupiter occupies the 3rd house.
The 3rd house indicates the mental ability and desire for
creation. This house rules over the mental balance, direction
on desires, new thoughts and inclination towards study, and
the subject of choice. Thus the 4* house and Moon indicate
the regular study, pre or post graduation certificates and
qualifications of the native offered by universities.
3rd house shows specialization, creation and inclination
of any branch ofknowledge. The 9th house indicates higher
education (M. Phil., Ph.D., postdoctoral research etc.) taste,
interest and chances of further study or to visit abroad for
specialization, etc.
2nd house is actually 10th from 5lh and 5lh from 10*. Karaka
of 2ndhouse is Jupiter. This house indicates the source of income
or earning and the nature of job. Strong 2A house and strong
Jupiter assure a good means of livelihood. One will not acquire
professional education or qualification, if Jupiter and 2nd house
are under the influence of malefics in any manner.
Thus the 4*, 3rd, 2"d, 5* and 9th houses indicate all aspect of
education, knowledge, intelligence, aptitude, qualification,
professional studies, constructive or destructive thinking,
memory, specialization etc. If Moon and Venus is in the 3rd
house and is aspected by benefices and associated with
benefices, the native takes food in valuable utensils (vide
Sarvartha Chintamani). In modern days without proper
qualifications and degrees one cannot take food in valuable
utensils the actual meaning stands thus the without benefic
influence of third house it is very difficult to become a rich
man (3ld house is second to second house).
If the 3rd house or its lord has any connection with houses

2, 6 or lO'^one can start agency or do commission business.
He can be a broker, representative, mediator, messenger,
publicity officer etc.
Since the 3ri house signifies books and publications
(magazine) one can become an editor, newspaper reporter,
news correspondent, journalist etc.
If in a lady's chart, the lord of 3rd happening to be a
natural benefic is posited in the 2nd house, the native may
put onjewels on ear, hand and neck ailed by the 3rd house.
If Rahu Mars or Ketu Mars join 3rd house, there may be
ear disease. The parts ofthebody ruled by the 3rd house are
ears (especially right ear), hands, throat, shoulder blade,
collarbone, arms and the nervous system.
Lord of 11* in 3rd causes cardiac disorders. 3 111 lord if
falls in a decante of Mars, native incurs danger in his legs/
arms. 3rd lord's aspect or 2nd, one acquires status with selfefforts. Generosity yoga is formed if the 2"d and 3rd lords
are in companionship.
3rd lord of the zodiac, Mercury is the significator of
friends. If Mercury is well placed in the horoscope - the
native gets many good friends. Benefic influenceof benefices
on the 6th house also provides many friends and he can
win over his enemies very easily. lfJupiter and 4,h house is
also strong, the native is surrounded by many friends.
Foods, friends and drinks are very essential in one's life for
amusement purposes. Contact of benefic planets on the
11* and 3ri house also provides many friends (a person is
a friend who offers help at the time of distress).
Many malefics on 2nd, 4th, 6"', 7th, 8th and 12th will
increase the number of enemies in life. Strong 6* lord,
promotes litigations in life (Astrology applied by Dr. S.S.
Chatterjee, P 193).
Significator of happhiess is Jupiter, Moon and Mercury
controls our minds, so where these three planets are strong
- one lives happily with many friends. When Rahu, Ketu,
Saturn are placed in the angle of 6th lord, and 2/3 malefics
occupy 2nd/4tl'/6lh/7,h/8th/12lh - the life of native become^gg

a cupful of sorrows on account of enmity.
Id* lord in 3ri nullifies effects of Raja Yoga present in a
chart, except when exalted, in own sign or aspected by
henefics (Practical Vedic Astrology by G.S. Aggarwal P-121)
According to Sukracharya, a famous Bengal Astrologer (died
in 2004), if 3rJ and 10* lords are conjoined together and
weak - such a person becomes an ordinary person or even
a beggar. If 3rJ lord is placed in 2nd and afflicted, one suffers
from bankruptcy. One with strong 3rd lord in 10* will get
quick promotions even superseding seniors.
Therefore a great care should be taken in assessing 3rd
house and its lord. In this article, an attempt has been made
to bring into focus some of the less talked matters having
tremendous relevance in our life which are to be judged
from the 3™ house and 3rd lord.
Usually dasa of 3rd lord and the planets located in this
house bring defeat tor the native, wounding his valour and
fame seriously.
One loses his brother during the dasa of debilitated Mars,
or dasa of Mars located in an enemy camp brings grief for
the younger brother.
When 3rd lord is in the angle of 9* lord, or conjoined or
aspected by 5th/9th lords dasa of 3rd lord will bring prosperity
for the native.
When 3rd/9,h axis becomes vital for any horoscope - such
a native usually shines in life, (should have at least one
natural planet either in 3rd or 9lh). Too many malefics in the
3rd house spoils the native (see exp. - 6)

Chapter - III
Motivation / Efforts
This house reflects the person's efforts, how much one
can put in or how much one is inclined to exert in order
to achieve success in life is reflected by this house.
Inclination for studies or to desire to study for long hours
is governed by this house. Ketu and Saturn in 3rJ interfere
heavily with higher studies 3rd is 2nd to 2nd. Success on
education depends on Sun, Mercury, Jupiter, Moon Lords
of Lagna, 4th house / 4th lord, 5"' house / 5* lord, 2nd house
and 3rd house. 3rd is actually 12"' from 4* house - from
where graduate studies are governed. 4th house indicates
postgraduate studies. Research work and very high
learning is governed by the 9* house.
; Moral virtues are also governed by this house. Mind is
channelised towards lower side for material advancement
if this house receives heavy afflictions. Criminal bent up of
mind is the ultimate result if 3rJ house is hemmed between
malefics and also afflicted.
Flow of life resolves around the Lagna and its lord. If
Lagna and its lord are well fortified in the horoscope, the
native does well in life.
It is well known that Lagna is strong, if it is occupied or
aspected by a natural benefic orby its lord. Sri Mantreswara
in his famous Phaladeepika says:
Na te tu upacha ya lagnam ativeeryotkatam - meaning
that Lagna is very strong if its lord is in an Upachayasthan
Lagnadhipati is praised in a Kendra by Sage Parasar,
irrespective of his being a natural benefic or a natural

malefic. According to sage Parasar.
Lagnadhipo vajeevo va Sukro Vayadi Kendramaha
Tasya Putrasya deeghayurdhanavan rajavallabhaha
Meaning that a native whose lord of Lana or Jupiter or
Venus is in a Kendra - he is long-lived, wealthy and a king's
or ruler's favourite. The 10th house occupation by the lord
of Ascendant need not detain us.
Lord of Lagna is like Gangajal (water of the holy river
Ganges). It flourishes the house wherever it is posited and
also boosts the Bhavas where it aspects.
3rd house is actually 11"' from 5'\ Therefore it indicates
gains from leanings. It is also 9,h from 7th, so indicates marital
bliss. Key to successful marriage is buried here. It stands
opposite to 9th house (bhagyasthan), therefore 9* house
indicates higher mind, 3rd house indicates lower mind.
In 21st century we observe rapid growth of human
populations in India, Asia and in African countries.
Therefore there is a stiff competition in all the entrance
tests conducted now in India. HTs and HMs are conducting
very tough admissions tests.
Desire for learning is governed by the 3rd house. So we
expect a good 3rd house for a serious boy or a girl in India
today. The significator of learning and progeny being Jupiter,
its placement in the 3rd house make a man highly learned.
Persons having Jupiter in their 3rd house have been observed
to evince interest in a wide range of subjects. Many people
with either their 5'" lord or Jupiter in the 3rd house have
been seen to remain engaged in such occupations which
ensure constant use of their acquired knowledge at school,
college and university levels. They usually become teachers,
journalists, lawyers or even professional speakers. Late
Pandit Jahwarlal Nehru's 5,h lord Mars was posited in the
3rd house Virgo. Everyone knows what a good writer he
was. In fact, capacity for sustained reading and writing can
be fruitfully and most rustically assessed via browsing
through planetary position in th 3d house, the 3d lord's
placement and relationship with other vital lords
particularly the 5* lord in a rasi chart.

Such beautiful configuration in the 3rd house is also
discernible in the birth chart of Dr. Radhakrishanan whose
3d lord Mars is in the Scorpio with Jupiter, the planet of
learning, 3rd lord in presence ofbenefics provide much
writing skills. Let us look to the 3rl house of Pandit Madan
Mohan Malavia, the founder of BHU, from where the
author took his highest degrees available in the educational
fields (the author holds a Ph.D degree from BHU in
Electrochemistry). He has 3rd lord Jupiter in the 5th house
with Lagnalord Saturn (has Capricorn Lagna) aspected
by the 5th lord Venus from the 11* house, Scorpio. Highly
benefic 3d lord provided him to pursue higher learning in
foreign countries and provided him the skills to write many
books in the field of predictive astrology (astrology is
actually a branch of religion. Eighth lord Sun in ninth house
helped him to write books in astrology in the field of
astrology because eighth lord / house governs occult
matters). He has published 100 articles in the fields of
corrosion and electro-chemistry and 100 articles covering
various aspects of astrology and finally published six books
in astrology upto 2005. His appetite for writing more books
is ever on the increasing level.
Example 4 : Horoscope of Pt. Madan Mohan Malviya
founder of BHU, DOB : 25.12.1861, at 7.00 P.M. in
Allahabad. In the horoscope of this immortal man, we find
the lord of Lagna Moon has conjoined with Jupiter and
Saturn. His 3rd lord Mercury is placed in the 6th house with
Sun and Rahu and has exchanged places with 6* lord
Jupiter. Upachayapati in Upachaya House generates
excellent results. Jupiter - Moon - Saturn combination
made him a highly religious person Jupiter in the 3rd house
provided him power of establishing BHU (a massive
educational Institution with thousands of students and
hundreds of teachers) in pre-independence’ era for
spreading education in India. His 10lhlord is placed in 5lh
(Purvapunyasthan) in its own house, and the 7* lord, 9*
lord and Lagnesh generated a formidable yoga for winning
the hearts of thousands of KLngs/Maharajas in the earl^

Example No .4
Date 25/12/1861 Time 19.00:00 Day Wednesday Lat 25:27:00 North Long 81:50:00 East
Zone 81:50:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 21:40:1 1
Balance of Dasa : Moon 2 Years 0 Months 14 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt-Cuspal
twentieth Century. All the kings granted massive financial
help for fulfilling his cherished ambitions of life. Langnadhi
yoga (he has mercury in 6* from Lagna, Venus in the 7th
from Lagna) made him a very learned man. Well fortified
3d house, several Rajayogas and other auspicious yogas
made him an immortal man in the history of mankind.
Immortal Novelist Sri Sarat Chattopaijhyahad Jupiter in
the 9* house, aspecting vacant 3d house. 3d lord Venus
was placed in 5* with 5* lord Moon. Three benefic planets,
Moon, Venus and Jupiter in watery signs flourished his
levels of imaginations and made him a prolific and gifted

writer. He has Pisces Lagna, like Rabindranath Tagore
Now let us study the horoscope of very young man w h o
has passed out from Delhi IIT and from 11M, Ahmedabad.
He passed the entrance test of 11T/11M in single chance. He
is now employed in a multinational film in Bombay with
pay package about Rs. 20 lac / annum (2003). He took
training in Paris during his IIM studies in Ahmedabad. 1
saw him as a kid and he is well known to me. He married in
2003 when Jupiter was passing over his 3rd house containing
3d lord Moon and Yogakaraka Saturn. If a Yogakaraka is
placed in the 3rd house, the native is sure of fame for his
learning and noble qualities. Moon in this house denotes
many sisters. Indeed he has two prosperous* elder sisters. He
studied in Delhi IIT (Bio-Technology) between 1994 - 1999.
We shall study his horoscope in depth.
Example 5 : A successful IIT Engineer
His birth chart is comparable with that of Sir Jagdish
Chander Bose, an immortal scientist of India. Langnapati
Venus and 8* lord Jupiter have exchanged places
developing a deep intellectual faculty. Lagnadhi Yoga
(Mercury in 7th house, Venus in 8th from Lagna) made him
a very learned person. Chandradhi yoga makes a man very
rich. Yogakaraka Saturn and 3rd lord in 3rd in its own house
- made him a very famous man before 25 yrs or so.
According to Sambhu Hora Prakash by Late
R.Santhanam, malefics in 3rd, 6* and 1 1 * bestow good
fortunes. But the result mentioned will occur only when
the three stipulated houses viz 3rd, 6* and 11* are
simultaneously occupied by malefic planets of course, there
are exceptions like Saturn alone being in the 3rJ giving
prosperity. When all the 3 houses specified are in occupation
by malefics, fortunes will be of a great order.
In the example 5 we find the presence of Saturn in 3 rd,
Sun and Rahu in his 6* house. Debilitated planets in 3rd/
6*/8* produce Raja yogas. His debilitated fourth lord in
6"' house generated a Raja yoga.

Example No. 5
Oate 14/11/1976 Time 18.00.00 Day Sunday Lat 28.39:00 North Long 77:13.00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:16 23
Balance of Dasa : Mercury 7 Years 10 Months 9 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
So we are not surprised to see his fat salary during his
early days of life.
Only 35 yrs ago people with his similar qualifications
used to start their life with only Rs. 500/month. The author
with his Doctorate Degree from BHU, started his life with
only Rs.500/month, in FC1 Ltd., Sindri, in 1968. From 1999
onwards Indian boys / girls are finding jobs anywhere on
this globe. We find in India - people are enjoying more
luxurious lifestyles in 2005 compared to early 1970s, ill
1870, 60% persons of India lived below the poverty line.
British fellows (from 1757 to 1947) made the life of common

Indians, very miserable. From history, we learn India was
the richest country on earth during Mughal Empire, 1500
We hope India will come up again as a top country
around 2050 or so. According to USA born female
Astrologer Carol Righter, Aquarian age started from 1904.
It is age for rapid advancement in the field of electronics &
space science. This Aquarian age will flow for next 2000
years. Actually in 1904 we find Right Brothers discovered
aeroplanes and the space age started. E-mail system of
communication started in the early nineties, all the
communications are governed from this 3rd house. Today
we don't need postman in sending letters in the different
parts of the globe. We can imagine the influence of benefic
planets of the third house in the map of universe created
by God, whose date of birth is unknown to mankind and
will remain unknown for the thousands of years because
Einstein has written - it is impossible to penetrate in the
secretes of creations by God, who created stars galaxies,
supernovas, sky, air, water and thousands of species of
animals / insects / plants. Very recently in December 2004
American scientist have proved from gene therapy that
evolution of human beings did not take place from monkey.
Theory of Darwin has been proved wrong. God controls
everything from heaven (it is not known where heaven
exists) through a remote control procedure also governed
by the third house. So we can really imagine the importance
of third house in the horoscope of a human being.
Malefics in Upachaya houses grant longevity and
happiness to the native. Malefics in malefic houses generate
excellent results. 3rd lord posited in Kendra / or trine provides
artistic talent to the native.

Chapter IV
Valour
Classical astrologers are almost unanimous on one point
i.e. a natural malefic's presence in the 3r house gives a man
requisite courage and determination to tackle a critical
situation where a natural benefic's presence there /makes
him wealthy but frugal - such a frugality almost bordering
on miserliness.
According to Jataka Bhamna, the Moon in the 3^ house
makes a man miserly in habit. According to Chamatkar
Chintamani, a man with Jupiter in the 3^ house though
rich, lives like a poor man. A man in whose horoscope,
Venus is located in the 3r house, refuses to spend money.
According to P.S. Sastri (AM., Sept 1973 P 819) for
Capricorn Lagna, Jupiter in 3rd/6,h is very bad.
One's Stamina and Capability to endure ups + downs of
life can be seen from the 3rl* house. This requires both mental
and physical vitality. Let us study a very interesting case.
Example 6 : No desire to do anything, DOB 1.9.1978/
1.05 AM/Panipat
He has been born under Kal Sarpa Yoga, though Venus
is slightly away from the Rahu- Ketu axis.
He passed XII with science group inl997 June and
wanted to study engineering. His father refused to bear
the expenses for poverty. So he joined Army in April 98,
took training in Poona. As the Venus- Moon dasa
commenced he managed to get himself dismissed from his
service in April 99. and returned home. He enjoyed Venus
- Moon dasa between 24-1-98 to 4-8-99. He preferred ni^

Example No. 6
Date 01/09/1978 Time 01 .05 00 Day Friday Lat 29 24:00 North Long 76:58:00 East
Zone 82.30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:17:53
Balance of Dasa : Mercury 7 Years 7 Months 4 Days
Planets
Nlrayana Bhava
Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
his friends were s tudy big- engineer! ng/medi cal etc. Dasa
of two planets in mutual angels bring some untoward
incidents in life. Dasa of infant planet Venus produced only
grief in his life.
Everything evaporates in air when 9th house/9* lord are
weak. His 8*/9* lord Saturn is a combust planet. 5th lord
Venus is an infant planet (< l°)and is afflicted by Saturn.
Weak 5 th/9 * houses did not allow him to seek help from
heaven for growing. Ketu in 10* will bring inauspiciousness
to the well being of the native's father, so also the native's
progress will be thwarted. < o

Afflicted 3rd house does not provide further utilization
of opportunities extended by God to any individual. So he
preferred to resign for wasting his time.
When 9dl house /9 th lord are afflicted one lacks foresight
and cannot think for the future. They are like animals who do
not think for the tomorrow. His 9* lord is a combust planet
and 9th house receives the joint aspects of Saturn + Sun.
A man has always ups and down in life when the major
planet Jupiter and Saturn are in 6/8 or 2/12 relationships.
His Saturn is a combust planet and is devoid of any benefic
influence on it. Only a strong Saturn helps a native to come
up in life from adverse situations in life.
Third lord in the 3rd house indicates success and
recognition solely through one's own efforts. If it is afflicted
(in his case 3111 lord is afflicted by its bitter enemy Saturn) it
makes the native timid, sexually weak and coward.
Saturn - Sun conjunction usually bring a rift between
father and son. He nourishes grudge against his father for
refusing his educational expenses. Mars - Rahu in 4"' house
did not help him to pursue higher studies. Afflicted 4th
house indicates, childhood memory regarding upbringing
is not very good.
Aspect of a benefic is a must on the 3rd house for a
prosperous life. In his birth chart third house is devoid of
benefic influence. Afflicted Sun (also Moon, Sun and Lagna
or its lord) does not auger well for the native. We shall
examine the 3rd house of another brilliant - 11T/Delhi
Engineer (Mechanical)
Example 7: Prosperous IIT Delhi Mechanical Engineer.
DOB 25.9.77/22=55hrs/Delhi
He is one of the best boys of DPS Mathura Road, Delhi
and entered Delhi IIT in 1995 just after passing his XII
examination.
He completed his M.S from Columbia University in 2000
and enrolled for his Ph.D. degree. Saturn - Ketu dasa
between 27.5.2000 to 1.7.2001 brought setback in his
educational pursuits and he returned to India in March
2001 without a Ph.D. degree. He developed difference of

Example No.7
Date 25/09/1077 Time 22:55 00 Day Sunday Lat 28:39:00 North Long 77:13:00 East
Zone 82:30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:17:06
Balance of Dasa : Rahu 0 Years 7 Months 1 1 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspai
is a Khala Yoga and brings break in education. So we are
really surprised to observe the accuracy of prophecy of our
sages of yore. He is now employed with a multinational
company based in Mumbai.
Khetra Simhason Yoga arrives when the 10th lord is
placed in trine or a quadrant, making him famous and
renowned. His 10* lord Jupiter is in Lagna in its own star
Jupiter. He has partial Adhi Yoga also, because Mercury
and Venus occupy the 7th house from Moon. Adhi yoga
provides plenty of money to the native. 4* lord Mercury

and 5* lord Venus have generated a formidable Raja Yoga
in the 3rd house.
9th lord in 3rd house with 4th, 5* lords have increased the
intrinsic strength of the horoscope.
Strong Moon in the 9th house aspectd by Divine Jupiter
has increased his luck factor. This house is also aspected by
9* lord Saturn, Lagnesh mercury, 5* lord Venus. Aspect of
Lagna lord increases the strength of the house, wherever it
aspects. So he has well fortified ninth house. We can declare
him as an extremely lucky man though he is unfortunate in
acquiring Ph.D. degree. Aspect of 611' lord on Jupiter is a grisly
combination. Conjunction of 6* lord Mars with Jupiter
denied him the Ph.D. degree. Until or unless Jupiter, Sun,
9th house are strong one does not get a Ph.D. degree.
A man does well in life when the 10th house of Sun is
occupied by divine Jupiter. We are astonished to see Jupiter
in the 10* house from Sun Strong Lagna, strong 9* house,
strong 9th lord several Raja Yogas and lastly a well fortified
3rd house made him an intellectual genius Goddess Laxmi
or lady luck smiled on him while he is a very young man
(only financially). Goddess Sarswati (indicated by strong
Jupiter & strong Moon) denied him happiness in
educational line.
PECULIARITIES OF MERCURY AND VENUS
It is strange to observe that Mercury in 3rd, 6th or 8 ,h
promotes education whereas in 1st, 4th or 5th it spoils
education (AM, 1978 Jan P 77). In 8th Mercury is capable of
giving excellent results including kingdom if powerful.
According to TDV Raman (AM, March 1999 2 P 270)
Mercury in 8 , Venus in 12* and Jupiter in 6* become benefic.
When Jupiter is strongly placed it is an indication of good
amount of wealth. Actually for a good education Mercury
should be behind Sun. Sun longitudinally hemmed
between Mercury and Venus produces top intellectual
person. Such a person can learn many subjects even
without reading books. They gather knowledge by
listening others or with less efforts through books.
Whenever Venus and Mercury join in a good house, it

Assures great fame to the native, of course, Moon also should
be strong for achieving nation vide fame. When there is a
success there is bound to be fame. They are closely
interlinked. So when Venus and Mercury is placed in the
3lki house - one is sure to shine in life with name and feme.
Venus joined by Mercury produce a person of eloquence,
landed property, good financial position, leader of masses,
proficiency in poetry, intellectual instincts, friends and
marriage with young woman.
Venus plus Jupiter is good for finance and makes one
energetic, intelligent, liked by kings, kind hearted, broad
minded, married to one in higher circles, fortunate and lucky.
Venus conjunct Saturn does not bring much credit to
his reputation and profession. His talk and behaviour may
be filthy and religious observances hypocritical (vide AM

Chapter - V
Role of Planets on The 3rd House
1. According to Dr. B.V Raman if the lord of the 3rd
house is an evil planet, if evil planets are in 3rd, the native
will have very few brothers. If the Karaka for brother,
Mars, or the 3rd lord is debilitated, is in combustion, or
with inimical planets, destruction of the indications of
the 3rd house should be predicted.
2. If the lord of the Ascendant or the 3rd lord is fairly
strong, but, conjunct with Malefics (Saturn, Rahu, Ketu,
6,"/8'l'/12lh lords) it signifies brothers through step mother
i.e. mother has a short life span. This aphorism is 90%
correct to the knowledge of the author.
3. If the lord of 3rd is an exaltation or in own or in
friendly house or is posited in a quadrant or in trine and
is conjunct with or aspected by a benefic, all the
significations of the3rd house may materialize.
4. If the lord of 3rd is in exaltation, conjunct or is
aspected by a benefic, that should mean prosperous
brothers.
5. The conjunction or the aspect of feminine planets
(Moon, Venus, Rahu, Ketu) on the 3rJ may indicate sisters.
If a negative sign falls in the 3rd house and is occupied or
aspected by female planets, the native has only sisters. A
positive sign on the 3rd house aspected by male planets
shows brothers.
6. Miserly brothers are indicated the presence of
Moon, Sun or Mercury in the 3rd,house.

7. Reputed and well mannered brother are signified by
Jupiter or Saturn in the 3rd.
8. According to Dr. B.V. Raman, if the lord is 3rd is with
Rahu or with the dispositer of Rahu, the person will have
fear from reptiles.
9. Throat disease: Mercury with lord of 3rd gives throat
disease. Generally evil planets in the 3rd or when Gemini is
heavily afflicted, there may be disease of throat.
10. Deafness :
a. Ear defects and deafness should also be predicted by
the presence fo evil planets in the 3rd house - particularly in
Dwadasamsa.
b. If malefic planets, unaspected by benefic planets, be
posited in 3rd, 5* or 11* house.
c. If the lord of 6* house occupies 6u,/8lh/T2,h house and
be aspected by Saturn.
d. If full Moon and Venus be associated with their
respective enemies or be in their inimical sign.
e. If Mercury and lord of6th house be aspected by malefic
planets,
f. In a night birth if Mercury be in 6* and Venus in the
5Lh or in the 10lh house, deafness may arise.
g. A debilitated planet in the 3rd or the llUl house give
congenital defects to the right or the left ear.
h. Aspect of Mars and Saturn on the 3ri orllth house
spoil the auditory organ early in life.
i. A weak Moon in the 3 d or the 11*, aspected by a
malefic without any aspect of benefics gives defect in the ear.
j. Speech is judged from the 2nd house and Mercury. If
Mercury is debilitated and is aspected by Saturn and Mars,
the native is dumb. Any malefic aspect or association with
Mercury develops defect of speech. But the Sim and Mercury
combination is not considered bad.
k. Presence of a debilitated malefic planet in the 3rdhouse /
11* house with Rahu make the native congenitally deaf and
therefore dumb also. o

Example No. 8
Date 27/11/1992 Tf me 17:21 00 Day Friday Lat 28 39 00 North Long 77' 13.00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23:29:48
Balance of Dasa : Venus 11 Years 1 Months 2 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
Example 8 : Case of a deaf and dumb boy.
He took birth in a rich family as a deaf and dumb boy.
Debilitated Mars in the 3rd house, afflicted 11th house by
Saturn and Rahu, made a deaf since birth. The house of
Speech (2nd house) is hemmed between malefics, and its lord
Mercury is spoiled by the hostile joint aspect of Mars and
Saturn. So he is dumb since birth.
We should be grateful to Indian Sages for discovering the
golden rules of astrology and we should believe in Karma
theory and rebirth.
Purva Punya Sthan is 5lh house. Here 8"' lord Jupit€^g2

reminds us about his zero Purva Punya balance. 5* lord is
destroyed by Saturn and Mars added fuel to the fire. House
of luck, 9* house is severely afflicted by Mars, and 8th lord
Jupiter on 9* lord Saturn. Aspect 8* lord is bad; even if he is
Jupiter, the most benevolent planet of the zodiac.
Lord of Lagna Venus is placed in 8th, the house of
inheritance, with a natural benefic Moon. Venus in 8th
provides enough wealth. Though he is deaf and dump by
birth but God has arranged his food for living.
Influence of Individual Planets on The 3rd House:
Saturn - It increase the longerity, makes the native brave,
wise and powerful, according to R. Sthananam (Sambhu
Hora Parakassa P 12), Saturn alone in 3rl makes the native
prosperous. According to Sephariel Saturn in 3rd is
detrimental for courier services, post and telegraph services,
newspaper work, publication works etc.
Sir Jagdish Chandra Bose had Saturn in 3rd house in
Cancer. Shivaji had Saturn in 3rd house in Libra, Pandit
Madan Mohan Malviya had Moon - Jupiter - Saturn
combination Tn Virgo in his 3rd house
Narayan Bhatt and Jeevnath Jha shared the view that
such a native may increase numerous hurdles in rise of his
fortune but will have definitely rise in fortune through
constant efforts Saturn in 3rd may give a cake but it will
never be an easy cake.
He will be expert in many branches of learning healthy
and wealthy as per the following sloka of the Sages :
TOtfKTrg w*Mfcki ■
cg-toc) !c)vllp9o | |
It should be remembered that malefic planets iri 3rd/6,h/
lO'Vll^yield satisfactory results, I have observed Rahu in
6* yields maximum good results to the native. Yogakaraka
Saturn in 3rd grants high education.
If this Saturn is aspected by another malefic - the life of
the native will be cupful of sorrows. In fact Saturn should
be aspected by Jupiter, 9* lord, yogakaraka or other natural
benefic planets. When Jupiter and Saturn make 6/8
relationships, there will be ups and downs in life. Benefics in
Kandra of Saturn reduce much evil nature of Saturn. Saturn'*--*

function actually provide stability to achievements. Great
people may appear to be ushered into this world when Jupiter
and Saturn are in mutual trines or angles.
In any horoscope, the situation of two major planets Jupiter
and Saturn is very important. When they are in a Kendra,
Trikona or the 11* from Moon or Ascendant, the effect is
definitely beneficial, for such a disposition gives strength of
character and these qualities which make for eventual success
and spirituality. People show deference to such persons. Their
achievements will be substantia] and solid. On the contrary,
when Jupiter and Saturn are in mutually 6/8 or 2/12
relationships, are also not well disposed from the ascendant
or the Moon, and Saturn afflicts either the ascendant or the
Moon, one may have a sudden fall and face disasters.
So the position of Saturn in the 3rd house is to be assessed
carefully before predicting the final results.
I have observed when natural benefics and malefics occupy
the 3rd house, the native can pursue higher education easily
(like JEE, A1EEE, IAS, 1FS competitions) alternatively the 3rd
house should be aspected by a benefic. Jupiter in 7’Jl aspects
3 rd/ IIth houses - so the native can prosper in life through
competitions easily. 6*/7*/8* houses are the houses of
opposition, so chandradhi and Lagnadhi yogas have been
framed by our sages. Venus, Jupiter, Mercury should occupy
6uV7"78'j' house for forming this formidable yoga of millions.
But alas if Sun, Moon, Lagna and its lord are not strong
everything evaporates in ah.
JUPITER EN 3RI> HOUSE
Jupiter is the planet of fortune. He is fiery, noble, benevolent,
fruitful, masculine, jovial, buoyant, optimistic, expansive,
positive and dignified. So to be successful in any field of
education, Jupiter is to be super strong Jupiter in the angle of
Moon has been praised by our seeras, it fomis Gaja Keshni
yoga -a yoga for easy success in life. Jupiter loses some strength
3rd house Jupiter does not allow the native to live for a long
time. The person will study well and gam knowledge, when
a natural benefic is placed in the 3rd house.

The position of Jupiter in 3din fiery signs in good fa' social
success; earthy signs - good for business, commerce and
speculative enterprise. Airy signs - good for mind and mental
pursuits; watery signs -good for voyages and travel by water.
Generally financial success comes through traveling.
Jupiter in 3rd with a malefic planet will cause penury and
irreligiousness. He will incur blemishes in marital life and
also concerning progeny. Jupiter alone in 3rd makes the native
lamp of the family, he is honoured by women.
If debilitated Mars/or Jupiter/or Sun is place in the 3rd
house - one may not have required valour and strength to
fight against adversities in life.
Maleficence of combust planets in 3rd, 6'h,8,hor if increases
tremendously (see exp 3). But in trines/ quadrants combust
planets do not harm the native.
MISERLINESS
Miserliness is assessed from the 3rd house. According to
Jataka Bharana, the Moon is the 3rd house makes a man
miserly in habit. According to Chamat Chinta Mani, a man
with Jupiter in 3rd house though rich lives like a poor man. A
man in whose horoscope Venus is in the 3d house often refuses
to spend money. So the 3rd house has something to do with
preservation of money which is facilitated through a natural
benefic's presence there.
A benefic as a 12* lord strong, one is liberal and virtuous.
Abenefic in 12*, 12* lord weak, one does not spend money.
12* lord strong - spend thrift, weak - miser.
Affliction to Sun or the 12* from Sun, one suffers from
insomnia. Affliction of Mercury and 12* from Mercury makes
one miserly. Affliction of Jupiter and 12* from Jupiter implies •
religious perversions. Affliction of Venus and 12* from Venus
causes extravagance and sexual perversions. Affliction of
Moon or 12* from Moon causes split personality, affliction of
Saturn or 12* from Saturn - makes very repulsive habit and
living, bad eating habits - eating stale food, cold meat etc.
The last aphorism is stunningly true to the knowledge of the
author. lfKetu is placed in 12* house of Saturn, native will
like only Junk Foods (supplied by fast good centers like, __

Macdonald, Chinese food shops etc). Strong 9* house and
benefics in 12th makes one charitable in nature. 9th house
should be occupied by a natural benefic.
When Jupiter transits the 3ri house fiom natal Sun, the
native suffers Iran poverty, illness and enemies increases. One
is separated from his family members during such transit of
Jupiter in his life.
VENUS IN 3rdHOUSE:
He will be miserly in disposition and will do favours to
women. In fact he is motivated by female folks. He will not be
able to tell "no" to them. The native of chart - 3 is controlled
by his mother.
If Venus is debilitated or is with a debilitated planet then
the native will lose virility early in life and becomes impotent
or partially impotent. If exalted the native will be very wealthy
and will attain sexual satisfaction.
If this Venus is aspected by other benefic planets, he will
achieve all his undertaking with wisdom and luck. His cobom will prosper.
MARSIN3rdHOUSE
Being in Upachayasthan,Mars in the 3r(1 house is very good.
It is the most benefic place for Mars. One will have abundance
of energy, will have adversities of life.
3rd house acts as a remote control of happy married life
and hence may get a questionable wife. He holds a high
position in the society.
Conjunction of Saturn - Mars, or opposition of Saturn -
Mars or Mars - Uranus is never welcome in any horoscope.
Conjunction of Saturn Mars in the 12:,:/8*/or 6* house of
the horoscope, shall always produce the Kemandruma yoga
in the chart of thenative. The impact of Saturn on Mars results
in intolerance and unreasonableness. The native becomes
prone to taking hazardous and foolhardy risks
Mars in the 3rl house devotes a turbulent and forcelul mind,
the native being over energetic and impulsive mentally
possessing a keen alert and sharp lower mind but apt to lack
control and balance. Mars and Uranus in 3rJ produce violent
tendencies.

Too many malefics in the 3rJ house will force the native to
earn money through hard work and will make him
unpredictable. At times they become a gentleman and at other
times cmel to achieve their objective.
Saturn -Mars in 3rd /5*/ll* houses produce top ranking
diplomats and people belonging to intelligence service. 6/8
relationship of Saturn and Mars is very dangerous. They spoil
both these houses wherever they occupy in a chart in such a
position. Mars alone in the 3rd will make the native free from
diseases. Many troubles through relatives are denoted by this
position. The turbulent tendencies of Mars in the 3rJ house
are modified considerably when it is placed in a negative sign.
SUNIN THE3RD HOUSE
PrcVrite i
One having sun in the 3 house will be fine from disease,
disposed to help others, be poor sighted, famous and will
possess much learning and wisdom. Another female other
than his mother will be responsible for his upbringing. It is a
dosha or blemishes fa' the mother. Though it gives general
prosperity, the native may be subjected to deception through
colleague or partners. Associates are controlled from the 3rd
house and friends are controlled from the IIth house. The
native will acquire only self-made wealth will gain through
governmental sources. It makes the person head strong and
is almost nonnegotiable with others .
If debililitated Sun or debililitated Mars or a debililitated
Jupiter is placed in the 3rJ house, one will be of very timid
behavior and may not have guts to face oddities in life.
Moon in The 3rd House
Miserly disposition; He will be fortunate, pleasing in
appearance, liked by woman skillful in many subjects (arts)
will have well disposed kinsfolk and will be get sons and
grandsons.
For Pieces and Taums people, Moon in 3 11 house is excellent.
It Moon is associated with Mercury and accepted by Saturn,
then one become impotent. His wealth will result from his

own efforts. He will mesmerize the members of the opposite
sex.
Mercury in The 3rd House
Karaka Planet for business is Mercury. It is the 3rd and 6*
lord of the Zodiac. If Mercury is placed in the 3rd house. It
may lead to one's taking a profession witch involves
calculation (they can become CA early) as the 3rd house is 6*
from 10* - the house of profession.
If the 3rJhouse in a movable sign, the native will shift from
one place to another place, will do noble profession, will have
trade skills and business acumen. For Aries and Cancer bom
natives Mercury in 3rd house will provide speaking ability or
oratory, artistic, dramatic skills.
According to Sages
Tftfl WT: TfmjTSftTS OTrf I
ypjdPiA ftiuumsjtl 7ft??i PIcuaim i i
One with Mercury in 3rd house will earn fame, be
immodest, will have many friends, be liked by women and
devoid of illusion and chicanery. This is quite true, as a
Karaka Planet in its own bhave destroy or weakens the
bhava. Ruler of destiny is Sun and Jupiter. They fail to
bestow one total good results to the native in the 9* bhava.
When Sun is placed in the 9* bhava-the native will remain
mediocre in his professional life. Sun in 9th will provide
male pregeny, friends, wealth, enjoyment but may not give
much marital bliss. Though various ancients scholars in
various classical texts on astrology have praised the
placement of Jupiter in 9* house, yet in practice it has not
been found to give extra ordinary results (vide TOA, Jan
2004 P 70). I fully agree with the learned astrologer Arastur
Prabhakar, that Jupiter can never become yogakaraka for
any ascendant.
I have shown that Jupiter in 7* house generate excellent
results (vide TOA April 2004 P 27) because it aspects the 3rd
house and also the 11* house. When Jupiter is in 7* house,
he will not encounter much enmity in life, because friends
are judged from 3rd/llth house. One must have strong
Mercury for having good friends. Benefic planets in Kendjjjjg

position increase the intrinsic strength of the horoscope and
thus, reduces hundreds of blemishes.
Mercury in 3rd house will makes in native industries in
nature but will not be close to his won people. This aphorism
is stunningly true to the knowledge of the author. If Mercury
in 3rJ is expected by Mars and Saturn, one's sister will be
childless. One becomes very intelligent when Mercury is
aspected by divine* Jupiter either from 7* or 9* house.
Incurable lung disorders can be traced in a native whose
3rd house is occupied by Mercury and aspested by Saturn,
both of whom should be afflicted.
Rahu in The 3rd House
Rahu - Ketu axis is known as karmic axis around which
all planetary forces impinge so as to bring radical
transformation into one's life. They play an important role
in every horoscope, revealing the psychological problems of
the individual and the evolutionary course embraced for
him or her. Rahu and Ketu are Karmic Planets where as
their depositors are karmic control planets. For big financial
gains karmic control planets should not make 6/8
relationships and should be well placed in the horoscope
(preferably in trines and quadrants. When conjoin in a good
house, Raja yoga is generated as per Sages, if the nodes are
placed in the 3rd, 6* or eleventh house, their beneficence is
pronounced. Rahu in 3Vi house provide leadership qualities,
strong will, long life, hostility towards brother with a proud
nature. He will '~esuccessful wealth gatherer and be
valorous.
If Rahu is in 3rd Ketu will be in 9*. Ketu in 9* / 10* is
never welcome. Rahu is the giver, Ketu is the taker. Rahu
stands for giving experience (anubhava) while Ketu stands
for what has been experienced (anubhuti). Rahu's influence
on Sun or Moon makes the mind extrovert, white Ketu
makes it introvert. They are natural malefics. Rahu is equated
with Saturn and Ketu with Mars in bestowing results. Rahu
(unaffiliated) attracts blessings according to the house it
occupies while Ketu robs us of coveted prizes. 9* house
control destiny pattern. Therefore Ketu in 9* (white rahu is

in 3rd) will make native little unlucky in many matters. Ketu
in 10* house wrecks the career. Domestic life too gets
disturbed. The native will be forced to do some heinous
work. One with Ketu in 9* house will be bereft of
righteousness, gain fortunes though basemen, he will suffer
from pains of the arms and mock at penance and
charitability.
9* house controls higher mind, research work. Ketu will
interface with higher studies and research work in this
house. This placement is also not good for the father
(particularly when Ketu and Mars is placed in 9*). One
who has Ketu hi 9th will be shunned by good people.
N. Vishwanathan (AM, Sep 1966 P 835) has clearly
written these nodes are supposed to be best in 3rd / 6* /
11*. But when one is in a good house, the other will be in a
bad place. When Rahu in 11* house it will give financial
prosperity to the nature, but Ketu in 5* house will provide
an evil mind, wicked native, not many children, stomach
complaint etc. His gains will ever be delayed. This is
stunningly true to the knowledge of the author. Ketu in 12*
house brings eye disorder.
KETU IN 3rd HOUSE
9* house governs higher mind, 3"1 house controls lower
mind. Ketu in the 3rd house produces sinner, unrighteous
conduct, lose of father, bad luck, poverty etc. Many wrong
decisions in life will engulf the native.
He will lose his intelligence (i. e. sometimes be unwise),
incur troubles to his arms and be agitated due to fear. He
will enjoy much wealth through self-efforts;Will like to mix
with low class people. I have observed a female with Ketu
in 3rd house got married with a lower class man (i.e. females
do not get good husbands compared to their own talent.).
When Jupiter is with Ketu in the house of Mercury
(Mercury is the 3d lord of the Zodiac), the transmit of Jupiter
in Sagittarius or Pieces as the case may be will be extremely
evil . His kinsmen incur destruction. The native will face
many evils and mental agony.

URANUS IN 3rd HOUSE
Uranus in the 3rJ house denotes an inventive, ingenious
and curious mind, given to study mystical arid metaphysical
subjects; unconventional and very liberal mental tendencies;
fond of abstruse and profound studies. This position denotes
some strange experience with friends or through relatives;
sudden and unexpected journey; travels for adventures and
discoveries; Separation from kith and kin, intelligent, sudden
and unexpected news, clairvoyance, clairaudience. In a
weak horoscope this position denotes bohemian tastes, wild
and erratic schemes and projects formulated by the brain
and unaccountable and strange mental attitudes.
NEPTUNE IN THE3RD HOUSE:
If afflicted dangers through other's plot and cheating.
Difficulties with relatives, and troubles on journeys are
probable. Imaginative, fanciful and weird mental tendencies;
Inspirational writing and correspondence, high ideas; Many
short journeys, when aspected by benefic.
Weak intellect, depraved tastes and morbid fancies, can
be attracted towards lower side of Mantra and Tantra,
Education suffers.
PLUTO IN3rdHOUSE
Pluto is a Yama or ruler of death. When Pluto is afflicted
in a natal horoscope, it can behave on a small scale like an
atom bomb in the native's life. No planet can wreck such
havoc. The individual's circumstances can be turned
completely up side down and conditions change to an extent
undreamt of. Well aspected natal Pluto can almost daze the
native by throwing good fortune on him.
When Pluto and Venus are in 120 degree apart gives a
charming artistic self-expression, ardent emotions, a
compelling personality and often outstanding success in
human relation dealings.
Pluto in 2"d/llth houses invariability increases fortune. It
destroys the other houses wherever it is located in the
horoscope. Pluto in 8*, if afflicted cause violent death of the
native; Whimsical and inert nature; Fond of doing fruitless
jobs; Many foreign travels; Not much helpful to others, has
a sick mind.

Chapter VI
Exchange Of 3rd Lord With Other
House Lords
Khala Yogas are very evil yogas . People bom in this yoga
will at one time or other go astray while at other times, they
are gentle in speech. Sometimes, they regain all kinds of
prosperity and while at other times, they suffer much distress,
poverty, misery etc. There are total eight Khala Yogas. An
interchange of thelord of 3rd with 1st, 2nd, 4*, 5*, 7* 9*, 10*
and 1 1 * will produce these eight dreaded evil Khala Yogas.
A person bom in Khala Yoga will be rough in behaviour and
will live in prosperity and poverty in cyclic order. Cycles of
gentleness and haughtiness will engulf the native .
EXCHANGE OF Ist AND 3 R D LORDS
This is a Khala Yoga. It makes one speak woundingly
about others, troubled by enemies, unsteady in mind and
sexually behaviour . Has desire to db something in life. Gets
Govt, positions.
EXCHANGE OF LORDS 2nd AND 3rd :
Can get Govt, jobs (vide AM Aug 2000 P 697). Any
connection between 2nd and 3rd lords is Rajvritya Yoga.
According to Bhavartha Ratnakar, generosity Yoga anises!
if the 2nd and 3rd lords are in companionship.
EXCHANGE OF LORDS 3rd AND4th :
Commander-in-chief, police or army job, occasional
change of residence, happhiess from mother affected, break
in education. Connection between the 3rd and 4' h lords is
Chamupaka Yoga which makes one a big military
commander. Let us analyse the horoscope of Chengiz Khan
(from Notable Horoscope by Dr. D. V. Raman) Aries - Rahu' _

Cancer - Lagna; Virgo- Saturn, Mercury , Venus, Sun,
Jupiter, Mars; Libra - Moon, Ketu)
Chengiz Khan was one of the greatest conquerors that
has ever lived, and this is testified by he peculiar disposition
of Mars as a yogakaraka in the 3rd house as Vargottoma.
In the chart of Chengiz Khan, we find six planets have
joined together in the 3rd house - the house of courage.
7'1' sign of the zodiac brings out war. The 3 rd sign is the
9th thereof, while the 4* signs in he 10* - thus, Raja Yoga
out of war comes out as background analysis. 3rj house
represents courage, and the 4lh increases, the significance
of 3rd. Exalted 3rl lord has conjoined with yogakaraka Mars
(yogakaraka has the unique property of energizing the
house it occupies)
Super strong 3rd house provided him conquering powers
in war. Saturn - Mars in the 3rd house made him a ruthless
man. He made a monument of human skulls in Delhi
during his invasion of India, for the celebration of his victory
in the war. He will be remembered as the most cruel man.
in history.
EXCHANGE OF 3rd LORD AND 5™ LORD :
Not much intelligent. Does not care lor children and
parents. Sufficient earnings are there. Has a deceitful mind.
EXCHANGE OF 3rd LORD AND 6™ LORD:
It is not a Khala Yoga. Mama (mother's brother) suffers,
earning gradually increase, good potion in service, brother
becomes an athlete.
EXCHANGE OF 3 RD AND 7™LORD : •
Occasional separation from wife, who is usually an illtempered lady. The native is courageous, business will be
ruined.
EXCHANGE OF 3rd AND 8™ LORD :
It is not a Khala Yoga timidity and unknown fears grow
in mind. Long lived, but there may be ear troubles.
EXCHANGE OF 3rdLORD 9™LORD :
If the exchange is between malefics - he will be a terror
to his relatives (for example for Gemini person exchange
between Sun and Saturn is not good for the native).

Benefics when involved will bring prosperity to the native.
He will respect his brothers and sisters. It is a khalayoga.
It provides business ideas at an early age.
EXCHANGE BETWEEN 3m& 10™ LORDS:
It is a khala yoga of very serious nature. If the planets are
involved weak, the man is sure to suffer from extreme
poverty. Lord of 3rd in 10 in Mercurian or Venusians signs
makes the native a signer or actor. Exchanged planets should
not be aspected by other malefics. A strong third lord inlOth
will give rank and status to the brother who will help the
native in business.
3rd lord in 10*, i.e. it goes to 8* house from its own house
form its natal position. Any planet when made to 3rd, 6*, 8Lh
or 12* house from its own Bhava, loses strength. Therefore,
the S^lord going to 10th house, which is 8* from it, the person
will a work alcoholic and will lose interest in sexual affairs.
One will postpone things for the tomorrow and so on,
thus ultimately land up doing nothing. It should be
remembered a bhava lord produces good results when it
occupies trine/angles, 2nd or 1 1 * from bhava it self.
EXCHANGE BETWEEN 3rd & U™ LORDS :
It is a Khala yoga. 3rd house is lower mind. 3rd lord in 11th
will make him immoral with unscrupulous attitude as
regards career and can do anything to rise in life. If the 3rd
lord in 1 1 * house is associated with Saturn or the malefic
Moon, then the person will have extra ordinary success in
own entrepreneurships. One will normally associate with
persons of high caliber in society.
1 1 * lord in 3rd surely make the native wealthy through
self efforts. If it is a malefic planet (for Capricorn natives
1 1 * lord Mars in 3d house generates excellent results), the
native will be very brave and will have extra-ordinary good
courage and strength. He will have good vision (eye sight).
The 3rd / 1 1 th house are Upachayasthanas. Hence 1 1 *lord in
3ld indicates growth of knowledge, courage and wealth.
6*/8*/12* lords in 3rd house generate inauspicious results.
Dasa of these planets in 3rd house will bring sufferings in
many ways. He will always avoid his relatives. The native

will face many hardships in life. Union of two malefic lords
always enhances the suffering of the native.
EXCHANGE OF LORDS OF3rdAND 12™
Third house being the house ofvitality and strength, it
may mean an end of such significations. He may have short
life span. Ear troubles may be there. Youngest brother could
be tyrant or cruel. Associations of two bad houses or
connections between them can only increase misfortunes.
Expenses for brothers and sisters could be there. So it is an
unfortunate yoga.
S^LORD IN DIFFERENT HOUSE
1 . 1st house : Vindictive (3rd lord is a highly malefic
planet), serves others, livelihood by self exertion, brave,
courageous, adept in music and acting, lustful, when well
fortified an expert in dancing, music and acting, always sickly.
2. ' 2nd house : He will be devoid of wealth, if the 3rd
lord placed in the 2"d is a malefic, enmity will relatives will
come to pass, while a benefic will be auspicious in this
regard, likes mean deeds. A malefic 3rd lord in 2lldmay goad
a man to over spending, if further afflicted total bankruptcy
may be there. Even natural benefic as the 3rd lord in 2nd will
bring overspending and sometimes on honest causes. It is
clear that a Bhava lord in the 12'''lromits own house cannot
bestow good results. 3ri lord destroys the house, where ever
it is a posited. It is too malefic for the native. When one of
the wealth giving lords, namely 1st, 2nd, 4th, 5lh, 9* and 1 1 *,
combine with 3rd lord in 2nd, it will bring large financial
losses leading towards bankruptcy. It should be
remembered that any planet placed in 12* hou.se from its
natal position, generally is inauspicious in nature.
3. 3rd lord in 3rd : In a common sign 3rd lord in 3rd
generates excellent results. He will cause happiness to his
kinsfolk, will honour elders, Gods and Brahmins and will
gain through royal sources. Many good friends will be there
who will’help him.
4. 3rd lord in 4^ Rich, very learned, happy, wealthy,
intelligent. 3rd lord in a Kendra indicates a person who

will be virile, strong and with a stout body, rise in life though
own efforts, wife may be cruel hearted and mean. 3rd lord
with 4th lord generates excellent results (see Chenzing
Khan's horoscope) When 4* lord is in 3rd the native is
generous, brave wealthy, happy with income by his own
efforts. He is ruined by his relatives of evil nature. His family
tree will grow.
5. 3rd lord in 5th: From the 5^ house, 3rd house is the
eleventh house. Gains from children are indicated. If this
3rd lord is connected with Lagna lord or 10th lord, the native
will have extra ordinary success in life backed by Poova
Punaya Bala. He will get successful children .Those people
who do not have connection with 10* lord or Lagna Lord,
will have to strive very hard in life. When 3rd lord in placed
in 5*, friction in domestic life, and not much happiness
from children.
6. 3rd lord in 6*: One becomes a victim of betrayal
when either the 11* lord showing friends or the 3rd lord
ruling associates (this can include friends) is in 6* the house
that rules cheating and enemies (vide AM, April 2004 P
350) Fond of illegal gratification, native may have rise in
defense department. Hates brothers, relatives, maternal
uncle suffers.
7. 3rd lord in 7*: 3rd lord in 7th house promotes thieving
tendencies. 7* being 5* from 3"1, 3ri lord produce good
results in 7*. If providers opportunity to settle abroad and
gains through business partners also possible. Childhood
is not happy may incur displeasure from rulers or
authorities. He will acquire a good looking spouse, one gains
after marriage when 7* lord or Venus is placed in 3/6/10/
or 1 1* house.
8. 3rd lord in 8,h: Lacks courage, misfortunes and
unfortunate marriage, career not smooth, his co-bom will
incur health disorders, involved in criminal cases or
accusations.
9. 3rd lord in 9th: Marriage improves fortunes,
untrustworthy father, long journey, sudden and

unexpected changes in life. If the planet is a malefic, he
will be terror to his relatives.
103rd lord in 10th: He will work for the prosperity of
honour of his race and be ford of wearing, beautiful clothes
everyday. Quarrelsome .Brothers shine well and have high
status and rank and are helpful to the native in business,
self made wealth, gains from professional journeys or
writings.
11.3rd lord in 11* Vindicti ve, earning with efforts
dependent on others. The person will be arrogant. One will
be so arrogant that one will have the capacity to go for
anything. A person who would leave no stone unturned to
achieve a thing and will strive to take out even a straw if
spotted .The person will rise in life to a great height. 3rd lord
in 1 1 * means two upachayasthans are inter connected, i.e
growth is accelerated.
12. 3rd lord in 12lhUnscrupulousfather, great ups and
down in life. Association of two bad houses can only
multiply misfortune. When 12* lord in 3rd, the native will
be devoid of fraternal bliss, lives far away from relatives,
efforts go waste. Dasa of 12* lord so placed with bring
decays of various forms, rich, valorous, good friends and
charitable. According to K. K. Pathak3rd lord in 3rd ,5*, 7*
.10* and lllhhouse may give auspicious results. If the 3rtd
lord is a malefic, troubles may be serious.
LORDS OF VARIOUS HOUSES IN 3rd HOUSE :
1st lord in 3rd The native will be endowed with relatives
and friends. He will be of delaying disposition and will be
blessed with velour -for all occasions. Charitable and
powerful. Long lived. When the lord of ascendant is placed
in the 3rl house - the Man will always think for the benefit
of others. The 3rd is an important base of the material triangle
of the chart. When the ascendant lord is in the 3rd house,
the individual may deceive himself with all kinds of
justification, but basically he will be concerned with
providing something material to his own kith and kin, for
the society where he lives in which act there should display

his own velour. A malefic in 3rd house always provides
commonsense and requisite guts for solving the problems.
Alexander the great, Pundit Madan Mohan Malvia had
1st lord in the 3rd house. Lagnesh in 3rj makes the man
always successful in life. One will have the capacity to earn
and make money and will have lot of strength. He will be
able to rise in life through self efforts. Lagnesh improves
the quality of the house, where it is posited and flourishes
the house where it aspects. Quite reasonably the man
becomes very fortunate.
2nd lord in 3rd The native will acquire wealth through
brothers, music, drama etc, if under a malefic influence,
money will be wasted through these means. Brave,
intelligent, good natured, addicted to luxuries, lustful. His
relatives will be fond of him.
3rd lord in 3rd Financial success if the sign is common.
Lot of good friends, cheerful, popular and takes part in
public life. Physically strong and virile. He will gain through
royal sources. He will honour Brahmin and Gods.
4* lord in 3rJ His wealth and family tree will grow. The
native is generous, brave, wealthy, happy with income by
his own efforts and suffering slightly from diseases. He is
cheated by the evil minded relatives. Creates family feuds,
cruel relations with paternal side, worried, unsuccessful
in many cases, self made person. Produces unhappiness in
the minds of father and brothers, may have disagreement
with mother also. This aphorism is stunningly true to the
knowledge of the author.
5th lord in 3rd Selfish, unhelpful, lasting paternal love,
highly intelligent, loves relations and becomes famous. He
will be scholar Jahwarlal Nehru had 5* lord in 3rd house.
Such persons are very creative in nature.
6* lord in 3rJ The dasa of 6* lord will cause destruction
in many ways, inimical to co-bom and servants, vindictive.
His realties will continue to be in some trouble or the other.
71*1 lord in 3rd The native will acquire beautiful spouse
who will win the hearts of all family members. Should tb^»_

said 7* lord be a malefic, the spouse will not be much
affectionate to the native, more female children.
8* lord in 3rJ Rigid, no personality, dislikes relatives,
incurs debts, ear trouble. The native will acquire enmity
with his friends and kinsfolk. Alternatively he will be devoid
of relatives. He will speak harshly. Dasa of 8* lord in such
a position produces grief to the native.
9th lord in 3rd He will be valorous, fond ofhis relatives,
will ever patronize them and will increase the happiness
of women (in the family). Lasting paternal love, fraternal
bliss, wealthy, virtuous, charming, will get a good wife.
10* lord ill 3rd This position nullifies effects of Rajayogas
in the chart. If it is a benefic planet, the subject will honour
his men. One will be able to supercede coworkers in service
life.
1 1 * lord in 3d He will distribute his wealth among his
kinsfolk. He will have male and female servants, his
knowledge will increase day by day. Skilful, fortunate
honoured by Govt, destroyer of enemies. Strong malefic
1 1 * lord in 3rd increases the longevity. He can overcome his
enemies easily.
12* in 3 rd The dasa of 12* lord will cause physical decay
to the native. He will be intent upon destroying the
happhiess ofhis brothers and sisters. Devoid of fraternal
bliss, lives far away firm his relations, efforts go waste.
Highly individualistic, selfish.

Chapter VII
Music Deciphered Through
Astrology
Voice is reflected by the 3rd house (not the 2nd house as
some astrologers think). A mellifluous voice is obtained by
a benefic planet or exalted planet in the 3rd. If the 3d' house
is owned by a malefic the good results are reduced. If it is a
benefic house, ruled by Venus, the sweetness of voice
increases.
Venus is said to be Karaka of music. In predictive
astrology Venus is associated with many fascinating aspects
of life. He is the planet of harmony and unison . It is a famine
planet, nocturnal, less benefic than Jupiter, artistic, loving,
placid and harmonious, crafty, sentimental, weak and
undependable under certain afflictions.
According to Satyachanya, Venus is the Karaka for
bhushana (adoration), Vahana (vehicles), patni (wife),
madana (passion), maithuna (sex - intimacy), ratna (precious
stone), pashu (cattle), vastra (cloth) muktahara (garland of
pearls), anguri (ring), chandan (scent), gana (music), nritya
(dancing), meha and meharoga (sex- diseases).
Body luster is also controlled by Venus. It represents fair
complexion, chamring eyes, handsome figure, round face,
medium stature, well proportioned body, smart disposition,
sweet and soft voice, agreeable conversion, quite and
friendly disposition, cheerful and inclined to mirth.
According to Satyacharya, Venus signifies white color,
windy and phlegmatic constitution, Brahmin, south east
direction, curly hair, famine qualities a damsel of sixteen
years, graceful look, fine cloth, rame, help, logic, furnished
rooms, silver and pearls. _

Combination of planets is like double edge weapons.
They express themselves favorable or unfavorable
depending upon number of other factors. Each planetary
nature has a positive and negative concept. On the positive
scale, Venus, is cultural, artistic, sociable and affectionate,
on the negative side she is lazy, sensual, and tribal. Venus
is essentially a planet of harmony and beauty, of refinement
and culture. When she acquires the positive characteristics
by being situated in a Kendra or trikona and unafflicted is
capable of constructive blessing; graceful manner, a pleasing
personality and a sustained and scientific interest in fine
arts and music. When afflicted, produces unsatisfactory
domestic conditions and tendency towords pleasure
humanity to an extent detrimental to other interests, sloth,
profligacy etc.
A horoscope should be studied as a whole taking into
account the sum total of the effect of all the planets and
should never be interpreted on the basis of isolated or an
individual planet.
Mars - Venus combination in a girls' horoscope is highly
dangerousin lsl, 2nd, 3rd,4lh,7lh, 8,h, and 12,hhouse.Itmakes
her oversexed, she is a sex-bomb and can commit' sexual
crimes with even with servants. However Jupiter in the 10*,
or Jupiter aspecting 10* house or 10th lord generally acts as
a restairing influence on one's personal motivations. A
woman having benefics in 8*/or 9* becomes sexually
principled. Even malefics in 7* /8 * can not do any harm to
these girls if she has a benefic ill the 9* house.
The conjunction of Venus and Jupiter adds nobility to
the Venusians influences and deprives Venus of her baser
or sensual nature while activating the creative aspect of
Jupiter. The personal life of such a person will generally be
above board.
It has been said that further Venus is away from the Sun,
the greater will be the aptitude for music or other arts. The
nature of the music - sensual or spiritual, that one may
specialized in - depends upon the other factors influencing
Venus. I£ for instance, Venus is in Taurus, but in association.

of Jupiter or Saturn and being placed in he constellation of
Moon and Moon is not afflicted, the talent will be used for
specializing in devotional and spiritual music. If the Venus
is involved with Rahu, the indication will be popular and
the sensuous, when Ketu - Venus combination is found,
artistic talent seems along original lines, the native sticking
to conservative and classical methods.
Venus, the brilliant benefic and preceptor of As suras in
Hindu Astrology, is Indeed, a planet ofbeauty, charm, arts,
literature, music, dancing and comforts. When Sun
occupies the 12* house from Venus, the Venus is fairly
strong; the native can hope to get beneficial results from
Venus. Venus with Mercury in lst/5lh/9,hwil] give fame, title
and social success in life.
Music is an art. It has its own beauty. It directly appears
to one of the five senses i.e. sense of hearing. 2nd house
controls hearing oratory power. Today oratory is regarded
as an art, which is very necessary to impress audience,
particularly in schools, colleges, universities, law course,
parliament and in public gatherings. When 2nd house, 2nd
lord powerful with powerful mercury, one has a oratory
skill. Aspect of a natural benefic on the 2al house/2ndlord
will be an added qualification for a musician. 2lld house is
actually 5'1' from 101' i.e. Purvapoonyasthan of Karma.
To become great musician one should have a strong Lagna,
strong 3rd lord, strong 4* house and strong 9* house.
To become a renowned author, one should have a strong
Lagna, 3rd and4* houses and Jupiter should aspect the 9* house.
A musician changes the Rhythm and observes that the
audience is much pleased. In instrumental music Rhythm
is very essential specially in stinged ones. Bu.t in wind
instruments such as nadaswaram, flute etc. pitch add
beauty. It offers the power of melody. Venus is the lord of
Melody. According to Sanskrit texts, vocal music,
instrumental music and dance - all these three comprises
music. Immortal writer shelly has written
"Music, when soft voices die vibrates in the memory.
Lord Sri Krishana told to Narada:

"Naham ThistamiBaikunte Yoginam Hriclaya na ch
Madbhhakta Yatra Gayanti, Tatra ThisthamiNarada"
Which means that I do stay neither in heaven nor in the
heart of yogis, but stay where my devotee sings. Tansen,
the famous musician in the court of Emperor Akbar of Delhi
could produce rain from the sky using "MEGHAMALHAR
RAGA". Some ancient musicians could make the calf
spellbound so that he/she forgets to suck milk from his/
her mother's breasts. Music was very famous in acient India
- and such talented musicians are not found in either 20*/
or 21s' century.
Around 550 AD Bretius published a book on music which
was the text book in English Universities. Later Sebastion
Bach developed the music in 1700 AD. He is called the
father of modern music. Mozart began to render music in
a enchanting manner and he started composing from the
age of 9. Wolfjang Amadeus Mozart was born on 27-11756, the Austrian genius is one of the Western Music's
immortals. He was murdered by his Italian rival Salieri on
5* Dec. 1791. Immortal German Musician Ludwig Van
Bethoven was alive between 1770 - 1827.
Pandit Ravi Shankar, Ustad Bismillab Khan, Lata
Mangeskar, Yayudi Mehadin, Amizad Ali and his two
famous sons Ayanali Bangash, Amanali Bangash - sarod
players, etc. are some famous names in the field of music
who are still alive and making us feel proud. Nobel Lauareate
Rabindranath Tagore composed "Rabindrasangeet" which
is very popular in Bengal today and is played in Kolkata
Rajdhani Express.
Adhunik (for cinema and cheap entertainment), classical,
bhajans, Rabindrasangeet, folk music, popsongs - are some
well known branches of music in modern India. Bharat
Natyam Academy is producing dancers.
Goddess Saraswati is known as the only Goddess having
the most melodious Veena held in her hands, Swan is the
Logo of Saraswati. Lord Krishna is known for his melodious
tune in Flute made of bamboo, which enthralled not only
Gopis but also all the creations of God. Mighty king Ravan^yg

pleased Lord Shiva only by reciting Sama Veda. It has got
its own peculiar Rhythm, tune and melody. In the early sixties
Beatles introduced pop-songs in the music world in the West.
There is a popular saying in Bengal, that a man who does
not like music, can be a murderer, i.e. he should have
afflicted 3rd house. Afflicted 3rd house produces criminals.
By the combined benefic influence of Sun, Moon, lupiter,
Mercury and Venus one can become an immortal
musician. Jupiter confers spiritual songs and joy. His
vibrations calls one the higher attributes of man -
aspiration, devotion, religion, Ime spirituality, philanthropy,
benevolence, sympathy and brotherhood, all over their lives
to his ministry. His mission is to scallion suds of songs, joy
and place. The influence of other planets in the music world
may be described as below:
Moon - Gives taste for instrumental music.
Venus - Venus posited in voice signs (Gemini, Libra,
Aquarius, Virgo, and Sagittarius) or in the 2IlJ /or 3rl house
produces vocal musicians.
Neptune - Stringed instruments.
Mercury - In earthy signs (Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn) -
Mridangam. In other signs - Tabla.(a instrument mostly
played by Indian musicians with both hands. Allaharakha
is the famous Tabla player of modern India.
Singers should be free from stage fear. Astrologically if
Moon Mercury, lupiter do not have the contact or aspect
of Mars - the individual is filled with fear complex. Saturn
being a depressor, people having Moon and Mercury
affiliated by Saturn will have the inferiority complex and
fear complex. When the lord of 6* house goes to 3rJ house,
it makes the man devoid of valour.
Weak Mars makes a man timid (particularly debilitated
Mars). Boldness comes from strong Mars. Mars m2"1 /3d /
Venus-in short ascension (Gemini, Taurus, Aries, Pisces
and Capricorn)- Flute.
Venus-in long ascension (Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
Scorpio, Sagittarius)-Violin.
Scorpio, Sagittarius)-Violin. 374

Ascendant being Scorpio or Sagittarius, 3rl lord Saturn
occupying 7* house aspeciting Lagna / Lagna lord can
give rise in skill in instrumental music. •
YOGAS FOR MUSICIANS AND
INSTRUMENTALISTS
3rJ house stands for the throat from where our voices are
originated. It also represents right hand. To becomes a
famous musician or an instrumentalist one should have
the following astrological combination.
1. Our profession is controlled by the 10* house so any
relationship between the 3rd and 10* lord or these houses
makes musicians Poverty is generated when weak 3rd lord
makes relationship with the 10* lord. Lord of 3rd in 10* in
Mercurion or Venusion sign makes the native a signer or
an actor. It has been noticed that the 95% musicians are
poor people.
2. Moon in Lagna, Jupiter in quadrant / trines, Venus,
Mercury and Sun in the 2nd house - all these makes one a
famous musician.
3. If the 3rd house is strong and is associated with or
aspected by Mercury or Jupiter, the native will have
melodies voice.
4. If from the 3rd house. Mercury, Venus and Jupiter
are in angle, the native will be a popular singer.
5. If the 3rd house has connection with Neptune and
Venus, he will be using string instruments.
6. If Mars - Saturn - Venus is posited either in the 3rd
house or in the 11* house (left hard) the native will be
using Tabla, Mrindanga etc. where dead skin is used.
Aspect or occupation of benefic planets on the 3rd house
increases the inherent talent of the native.
3rd house stands for the throat from where our voices
are originated. It also represents right hand. According to
Satyachanya, 3rd lord in 10* hoLise in the sign of Mercury
or Venus makes the native a singer or an actor or a dancer
or an instrumentalist. Actual observation is that the
angular position of the 3rd lord usually gives artistic talent
depending upon other supporting astrological factors. 375

Exchange of lord of 3rd and 10* house or if 3rd and 10*
lords are joined together in the sign of Mercury or Venus,
the native will be a successful singer, dancer or an
instrumentalist or ajournalist. Virgo and Libra sign falling
in 10* house promote fine arts like music and painting.
10lh lord in the navamsa sign of Mercury or Venus
indicates an artistic career in general. 10th lord in 5* house
uncombust and in the navamsa sign of Venus shows an
expert musician.
For film stars the position of Neptune is of major
importance. Quite a good number of film stars are born
with Pieces an ascendant / Moon sign / Sun sign and
Neptune occupying 10* house near Zenith.
For success in stunt roles in motion picture, the Sun, the
Moon and Mars should be in fiery signs in 10* house or at
least one of the above planets should occupy 10,h house,
other planets having benefic aspects with M. C.
Moon is the controller of Raaga, Swara and Taala. The
native will have natural attitude for singing if Moon occupies
1 st / 2nd / 3rd II* / 9* or 1 1 th house in airing or earthy signs.
Venus is the planet for music. 2nd house gaverns throat
like the 3ri house and the Virgo sign helps melodious voice.
Musical voice should be determined from these significators.
If Venus occupies 3rd house in exaltation sign Pieces, it
should promise of vocal music as 3rd house is the house of
voice and Venus - the planet of the arts. With Taurus or
Libra as lagna and 3rd house being strong one can hope to
sings well. Lagna being Leo or Pieces and 3rd lord Venus
joining 4* house aspected by lagna lord helps music/ fine
arts, poetry etc.
If Mars - Saturn - Venus are posited either in the 3rd
house or in the 1 1 * house the native will be using Tabla,
Mrindanga etc. where dead skin is used.
Gandharva Yoga : if 1 0* lord occupies 3rd / 7* 11* house,
lagna lord and Jupiter are in association, the Sun is exalted or
powerful and Moon occupies 9* house -the above yoga is formed.
This yoga is also said to be formed when ascendant is
Taurus or Libra and Jupiter and Venus occupy Kendra.

The yoga makes the native super musician indicating a
good proficiency in music, dance and drama.
SANGEETA VIDYA YOGA
If the 2n:1 hoLise or 2,,d lord is connected with 5* house or
5* lord and Venus in any manner, this yoga is caused.
Result is musical talent in the native.
KALANIDHI YOGA
This yoga can be formed by the different ways.
1 . Jupiter conjoined with or aspected by Mercury and
Venus in 2ni or 5* house in sign of Mercury or Venus.
2. Jupiter conjoined with or aspect by Mercury and
Venus in 9* house. The result is proficiency in fine arts
including music.
DANCE AND DANCER
Venus is the main Karaka planet as Venus controls
beauty, Swara and Taala. The Moon also controls Taal and
Naatha. Unless, the Moon is favorable, one will not be able
to master the art of dancing. The moon should not occupy
fiery or watery signs.
Neptune should be in watery and earthy sign or be in
conjunction or in good aspect of Moon Mercury, Jupiter or
Venus. The delicate feelings of heart are fanned by Neptune.
Success in stage and screen depends on this Neptune.
Dancer should have strong Mercury and strong Mars.
Mercury should be in fiery or airy signs and not conjoined
with Saturn / Rahu / Ketu or Uranus. Dancing is an art for
entertainment and 5* house should not be afflicted. There
will be no financial success in dancing if VenLis is in bad aspect
with malefics or if Venus occupies 6* / 8* / 12* house.
CINE ACTORS AND STARS.
5th lord with Venus in 9* house in Taurus or Libra sign
aspected by 2nd lord indicates great actors.
Ascendant Libra with the Moon - Jupiter conjunction
there in aspected by ascendant lord Venus from 7* house
is a very good combination to become a successful actor as
in the case of N. T. Ramarao - the Ex - chief Minister of
Andra Pradesh, who was the founder of-Telegu D.esam

Party in the early 80's.
For majority cases of cine stars. Mercury is found in
strength. Fie should not occupy watery signs and should
not be in 6,h / 8th / 12th house.
Where there is a show of beauty, clothes, wealth and
Jewellery, strong Venus is required for success.
Neptune, Mars and Uranus should be strong. For
interesting love scenes Uranus and Neptune are to be seen.
Neptune 'should be in 1 st /- 5th V 7* / 9* or 1 1* house.
YOGAS FOR MUSIC COMPOSERS
The greatest devotee of Lord Rama, Sri Thigaraja was a
great Musician and composer of songs on Lord Ram.
Example - 9. The horoscope ofThiagaraja has been pen
down from Notable Horoscopes of Dr. B.V. Raman.
According to Bepin Behari (vide Esoteric principles of
Vedic Astrology P267)' the 2nd and 5* houses in a chart are
concerned with creative potentials and creativity of the
individual.
In the above chart we find 2n,J/3rd lords are placed in the
10*, which flourished his talent in the musical world.
Mercury and Mars are involved in the Parivartan Yoga, as
a result there is a close connection between 3rd / 5* houses.
2nd lord is placed in the constellation of 4* lord. Thus there
is a close relationship between 2nd, 3rd, 4* and 5th lords.
Jupiter is aspecting his 10* house - making him a famous
man of the society of his time. His Yogakaraka Mars is
aspecting his 3rd house, Venus is placed in his own house
and the Sun is placed in the 12* house from Venus. Venus
provides best results under such circumstances. Strong 2nd
house / 3rd house / 4* house / 5* house and strong Venus
made him a famous musician and a composer of music also.
Most of the composers will be skilful artists who could
play whereas all musicians cannot compose.
Jupiter - Venus When free from affliction his native
can be composer of light and tuneful music.
Mars -Venus Can compose for dramas.
Saturn - Venus -Mars Can compose for love songs
Jupiter Can compose prayers .

Example No.9
Date 04/05/1767 Time 1 1 30;00 Day Monday Lat 17:22:00 North Long 78:26:00 East
Zone 78:26:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 20:20 56
Balance of Dasa : Saturn 15 Years 10 Months 4 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspai
Mercury Helps to compose for dance
Venus - Moon If posited in the 10th house, the native
can acquire great talent as a musician and musical writer.
Let us now examine a few birth charts of famous
musicians:
Example 10 : Km. Lata Mangeskar - all time great singer
DOB 28.09.1929, Saturday, 23hrs, Mumbai
Jupiter is placed in Lagna; 2rd house is hemmed between
benetics, 3rd lord is placed in 3 rf|, 4th lord is placed in the 5th
hoLise and has formed a strong Raja Yogas with 5th lord
Mercury.

Example No. 10
Date 28/09/1929 Time 23 00:00 Day Saturday Lat 18:58 00 North Long 72 50:00 East
Zone 82:30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22.36:55
Balance of Dasa : Mercury 15 Years 10 Months 23 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
In the 4l", Venus is strong since he is endowed with
directional strength. The native will get happhiess from
mother, relatives, conveyance and material prosperity. Sun
is the dispositor of Venus. Any planet when Moves to 2nd /
trine / quadrants / or lllhfrom own bhava, boosts his own
bhava indications. Strong Sun has made Venus super strong.
Strong 2,,d/5lh lord Mercury with 4th lord Sun made her a
creative genius. *
For the nation wide fame are should house strong Moon.
Her Moon is placed in her own house and hence very strong.
She has been born under Parijata Yoga a very rare yoga

tor all the immoitals like Shivaji, Aurangazeb, Vivekanand
etc. Lord of Lagna is placed in a Kendra, whose dispositer
Sun is placed in a trine, whose dispositor is also in a trine
forming this unique and unparallel Parijata yoga.
Her .name has entered the Genies record book for
recording maximum number of songs in one's lifetime.
She can sing with melodious voice in more than 25
languages.
I have observed, if anybody is born on Saturday - he /
she has to face some terrible anxious moments of life. She
has been denied marriage and children by God. I strongly
believe retrograde 5th lord in 5th, aspected by Saturn denied
her children.
Example -11 Smt. Malavika Kanan
DOB 29.12.1930 at 12:00 PM in Lucknow
She is a beauty queen for the presence of Moon in Lagna.
I first saw her as a living Goddess Saraswati with Veena in
hand in 1984.
She is a legendary figure in the field of classical musical
world. She is a Bengali woman, but married another
legendary figure in the classical world, a Tamilian Mr. A.T
Kanan who died in September 2004. Thousands of persons
showed their respect for Mr. Kanan who breathed his last
inTallygunj, Kolkata.
Both of them where living in the Sangeet Academy
circle, in Tallyguing, Kolkata. They were provided with a
well spacious Bungalow with many servants, driver and
cars. In April 2004 she was also gravely ill and was
fighting for her life. She became widow at the fag end of
life. I'm yet to come across such a dedicated couple in
India. They are like Piere Courie and Madam Courie of
France, the Nobel Laureates.
She has a unique horoscope - because all the planets are
in trines and quadrates. She has been born under Parijata
Yoga. Lord of Lagna is in a quadrant, whose dispositer is
in another quadrant, whose dispositer is Jupiter himself
forming Parijata Yoga. Such native is famous, brilliant
learned, get patronage of state, holds conveyances,

Example No.1 1
Date 29/12/1930 Time 12:00 00 Day Monday Lat 26 50:00 North Long 80:54:00 East
Zone 82 30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:37.58
Balance of Dasa ; Mercury 4 Years 7 Months 4 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspai
conforming to traditions and customs. Since she is my
relative (from my wife's side) f found the wisdom of saga
are quite true in her life.
Her 4lh/10,h lords have exchanged places forming Maha
Yoga. 28 such yogas are formed jf>ym the mutual exchange
of lords of 1,2,45,7, 9, 10&ll,h. Increase in respect of luck
pertaining to the houses involved. These are extremely
benefic Yogas which push anybody to the zenith of life even
from an ordinary level.
The man bom in Maha Yoga will get the blessings of the
Goodness Laxmi. He will be protected by sovereign airjjg2

will command vehicles, wealth and children. They are well
dressed and wear costly ornaments. They will receive
valuable presents from the king or people in authority.
Special Role Of4,h And 10th Lords
5th and9th house are related to our activity of the
tVi tH
previous birth. Those who have strong 5 and 9 houses,
they come to this earth for harnessing the fruits of previous
good deeds. These are usually lucky people. Einstein's 5
and 9* houses were free from malefic influences and both
these are influenced by Jupiter. Generally it is believed that
dasas of 5 and 9th lords are always good for any native. If
it is afflicted, inauspicious results will be obtained during
the ruling periods of 5th/ 9,u lords or planets connected with
them by aspect or conjunction. In Phaladeepika Sri
Manteshwara has staterl
qwdmr:
cFdTfsJT- ^PJ'GSSST |
^cRfciT'yssnPr fcfrdfci
TTcfrTrmci Tf fcigcRTTPT: I I
Meaning that if the quadrants (l“/4,h/7'l,/10th) are free
from any malefic and if lord of Lagna and Jupiter are
together or associated in quadrants, the native live long,
free from diseases, doing good acts, earning merit.
Likewise another sloka says, if the Lagna is very strong,
free from malefic association or aspects and enjoying the
benign aspect of a powerful benefic posited in a Kendra,
the native lives long averting premature death, with
permanent prosperity.
Our activity in the present life largely depends on these
two house 4,h and 10th. A strong 4lh lord and 4lh house
indicates a good career (See Essentials of Hindu predictive
Astrology by Late R. Santhanam P 163), 4lh house is very
vital house because it controls our happiness of mind.
If Tlord and 4 'house is very strong and a benefic planet
occupies the 4* hoLise, the individual will enjoy Raja Yoga.
Sometimes malefics in the 4* house cause only discomfort

and want of happiness unnecessarily. Many malefic
planets in the 4th house in respect of a female subject may
affect her character adversely.
When the 4th lord is in the 10lhand 10th lord is in 4th and
in addition Mars is powerfully located or in exaltation
sign, they may possess much landed poetry.
th
If the 4 house falls in a moveable sign (Aries, Cancer,
Libra, Capricorn) and coincidently the 4th lord is also in a
moveable sign, one may be the possessor of a few
mansions.
Now we will analyse which plants yogas made her a
musician (in the chart 11)
Jupiter is placed in the 3C house of zodiac, i.e. in
Gemini 3rd lord Venus is placed in the 9th, aspecting its
own house. In the 9 , Venus gives happiness from father,
preceptors and travels. When under benefic aspects, the
native may inherit paternal property. The person will be
wise, friendly and full of intuition for achievement of art,
literature ^or music (vide AM Feb 1979 P 217)
Her 2n / 9 lord Mars has generated a necchvanga
Raja yoga, because its dispositer is in Lagna. Lagnesh /
4 lord Jupiter is strong for the parivar^an yoga. ^rd lord
is aspecting its own house. 4th lord / 4 ’ house, 5 lord /
5th house all are strong. These rare yogas and placement
of VenLis in the 9th house, all the Raja yogas as mentioned
earlier made her a legendary figure in the music line.
When 9th house is having a benefic, several disquieting
features evaporate. She can compose song. Strong 4 /
-j-n
5 house gifted her with this unnatural talent. Her
students are well known musicians in the various parts
of the globe. Retrograde and debilitated Mars in the 5th
house denied her any children. Ketu in the 7^ house
aspected by Saturn made her widow at fag end of her
life. She is not maintaining good health from January
2005. All the phophecies of Sages are true in her real
life. I request the readers to learn astrology more deeply
- so that they may be helpful in the correct
interpretation of birth charts of the public. •>,

3rd HOUSE AND ASTROLOGY SKILL
Sky is represented by the 10L'1 house. 5* (Knowledge) of
10?’ is 2ri . So therefore in order master this diving branch of
science or to have sound knowledge on sky related matters
one should have relationship between 2nd and 10* lord
(astrology deals with stars planets, purva punya destny etc.)
Beside this yoga one should have a relationship between
Venus and Saturn. 2nd lord of the zodiac is Venus, 10th lord
of the zodiac in SatLim. With these two combinations one
can become a perfect astrologer. 1 1th lord in 3rd house
provides Vaksiddhi.
11th house stands for gains of money and knowledge.
Bhava occupied by lllh lord flourishes. 11th lord in 3rd
(upachayasthanas are interconnected). lllhlord in 3rd allows
growth of various fields like knowledge, wealth, courage
etc. A knowledgeable person will arrive near to truth (i. e.
his predictive skill in astrology will very near the truth or in
other words he will attain Vaksiddhi). All discoveries are
made by very intelligent person who has deep
understanding in a particular field.
1 1* house also 311 (super intelligence faculty) from 3rd. So
11* lord in 3ri makes a man rajorsharp intelligent person.
Let us study the horoscope of Sri N. C. Lahiri, who
introduced Chaitrapaksha Ayanamsa and wrote the
sciencitific Ephmeris, for the benefit of the astrologers
throughout the globe. Raman Ayanamsa is not good, written
by Sri K. N. Rao of Bharatiya Vidyabhavan, Delhi in his
books. Shri Lahiri was a renowned physicist and a great
mathematician. We the present the generation of astrologers
should bow our head in his memory for his wonderful
contribution in the field of astrology.
Example 12 .'Horoscope ofN.C. Lahiri - writer ofmodern
Ephemeris in 1954.
Gemini - Lagna, Jupiter; Cancer - Rahu ; Leo - Mars;
Virgo - Sun, Mercury, Scorpio, Venus ; Capricorn - Ketu ;
Acquires - Saturn ; Aries - Moon
He was a super intelligent person and had deep
knowledge in mathematics and physics. He was a scienti^g

Example No. 12
Date 05/10/1906 Time 23.30:00 Day Friday Lat 23 43:00 North Long 90.26:00 East
Zone 88 20 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22:17:40
Balance of Dasa : Venus 1 Years 7 Months 9 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
by profession. Lord of Lagna is exalted in the 4th house,
generating Bhadra yoga - a Mahapurush Yoga - the man
bom with this yoga will be highly intelligent, learned, gifted
with long life and health. Budhaditya. Yoga in the 4,h house
made him ambitious, intelligent, quick witted, thoughtful,
studious, capable and aspiring. Jupiter in Lagna is the gift
of God. Jupiter's gift is like sea water, and Venus's gift is
like river water. Those people who have strong Jupiter -
gets wealth and wisdom very easily.
His Jupiter is the 7th / 10th lord p'aced in Lagna. In such a
yoga one would like to work tih the end of life and be

known for one's work. When 10"' lord is placed in tries /
quadrants, Khetm Simhasonyoga is formed. Such a native
becomes world famous, acquires power and wealth.
Prophesies of Sages came true in his life.
9* lord Saturn is placed in his own house aspected by
the 10,hlord Jupiter. Strong Saturn, strong Jupiter, strong
Mercury shaped his mundane journey in a very favorable
manner. II131 lord in 3ri house made him a rajor shaped
intelligent person.
Since the Kendras of Moon are not occupied by any
benefic he left the earth before he could complete his 75
years. Benefics in Kendra of Moon - usually grant long life
to any native.
A yogi can become a Trikalaggya (who knows present,
fast and future of anybody), but for an astrologer it is really
very different to becomes Trikalaggya. Strong Sun, SatLim,
Moon, Jupiter and Ketu can make a man Vaksiddha or
Trikalaggya, where as anybody can become a good
astrologer when his Mercury, Jupiter, SatLim and Ketu are
strong. An astrology cannot tell about the past lives of an
individual, but a yogi can tell the past life, present life and
future life of an individual.
The yogic process (linkage of one's self with the absolute)
functionally aims in reduction in the metabolic needs to
that all functional organs said in harmony for a minimum
consumption of energy. This also called a process of
renunciation.
Supreme bliss comes to that yogi alone whose mind has
become perfectly tranquil, rajas (metabolic transformation
of the body) has been subdued, who has been identified
with Brahman (Absolutes) and is tint less. Here moot point
is Santaranjasam, the subdued projecting power from
which activity emanates and mental modification such as
attachment and grief are continually produced
(Vivekcudamani HI).

Chapter - VIII
Father-in- Law And The 3n'' House
Father-in-law is judged from the 3rd house and motherin-law is judged from the 10th house. Karaka for fatherin-law is Jupiter. So the 3^ house of Jupiter should also
be Judged for the father-in-law.
Example 13 - Problematic father-in-law
DOB - 5.8.79, 7.=20 AM,.Allahabad
She is the daughter of a lady principal of Noida Senior
Secondary School. She got married in January 2002.
Husband is an MBA and is employed in Delhi. Fatherin-law controls the entire house and he forces his son
and daughter-in-law to give him all the money, they earn.
Her 3rd house is aspected by Saturn and 3rd house of
Jupiter is aspected by Mars.
Malefics in Lagna spells trouble for the native. Her
mother left the house of her father when she was hardly
6 months old.
th
When Rahu or Mars is placed in the angle of 6 lord -
lot of litigations crop up in life. Her 6th /7th lord Saturn is
placed in the Lagna with Rahu. She is fighting for her
survival since childhood. 4th lord in 11th (it has traveled
8,h house hum its natal position) denied her happiness
in life. In January 2003 - she got a son.
Presence of four benefic and malefic planets in the
12’ house will make her a rich lady in the near futLi^gg

Example No.13
Date 05/08/1979 Time 07 20:00 Day Sunday Lat 25:27 00 North Long 81:50 00 East
Zone 82:30 00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 23 18:40
Balance of Dasa : Ketu 3 Years 8 Months 0 Days
(see adraced predictive Astrology Vol. 1 by Dr. S.S.
Chatterjee). She has acquired a BBA degree and perusing
MBA degree from Symbiosis college, Poona- through
distant learning program.
Example 14 - Loss of father-in-law before marriage
DOB - 14.6.1945, 2=45PM 1ST 3=45 Bengal time, Kolkata
She has Ketu in the 3rj house aspected by Saturn from
the 9th house. 3rd lord is placed in the llthhouse. 3rj house
of Jupiter is aspected by Mars and Rahu. So her husband
comes from noble family and she lost her father-in-law
before marriage. _ .

Example No. 14
Data 14/06/1945 Time 14:45:00 Day Thursday Lat 28 39:00 North Long 77:13:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 22 50:04
Balance of Dasa : Mercury 8 Years 3 Months 19 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
Her Husband's Lagna is Aries. From this 8th from 9m =
4th house = Cancer, which is hemmed between malefics
Saturn is aspecting 9th lord Jupiter from Gemini. We should
stoop down our head in gratitude for our Sagas for framing
so many golden rules for the benefit of mankind.
9'1' from 7,h is 3rd, on account of this reason father-in-law
is judged from the 3rd hoLise. 4th from 7th is 10th. So motherin-law is Judged from the 10th house. Horoscope can reveal
the clues regarding one's relationships with in-laws. If2"d
house is heavily afflicted, one does not have good
relationship with his in-laws.

If 1 llh lord is in 3rJ or 7th house, one will not have good
terms with in-laws. This aphorism is stunningly true to
the knowledge of the author.
If the 3rd house occupies 6,h/8lh/ 12th lords or any of the
above planets, aspect the 3rd house - the native will not get
any help from the father-in-law.
If the 3rd lord is placed in 6,l,/8ll,/or 12th the father-inlaw may be harmful to the native. If the 3rd lord is placed
in the star of 6*h/8th/12lh lords - same result is expected.
Let us study one example
Example 15 - Divorce within one month after marriage
DOB - 15.2.198078=30PM/Ghaziabad. After passing
her BA examination, she got_married_in_Nov._200L but
Example No. 15
Date 15/02/1930 Time 20 30 00 Day Friday Lat 28 40 00 North Long 77.26 00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East SriSanatan Ayanamsa 23 19:06
Balance of Dasa : Moon 0 Years 8 Months 15 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal

retailed home within a month. She is the daughter of a
prosperous garments exporter and she has a younger sister.
Her 3rd lord Mars is placed in 12th with Rahu. 3rd house
is aspected by Saturn, 3rd house of Jupiter is aspected by
Ketu. Her father-in-law perhaps played the instrumental
role in the divorce.
She has acquired on MA (Marketing) degree from UK
Malefics in Lagna always spells trouble for the native -
even if it is a yogakarka. Her retrograde Saturn (5th +6'1'
lord) in Lagna has multiplied her number of enemies in
life. Exchange of lord of Lagna with 6th lord is Daina yoga.
They will suffer at the hands of enemy. There will be several
impediments to all their undertakings.

Chapter - IX
3rd House And Writers
Poets, writers and skilled artisans are born with
favourable planetary configurations. Poets or writers of
national and international fame cannot be produced from
the schools or universities. Such persons are born with
natural talents. Whenever 3rd lord is placed ii* the Kendra/
Trikona - there is an artistic talent inside the native. Well
fortified 3ri" house allows the native to become a good
writer. The horoscope really tells us the nature of
profession, its rank and file and the tune of prosperity.
Venus in the 2nd house /or 8th house of Moon or Lagna
gives poetic talent. A poetic mind is common
characteristics for almost all good writers.
The 5th house is the house of intellect and sanity. Literary
work is a sort of intellectual exercise. Thus the 5lh house, 5,h
lord must be well placed and strong. Benefic influence on
the 5th lord - increases the writing caliber.
YOGAS FOR A GOOD WRITER
1. There should be a relationship between 5th and
9lh lords .
2. Benefic plants in the 5lh/or9ft house from Karakamsa
Lagna - make good writers. This is as per Sage Jaimini.
3. Saraswati Yoga : When Venus, Jupiter and Mercury
are placed in trines / quadrants or in the second house -
Saraswati yoga is formed. With this Yoga the native becomes
a highly respected scholar with talent as writer or a
mathematician. Bertrand Russel, Upton Sinclair, Jack
Londan. Omar Khayyam and Rabindrnath Tagore were
bom with this rare yoga (see AM, July 1976, P531)

Immortal writer of Bengal Sarat Chadnra
Chattopadhyay had Jupiter and Venus in Trines but
Mercury was placed in the 8th house, but in a Kendra of
Moon. His 3rd lord Venus has conjoined Moon in Cancer,
in 5th house, aspected by Divine Jupiter from Scorpio (he
had Pieces Lagna). He was a great novelist, when Ravinder
Nath Tagore was in his hay days.
4. If the 5 ford is placed in the 1 1 'house - he acquires
great knowledge in diversified fields and becomes a
reputed writer.
1 1th house is the 7th from 5th and is an upachayasthan
from Lagna. It indicates prosperity and growth in respect
of everything that is associated with the 5th house as the
11th house stands for growth. It assures growth of children,
good education, spiritual knowledge, Mantras and Tantras.
One will have intention towards business and business
associated things. He should have success in speculative
fields. We shall now discuss the birth chart of a famous
Nobel Prize winner.
In 1913, the three principal competitors for the Nobel
Literature Award were Anatole France, Rabindranath
Tagore and Thomas Hardy. At that time Tagore's named
just heard in Europe, but the other two persons were
literary titans known over the world. But in reality, Tagore
was given the Nobel Award which was beyond all
expectations of the literacy critics.
Exp. 1 6 Horoscope of Anatole France, Noble Prize winner
Time 7:30 AM, Paris. His Lagna is occupied by Mars and
Ketu, two dreaded malefics. Malefics in Lagna spell trouble
for the native. His 8111 house is aspected by Mars and 8lh
house is hemmed between malefics. Afflicted 8th house
provides stiff resistances in life.
His 10th lord is placed in 9th. The 9th lord in 10lh makes
the native virtuous, without anger, happy, do brave acts
and is famous in the society where he lives. When the 10*
lord is in 9th, the native will have grandeur, magnanimity,

Example No. 16
Date 16/04/1844 Time D7. 30 00 Day Tuesday Lat 48:50:00 North Long 2:20:00 East
Zone 0:00:00 East Sri Sanatan Ayanamsa 21:25:22
Balance of Dasa : Mercury 13 Years 0 Months 4 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit-Cuspal
good fortune but he will be worried and with no peace of
mind (AM Aug 2000 P 701). So we can really imagine that
in 1913, this gentleman was swimming in the current of
grief, for being rejected by the Noble committee. He had
to wait long 8yrs for the Nobel Prize. With in 3 years after
receiving this prestigious prize, he entered grave for internal
peace. Thomas Hardy died un - nobelled. It is of course a
matter of painful fact for Indians that Tagore is much less
read by the modern world compared to his erstwhite
competitors. The author was surprised in 1974 when he
found that hardly anybody knows him in USA.

Purva Punya is judged from the 5th house. Those people
who have enough Purva Punya they come to this earth only
tor reaping rich dividends for the meritorious works in their
past lives. Tagore's 5* / 1st lords have exchanged places -
confirming with enough Purva Punya balance. In France's
horoscope 5th lord is a combust planet, and is placed in the
I2hhouse in enemy camp. Aspect of Saturn on the 3* house,
and afflicted 8th house multiplied his sufferings in life. A
benefic in either 12" / or 8th makes the man happy in life.
ROLE OF EXALTED 3rd LORD
1 . Aries Lagna : 3rl lord Mercury is in Virgo in its own
house. In such a case the native will get help from his
maternal uncle. Strong Mercury increases the level of
intelligence and should get many good friends in life 6th
house is both a trika and Upachaya. Here presence of
benefic in 6th will help the native to earn more money.
Upachaya lord in Upachaya house generates excellent
results. The person will be capable to become an orator or
a judge or a person who command over other. The native
may take bribe as the 6th house deals illegal deals of money.
He can make friendship with his enemies i. e, he will be
diplomatic in nature. Strong Mercury nourishes his
commonsense. He will have much business caliber.
2. Taurus Lagna : Here 3rd lord Moon will be in Taurus,
a native whose early part of life or infancy must have been
full of turmoils and tension. He will have prowess to
develop own empire and will rise in life through self efforts.
He will be virile, strong, of stout body and a very good
mental disposition. If the lord of Lagna and Sun is also
strong in the horoscope he will roll in money. Moon is the
Sampat Karaka planet. So it will grant enough money in
life. Strong Moon will also make other planets strong. Sun
and Moon are the royal planets, if they are week - the
native is destined to suffer in life.
3. Gemini Lagna : Here Sun gets exalted in the 1 11''
house. Sun represents success and government. 11th house
stands for gain through government and through rich
friends of the society. He will possess conveyances. It wj^g0

grant a long life to the native. Malefics in 3rd and 11th
increase the longevity. He will acquire high status and has
an enviable position. The strong Sun in the n,hwill bring
good friends and leadership qualities. He will be ever after
making money and will be successful in his work. He will
acquire a beautiful wife, will also attract other women,
will enjoy abundant paternal gains, but be grieved on
account of loss of children. If the Sun in the 11th in conjoined
with or aspected by a Malefic, debilitated or mimical planet,
entire accumulated wealth may vanish.
4. Cancer Lagna : Here 3rd lord Mercury gets exalted in
it own house in Virgo. A man remains happy with his brother
and sister and can bring under him a recalcitrant subordinate through sheer tact and intelligence. Kalyan Verma
states that the native will be quite cunning. One will be
industrious in nature, but will not be close to his own people.
He will be always after money. This position of Mercury
will not help a long lease of life. If Mercury is aspected by
Mars or by Saturn his sister will be childless.He will be expert
in business advise (or consultations), will be modest patient,
and capable of proving his mettle in tiny assignment. If this
3rJ house is not aspected by Malefic - it may indicate speaking
ability or oratory, artistic, dramatic skills. This may produces
good chartered accounts who takes a profession which
involves calculation as the 3rd house is the 6"' from the 10'h
house - the hoLise of profession.
5. Leo Lagna : Here 3rd lord Venus is posited in Pieces,
in the 8th hoLise. Venus in the 8th house in a malefic sign or in
a sign raled by an enemy will reduce life span. But here
exalted Venus will grant longevity upto 75 yrs. He will have
a favorably (8* house controls marital bond) disposed spouse
but she will incur unexpected danger or perennial illness.
His prosperity will often be cheguered. He will be highly
charitable but will not have orthlodox habits concerning
foods. He will incur inheritances and liabilities as well, from
his ancestors. One will serve the government and will be
prosperous with all comforts of life If associated with malefics
- it will not give good luck. Too many malefics in the Sggy

provides stiff resistances in life, and also curtails longevity.
6. Virgo Lagna :Here Mars is placed in Capricorn
making him a very intelligent person. Be ever sinful and
inquisitive of other's affairs. He will be not friendly with
others. He will be having difficulty in producing children.
7. Libra Lagna: An exalted Jupiter in cancer makes a
man superior to his father and elder brother. He lives in a
big house where many people come for lunch. We find
Shri K. N. Rao has exalted Jupiter hi Cancer. Who has also
Libra Lagna. Really many big persons visit his house -
making the prophecy of Cham at Chintamoni true in real
life in the 21st century. He held high chair in Govt, offices
in various cities of India. The native will in addition obtain
a great deal of progress in his life. On account of this reason
Shri Rao converted himself to an elegant astrologer from a
•bureaucrat level before retirement. He will enjoy ancestral
inheritance. His parents will be long lived. He will not enjoy
much happiness through his progeny (Shri Rao is a
bachelor), unless Jupiter is close to meridian. Any planet
close to meridian provides excellent career. Any undertaking
he commences will quickly flourish. His contribution to the
society will be of a great order and last long. He will be
associated with great men and great deeds. He will earn
enough wealth and will be endowed with knowledge of
scripture. He will have artistic talent. The prophecies of Sages
of yore of India came stunningly true in life of Shri Rao.
8. Scorpio Lagna: Here 3rJ Lord will be placed in Libra.
SatLim is the lord of 3rd / 4,b house. His relatives will not
repose much confidence in the native. He will suffer from
illness or some problems always; Will never experience
happiness in life. Retrograde SatLim will produce
imbalance, some peculiar disease may strike the native. He
will often be confronted by professional debacles. Saturn
in the 12th house with a benefic planet will give wealth
and happiness. He may visit foreign countries early.
9. Sagittarius Lagna : Here 3rd lord Saturn will in Libra.
Much financial gain is predicted, will not have much
desires, be interested in scriptures, will conquer enemiggg

and be eulogized by man of virtues. Will make him great
scholar and abundantly fortunate. He will gain landed
properties. He will have special liking for cold stuff.
10. Capricorn Lagna : Here Jupiter will be exalted in
Cancer generating Hamsa Yoga - a Mahapurush Yoga.
He gets happiness from wife and has frequent foreign
trips. When Jupiter not aspected by malefics - he will be
happy in married life. Retrograde Jupiter in the 7th house
proves a major setback fa- marital happiness. Jupiter in the
7th house, in general joining Rahu, Ketu, Saturn or Mars
will lead to remarriage or extra - marital relationship. One
will rise to a higher position than one's father. The native
will be good looking, soft spoken and will have a good status.
If Jupiter is connected with Lagna lord, he will gave a good
son, relationship between father and son will be cordial.
11. Aquarius : Here 3rd lord Mars will be placed in
Capricorn. Mars is also his 1 6 lord, 10lh lord in if always
grant foreign jobs. From 12th, Mars will be aspecting 3rd, 6th
and 7"' house. He will be materialistic in nature and would
always like to possess all comforts and luxuries of life. It
provides injuries to head, operation to lower abdomen,
appendicitis problems and removal of gall bladder.
12. Pisces : Here Venus will be placed in Lagna. The
native will be have charming appearance with thievish
nature,. He will have dull married life. This aphorism is
stunningly tme to the knowledge of the author. Fond of
finer things in life, one will dress up attractively though
not gaudily. Perfumes and fine cloths are consuming
passion of the native. Besides these., one would like all the
comforts in life. Eloquence is another attribute that one
has, therefore one will be a good orator. One will enjoy
female company and also benefit through them. Avoiding
work will be a habit. He will gain from politics or
government. He will be skill full in arguments and counter
arguments. He will be fickle minded person and be intent
upon creating misunderstanding among his men.For every
bhava or house in a horoscope, its opposite bhava also play
a significant role. It may be complementary or adverse. In

other words no bhava is complete without depending on
its opposite bhava. When we want know about the 2nd
house, the 8* house stands for coordination, for example,
6 sets are always to be considered (1-7 ,2-8, 3-9 ,4-10,5-] 1 ,612) for a fare decision. The 4L'’ lord, well placed and strong
can promote one's career. In the similar logic strong 3rd house
will increase luck factor, governed by the 9l!l house. Without
strong luck factor, everything evaporates in air.
Vastudosha and The 3rd House
An afflicted third house does not provide piece of
mind. (because mind is controlled by fourth house) Severe
Vastudosha surfaces out, because it is 12lh from 4th Afflicted
3rd house spoils marriage, does not grant happiness of life
(see Astrology Applied vol 1, example 6. P 70 by Dr. S.S.
Chatlerjee).3rd house acts as remote control of marriage.
Let US study an example of unhappiness in married life.
Exp. 17: Unhappiness in marrigedlife DOB 1-8-72, 1=30
AM, Darjeeling.
After finishing her B. Sc. and MBA degrees she got
married with a highly qualified man, settled in USA (Ph.
D in mechanical engineer, BE from Rurkee) in 1997 during
Venus - Jupiter dasa. As soon as Venus - Saturn dasa started
- she felt like a fish out of water. She lost charms in living
with her husband. Divorce was Filed in 1998, and finally
she came out from the wedlock in 2000. She is now
working in USA and has applied for green card.
Her 3rd house has Ketu, Sun, debilitated Mars, retrograde
Mercury aspected by Saturn from Lagna. So her 3rd house
is highly afflicted by malefics. Malefics in Lagna always
bring disaster for the native even it is a yogakaraka. This is
stunningly true to the knowledge of the author. Sages did
not praise Malefics in Kendras.
For a colourful life, Saturn should be aspected by Jupiter.
In her case we find her Saturn and Jupiter have 6/8
relationships. Such a1 relationship always bring ups and
down in life.
Relationship between 4* / J2lhlords helped her to settle
in a land outside her place of birth. Strong 12th lord, strong

Example No.17
Data 01/08/1972 Time 01:30:00 Day Tuesday Lat 27:02:00 North Long 88:20:00 East
Zone 82:30:00 East Sri Sana tan Ayanamsa 23:12:47
Balance of Oaaa : Mercury 5 Years 7 Months 13 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt-Cuspal
Her ordeals in life started during Venus - Saturn dasa.
Such a dasa is bad for 95% persons on this earth.
According to Uttar Kalamrita ( VI - 28.5 to 29.5)
dl'idAi "cfr qrrafnfi
*pTciT fcHAMH) ft "'field'd' ftsi?Ffr 1 PUfcPd:
ifcfr R)<Nel!r4^’l4dl'4)<K: I I
Meaning : if Venus and Saturn are in their exaltation,
own sign or vargottom, strong and equally powerful to
cause yoga, they will in their mutual Dasa and Bhuk^Q^

make the native a beggar seeking alms and becomes a
powerless being, even if be bom as a king or Kubera (the
God of wealth). So Venus - Saturn dasa brought disaster
in her life as per the aphorism framed by Sages of yore.
When 3rd house is afflicted charms of life is reduced
drastically. When Mars is afflicted in the case of females,
married life is turbulent.
So we understand a strong 3rd house / 3rd lord is a boon
to the native.

Index of Example Horoscopes
PART - 1
Name Page NO
Chapter - I
Example No. 1. 45
Example No .2 . 46
Example No. 3. 49
Example No.4. 50
Example No.5. 53
Example No.6. 60
Chapter - II
Example No.7 . Shri Lai Bhadur Sastri 68
Chapter - III
Example No. 8. Dr. B.V. Raman 76
Example No.9. Astrologer of West, Alan Leo 77
ExampleNo.10. Dr. GopenduMukherjee: 78
ExampleNo.il. Late K. Kalkar Sridhar 79
ExampleNo.12 KK.Pathk 80
ExampleNo.13. Shri Daya Shankar, IRS 81
Example No.14. Dr. S.S. Chatterjee 83
Chapter - IV
Example No. 15 A. Mahesh Yogi 95
Example No. 15B. Svvami Sanatan Shri 96
Example No.l5C. 97
Example No. 16. 99
Example No. 17. 101
Chapter - V
ExampleNo. 18. 113
ExampleNo.19. 115
•Example No. 20. 116
Chapter - VI
Example No.21 122
Example No .22 1 23
Example No.23 124
Example No .24 126
Example No.25 127
Example No.26. 129

Chapter - VII
Edgar Cayce 132
Thomas Ava Edison 135
Sigmund Freud 137
Chapter — Vlll

Example No. 49. 265
Example No.50. 266
Example No.51. 270
ExampleNo.52. 272
Example No. 5 3. 274
Example No. 54. 276
Chapter - XV
Sir Jagadish Chandra Bose's 280
Shri Bansi Lai 285
ExampleNo.55. Ms SmitaPatil 286
Chapter - XVI
Example No.56. Shri Rajeev Gandhi 311
Example No.57 316
Example No.58 Shri Sanjay Gandhi 318
Example No.59 Sir J.E Kenndey 319
PART - 2 •
Chapter - I
Example No.l Ms Margaret Thatcher 326
Example No. 2 328
Example No. 3 330
Chapter - JU
Example No.4 Pt. Madan Mohan Malviya 340
Example No. 5 342
Chapter - IV
Example No. 6 345
Example No. 7 347
Chapter - V
Example No. 8 352
Chapter - VII
Example No.9. Shri Thiagaraja 379
ExampleNo. 10. Ms LataMangeshkr 380
Example No. 11. Ms MalavikaKban 382
ExampleNo. 12. Shri N.C.Lahari 386
Chapter - VIII
Example No.13 389
Example No.14 390
Example No. 15 391
Chapter - IX
Example No.16 Shri Anatoie France 395
Example No.l 7 401
