READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_kp_true_astrology_s_p_khullar.json
Dataset number: 241 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 401,033 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_KP_True astrology _S.P. Khullar
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_KP_True astrology _S.P. Khullar
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 310
  • total_words: 64649
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.965
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUE ASTROLOGY
"BASIC AND TRADITIONAL CONCEPTS'"
(Revised and Enlarged)
SP. Khullar
I.T.S.
GM. Telecommunications (Rtd.)

Acknowledgment
First of all I feel greatly indebted to all the Astrologers of the era
whose irresolute faith in the sacred knowledge of Astrology acted
upon my psyche like Saturn on Mars in Capricorn; Moon on Jupiter
in Cancer and Mars on Sun in Aries. In depth study of the theories
of Nadi Literature enkindled in me the true love and devotion for
Astrology. Mr. Saurabh Sagar of Sagar Publications provided me
this literature. I owe my sincere thanks to him. I was inspired to
dive deep into the ocean of this occult science of Astrology by my
sons Mr. Manish and Mr. Mohit. I owe my gratitude to them. My
beloved wife Mrs. Rashmi suffered the pangs of negligence due to
my single-minded devotion to Astrology. I offer my apologies to
her. I also owe my gratitude to some of my students and friends but
for their motivation it would have not been possible to write this
Book.
Let me also thank Sagar Publications for bringing my Book "Basic
and Traditional Concepts" in the simple, illustrative and beautiful
format.
I will fail in my duty if I don't express my gratitude to Mr. R.S.
Chani for his valuable suggestions.
S.P. Khullar
I.T.S.

Contents
g Title Page
No. No.
Introduction ix
Hindi Equivalent xi
1. Fundamentals of Astronomy 1
2. Retrogression & Combustion of Planets 15
3. Zodiac and its Division 19
4. Casting the Rashi Chart 56
5. The Houses and their Significations 76
6. Nakshatras 102
7. Planets and their Significations 124
8. Aspects 147
9. Behaviour of Planets 152
10. Vimsottari Dasa 160
11. Traditional Concept of Analysing Horoscope 168
12. Analysing the Ascendant 178
13. Analysing Sixth House - Diseases 204
14. Analysing the Seventh House - Marriage 231
15. Analysing the Fifth House 252
16. Analysing Horoscope for Educational Prospects 260
17. Analysing the Tenth House - Profession 271
18. Navamsa and its Significance 285

Introduction
Is Astrology a science? "No, it is a super science"
says Mr. Astrologer. It is in fact the dogmatic,
rigid and ritualistic approach of the practitioners
of astrology, which resulted in creating doubts in
the minds of the people about its efficacy.
Astrology, no doubt, will remain an enigma if the
attitude of the traditional astrologers will continue
to be rigid and their minds closed to the realities
of life. We need to learn to discriminate. It is S.P. Khullar
shocking to say that even the intellectual giants
like Carl Jung, Sepharial, Alan Leo, Walter Gibson, William J.T.
Tucker, C.E.O. Carter and H.S. Green who knew that "Whatever
is born or done at this moment of time has the qualities of this
moment of time", also showed as if they suffered from some sort
of intellectual void during their approach to Astrology. A moment
can’t be defined as an hour or even a few minutes. How then the
Rashi Chart or even the Navamsha Chart (as studied and analysed
by Vedic Astrologers) can delineate the nativity of a person. Neither
the planetary positions nor the aspects, nor the yogas change; and
even the varga charts may remain the same. And the less we say,
the better it is, about the Western Astrology which primarily depends
upon the theory of Aspects and Progression. No two human beings
are alike in the universe. Each horoscope, therefore, has to be unique.
Our ancient seers used to construct and analyse charts to the
accuracy of a few seconds of the ascendant. Let us try to match
their calibre to the best of our ability and use this sacred knowledge
to pro vide, benefits to the society at large.
To me Astrology is, at bottom, a microscopic criticism of all facets
of life under the influence of celestial bodies. It is difficult for any
learned man to deny the influence of celestial bodies on life on

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Earth. It is a different matter how to analyse this influence and
apply it to predictive Astrology. People oppose tilings because they
are ignorant of them.
Laws of science are universal. We do not say American or Indian
Laws of Motion. However in astrology no body agrees on anything.
It is time, friends, to come to an agreement, at least in respect of its
elemental principles. There are so many misunderstandings that if
a radical change is not made, the fundamental role of Astrology will
be seriously limited.
My approach may not be an end in itself. However, I am making an
effort in my books under the Title 'T rue Astrology” to present before
the readers how to approach the subject of Astrology in a scientific
way. The reader's dedication, devotion and the open-minded
approach will bring rewards. However, let us not forget that our
success in prediction is largely dependant on the accuracy of the
software, which we use for the calculation of planetary and cuspal
positions and also the accuracy of the birth data, which more often
than not is questionable.
The book True Astrology "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
is written with the intention to prepare the genuine readers
of the sacred science of Astrology to comprehend with ease
the Kalamsa and Cuspal Interlinks Theories.
Suggestions from readers are welcome.

Hindi Equivalents

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Miscellaneous Terms
English
Altitude and Azimuth
Autumal Equinox
Celestial Equater
Celestial Longitude and Latitude
Celestial Sphere
Declination
Ecliptic
G.M.T
Latitude
Longitude
L.M.T
Northern Celestial Hemisphere
Oblique Ascension
Precession of Equinox
Retrograde
Regression of Equinox
Right Ascension
Right Ascension and Declination
Sidereal Period
Sidereal Year
Sidereal Day
Solar Day
Southern Celestial Hemisphere
Standard Time
Synodic Period
T ropical Year'
Vernal Equinox
Hindi Equivalent
Unnattansh and Digansh
Sharad Vishuv
Vishuvat Rekha
Bhogansh and Vikshep
Khagol
Graha ka drikpaat
Ravi Marg or Kranti Vrat
Greenwich Aosat Samay
Graha ka shar
Graha ka sayan, Rekhansh
Sthaniye Aosat Samay
UttariKhagolaard
Rashi Maan
Vishuv Ayan
Vakri
Vishuv Pratigaman
Graha ka Vishuv aansh
Vishuv aanshand Dikpaat
Nakshatra Kaal
Nakshatak Varsh
Nakshatra Din
Sour Din
Dahshini Kliagolaard
Maanak Samay
Sanyuti Kaal
Sayana Varsh
Basant Vishuv

Chapter 1:
Fundamentals of Astronomy
Introduction
Astrology is the study of the influence of the celestial bodies on
life on Earth. Our solar system consists of Sun, around which
planets Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury revolve in
elliptical orbits. Moon is a satellite of Earth and revolves around
Earth. Since Moon plays an important role in Astrology, it is also
considered for all practical purposes a Planet. Since the Moon's
orbit is inclined to the plane of Ecliptic (the apparent orbit of Sun),
it cuts the Ecliptic during its revolution at two opposite points.
These points are called Rahu and Ketu and they are also treated
as planets in Hindu Astrology. Since these are only intersection
points and don't possess any mass, they are called as shadowy
planets. T o understand how planets influence life on Earth, it is
imperative to study some important fundamental aspects of
Astronomy.
Astronomical Basics
Poles: Earth is a spheroid and if a perpendicular is drawn through
the center of the Earth it will meet at two ends of the Earth's
sphere. These points are called Poles. One is said North and the
other is called South. At North and South poles, there is no East
or West direction.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Earth's Axis: Line joining North pole and South pole passing
through the center of the Earth is called the Axis of Earth.
Earth's Equator: The great circle whose plane passes through
the center of the Earth and which divides the Earth in two
hemispheres (North and South) is the Equator. The circle in fact is
traced by the perpendiculars drawn from the Earth's surface to
North and South poles. Hence, Equator is an imaginary line on
the surface of the Earth midway between two poles i.e it is
equidistant from the North and South poles i.e 90 degrees towards
North or South.
Earth's Meridian : The planes parallel to Earth's Equator, having
their center on the Axis, can be cut by the planes perpendicular to
them and passing through the North and South poles of the Earth.
These perpendicular circles are called Meridians.
How to fix the co-ordinates of a place on Earth: For
measurement we have to set a reference point. In India in olden
days, Ujjain was the place of reference. But now, for the whole
world, Greenwich is taken as the reference. Location of a place is
defined by what is called the longitude and Latitude of the place
with respect to Greenwich longitude and latitude i.e. the circles of
reference are the equator and the meridian of Greenwich.
Longitude: The distance of a point where the meridian drawn
through the point cuts the equator, is called the longitude of the
place with reference to the point where the reference meridian
cuts the equator (QR Arc Fig. l).It is East or West i.e. Oto 180
degrees East or West.

Chapter 1: Fundamentals of Astronomy
s
Pig- J
Latitude: The distance of the point along the North or South
measured along the meridian from the reference equator is called
the Latitude of the place (RM Arc Fig. 1).
It is north or south i.e. 0 to 90 degrees North or South.
The Celestial Sphere: It is a great imaginary sphere with the
Earth at its center. Since Earth rotates on its axis from West to
East , the celestial sphere and the celestial bodies, therefore,
appears to an observer on Earth to move Westwards i.e from
East to West. This apparent movement of the celestial sphere
makes Sun and other planets to rise East of, and sets West of the
observer’^ meridian (i.e. the imaginary semicircle that passes the
North and'South points of the horizon).The celestial sphere can
be imagined as being somewhat an extension of the Earth itself.
The celestial equator is directly above the earth's equator. The

J
True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
respective North and South poles of the celestial sphere are exactly
above the North and South poles of the Earth and are known as
the celestial North and The celestial South.
Fixing the Position of the Planets: We locate the position of a
place on Earth by noting its Longitude and Latitude.The location
of the celestial bodies is done using the same concept. However
celestial sphere's latitude is termed as Declination (DEC) and
celestial sphere's longitude is known as Right ascension (RA).
Right Ascension: It is a measure of how far East a point is with
respect to the line running on the surface of the celestial sphere
between the celestial poles (Prime Meridian).
Difference between Longitude and RA
1 . Longitude of a place is measured either E or W However,
RA is always measured eastwards from a reference point
known as the "First point of Aries" or Vernal Equinox.
2. Longitude is measured in degrees whereas RA is measured
in hours, minutes and seconds. It actually indicates the time
taken by the celestial body to transit from its meridian to
the reference meridian.
Declination: The circles crossing the celestial equator at right
angles and passing through the two poles are called Declination
circles. These help to fix the position of the celestial body North
or South of the celestial equator. Declination is called Kranti in
Sanskrit. Distance of objects found in Northern hemisphere of
the celestial equator are said to be positive and those situated in
the Southern hemisphere are said to be negative.
Motions of Earth: Earth revolves around Sun from West to East
and completes 360 degrees in 365.2422 days. Earth also revolves
around its own Axis (the plane joining North -South poles) and

Chapter 1 : Fundamentals of Astronomy
completes its revolution in 23hrs 56mins and 4 secs. This revolution
of Earth is also from West to East.
Ecliptic: The great circle formed by the intersection of the plane
of Earth's orbit around Sun is called the Ecliptic. Viewed from
Earth it appears as if Sun is moving from East to West. It is,
therefore, also called the apparent path of Sun in the sky during
the course of a year. In the geocentric system this path is inclined
to the celestial equator at an angle of 23° 27'.
Equinoxes: The Ecliptic and the celestial equator cuts at two
points diametrically opposite to each other. These points are called
equinoxes. Its intersection point formed due to Sun's movement
from South to North and which coincides with Aries is called
Vernal Equinox and the point of intersection of Ecliptic and celestial
equator during Sun's journey from North to South and which
coincides with Libra is called Autumnal Equinox.
Vernal Equinox, infact, is the point of intersection of the Ecliptic
and celestial equator when Sun changes its DEC from South to
the North and the Autumnal Equinox is the point of intersection

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
during Sun's return journey Southwards i.e. when Sun changes its
DEC from North to South.
Zodiac: If we observe the movements of the planets we will find
that they also move in their individual orbits, which are slightly
inclined to the Ecliptic. However, no planet precedes either North
or South of the Ecliptic by more than 8.5 degrees. Hence, if a
parallel line on either side of the Ecliptic is drawn at a distance of
8.5 degrees, then the Ecliptic will be in the middle whereas on
either side there will be a broad pathway. This pathway in which
all the planets can be located at any time is called the Zodiac.
Celestial Longitude and Latitude
For Astrological purposes, to locate the position of Planets, the
Ecliptic is used as the circle of reference. The distance measured
in one direction along the Ecliptic from the Vernal Equinox is called
the celestial longitude and the distance measured perpendicular to
the Ecliptic is termed as the celestial latitude. The celestial latitude
is absolutely different from Declination except at the two equinoctial
points.
In short, celestial latitude is the perpendicular distance between
the planet and the Ecliptic, whereas the Declination is the
perpendicular distance counted from the celestial equator to the
planet.
Celestial longitude is measured along the Ecliptic from the Vernal
Equinox whereas RA is measured along the celestial equator from
the Vernal Equinox in one direction.
= angle substended by the Arc XH (Fig. 3)
= angle substended by the Arc MH
DEC
RA

Chapter 1 : Fundamentals of Astronomy
Fig. 3
Cel. Long = angle substended by the Arc MG
Cel. Latt = angle substended by the Arc XG
If two objects are in equal DEC either on the same side of the
celestial equator or on opposite of it, they are said to be parallel
to each other.
For astrological purpose, the zodiac is divided into
i) 12 signs each of 30 degrees.
ii) 27 Nakshatras each of 13 deg 20'
ia) 108 padas each of 3 deg 20'
Tropic of Cancer: It is an imaginary line around the surface of the
Earth parallel to the Equator at an angular distance of 23 deg. 27
min. (N). On 21st June every year Sun shines at the head at Mid-

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Noon. Since in Sayana system on this date Sun enters Cancer
Sign, it is named as Tropic of Cancer.
Tropic of Capricorn: On 23rd December of ever}' year Sun goes
maximum towards South on its orbit and shines above the head at
all places whose latitude is 23 deg. 27 min. (S). The small circle at
23 deg. 27 min. (S) is called Tropic of Capricorn because the Sun
on this day enters the sign Capricorn in Sayana System.
Precession of Equinoxes
Equinoxes represent the two points of intersection of the Ecliptic
and the celestial Equator. Sun transits over these points when Day
and Night are equal. These points slowly move backwards. This
is known as precession of equinoxes.
The Precession of Equinoxes is due to the gravitational pull of
Sun, Moon and other planets on Earth. The axis of the Earth is
inclined to 23 degrees 27 minutes to the vertical drawn to the
plane of the Ecliptic. Earth is a spheroid and bulges at the equator.
Its center of gravity does not, therefore, pass through its center.
As a result of this Sun’s, Moon's and other planets gravitational
pulls tries to pull the polar axis of Earth. Asa result of which the
polar axis of Earth does not always point to the same pole star.
Due to Earth's rapid motion around its axis, these pulls make the
axis of Earth to trace a circle at the top. The North pole of the axis
of the Earth completes its revolution around the pole of the Ecliptic
in approximately 25,800 years. The effect of Sun, Moon and other
planets gravitational pull gives a net amount of Precession of
Equinoxes per year.

Chapter 1: Fundamentals of Astronomy
Fig. 4
The rate at which the equinoxes move backwards per year is
different according to different scholars as follows.
AryaBhatta
Prasara
Varahamihra
New Comb
Surya Sidhant
Fixed and Moving Zodiacs
The movement of Vernal Equinox backwards means the shifting
of the point of reference for measurement of the longitude of the
planets. This point of reference is nothing but the point of

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
intersection of the imaginary Great circle called Equator and the
apparent path of Sun. If instead of this we fix the point of reference
with respect to a fixed star, then the question of it's slipping
backwards does not arise.
Thus we find that there are two schools of thought. One school of
thought measures the celestial longitude with respect to the actual
point of Vernal Equinox which is moving and are said to use the
Moving Zodiac or Tropical Zodiac. This is also called Sayana
System.
The other school of thought which measures the celestial longitude
with respect to the fixed point which is 180degrees opposite to
the fixed star (Spica or Chitra) is said to use Fixed Zodiac or
Sidereal Zodiac. This is also called Nirayana System.
Ayanamsha: It is the measure of the degree by which the Vernal
Equinox has slipped backwards or Eastwards due to the
phenomena of Precession of Equinoxes. The calculation of this
depends upon the following:
1 . Rate of precession of Equinoxes.
2. The date on which the Vernal Equinox coincided with the
fixed point of Aries i.e. 180 degrees opposite the star chitra.
Ayanamsha plays a very significant role in Indian Astrology
because the calculations of the Nirayana planetary positions and
cuspal positions are obtained from their corresponding Sayana
positions by deducting the Ayanamsha for the date of birth.
However, since no two Astrologers agree on the rate of precession
and the date of coincidence of the two Zodiacs, this problem has
become very vexed. The rate of Precession followed by some
great scholars has been given in earlier paras. The date of
coincidence, according to some is given below:

Chapter
Fundamentals
of Astronomy
Cheiro 388 B.C.
C.Fagan 213 A.D.
N.CLahiri 285 A.D.
New Comb 291 A.D.
Sphered 485 A.D.
Mostly the traditionalists or Vedic Astrology followers now use
the Ayanamsha figure calculated as per rate and date agreed upon
by N.C. Lahiri. Krishnamurthy followers use the Ayanamsha figure
arrived at using New Comb's rate of precession (50.2388475"
th
per year) and the date of coincidence as 15111 April, 291 AD.
Synodic and Sidereal periods of planets.
Sidereal Period: It is the time taken by a planet to complete its
one revolution of Sun. It is always with respect to a fixed star.
Synodic Period: It is the time taken by a planet to complete its
rotation around Sun with respect to specific condition or
phenomena.
Mercury: It is the closest planet to Earth. It can be seen only in
the morning before sunrise or in the evening after sunset. It always
keeps its one face towards Sun, hence the year and day of Mercury
will be equal i.e. its period of rotation around Sun and on its own
axis will be the same. Its orbit is inclined to the horizontal plane of
solar system at 7 degrees.
Sidereal period of Mercury: That is the time to complete one
revolution around the Sun, which is 87.969 Earth Days.
Synodic period of Mercury: That is with respect to a particular
point which in this case is taken as the nearest point to Earth and
is 116 Earth Days.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Moon: It also keeps its one face to Earth; therefore the time taken
by Moon to complete one revolution around Earth and around its
own axis is same. This is equal to 27.32166 Days. It is also the
Sidereal period of Moon. The time taken by Moon from the
position of Full Moon to the next Full Moon is 29.5306 Days.
This is called its Synodic period.
Venus: Its sidereal period is 224.7 Earth Days. Its Synodic period
i.e. the time it takes to complete its rotation from its nearest position
to Earth and back is 583.92 Earth Days.
Mars: Its Sidereal period is 686.9804 Earth Days. Its Synodic
period is 779.94 Earth Days i.e. the time it takes to complete its
rotation from its position nearest to Earth and back.
Jupiter: It completes its revolution around Sun (i.e. Sidereal
period) in 11.86 Earth years. Its Synodic period is 399 Earth
Days.
Saturn : Its Sidereal period is 29 Y ears 167 Earth Days and its
Synodic period is 378 Earth Days.
Traveling of Planets in Signs and Average Speed
of Planets:
If we observe the planets movement from northern celestial
hemisphere it appears that the planets rotate around Sun in anticlockwise direction. They complete there rotation around Sun in
their respective Sidereal periods. The average speed of the planets
is defined as the angular distance covered by planets per day.
Average Speed of Sun: Fig 5 shows the movement of Sun as
observed from Earth. When Earth is at El Sun is at 0 degree. As
Earth revolves around Sun fromElto E2, E3 etc we find Sun to
move to different positions. When Earth comes back to its original
position El Sun completes 360 degrees.

Chapter 1 : Fundamentals of Astronomy
Sun crosses the whole Zodiac i.e. 360 degrees in 365.2422 Days.
This is called its Sidereal year.
Hence the average speed of Sun will be 360/365.2422 = 0 deg.
59 min 10.68 secs
Due to bulging of Earth, Sun acquires different speeds. Max speed
of Sun is 1 deg. 01 min. 08 sec. which occurs on 3rd Jan and its
slowest speed is 0 deg. 57 min. 08 sec. which occurs on 4 July.
Average speed per day of other planets is as follows:
= 1.602 degrees.

True Astrology - " Basic and Traditional Concepts' '
Rahu And Ketu
The Earth orbits around the Sun from West to East and in the
similar way Moon also orbits the Earth in the counterclockwise
direction i.e. west to east. Since Moon's axis is inclined to the
Ecliptic at 5 deg. 8 min., it will cut the Ecliptic at two points which
are diametrically opposite to each other. These points are called
as Ascending Node or Rahu and Descending Node or Ketu.

Chapter 2:
Retrogression of Planets
There is no unanimous opinion amongst Astrologers regarding the
role played by the retrogression of planets in predictive Astrology.
Astronomically speaking no planet retrogrades. Each planet
revolves in its orbit around Sun at its specified speed. If the planets
longitudes are observed from the Sun (i.e. heliocentric system) in
the background of the Zodiac, each planet will always appear to
be in direct motion. However, for Astrological purpose the
longitudes of the planets are observed from the surface of the
Earth in the background of the Zodiac. Since the distances of the
planets from the Earth is very large as compared to the radius of
the Earth. For all practical purposes the longitudes of the planets
as seen by the observer on the surface of the Earth are taken as
Geo-centric longitudes. But due to different speeds with which
each planet orbits, the relative angular speed of the planet and the
Earth give rise to the phenomena of retrogression of planets. The
conditions, however, for retrogression will be different for inner
planets (Planets whose orbits are between the orbit of Earth and
Sun), and outer planets (Planets whose orbits are outside the orbit
ofEarth).
Inner Planets and Retrogression
Mercury and Venus are the two planets whose orbits He between
the Earth's orbit and Sun. They are called inner planets. Let us
consider how and why Mercury appears to retrograde to an

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
observer on Earth. The Sidereal period of Earth is 365.2422 days
and that of Mercury is 87.969 days. (Refer the figure 7):
Zodiac
Let us assume Earth is stationery and Mercury is revolving in its
orbit around Sun at a relative angular speed between Earth and
Mercury. It can be seen when the observer is at E, the longitude
of Mercury when at B will be Bl. The longitude of Mercury will
appear to be increasing to an observer at E till Mercury reaches
G However, beyond G till it reaches H, it appears that the longitude
of Mercury is decreasing though it is still moving in the same
direction. It may be noted that the points G and H are the tangential
points from the plane of the observer to the plane of the orbit of
Mercury. Beyond H, the longitude of Mercury starts increasing
again. Thus we see Mercury's longitude appears to be decreasing
when it was transiting between G and H. These two points or the
Arc GH indicates that Mercury appears to retrograde when it is
nearest to Earth.

Chapter 2: Retrogression of Planets
Similarly the Planet Venus appears to retrograde when it is nearest
to Earth.
Outer Planets and Retrogression
The orbit of Jupiter and Saturn are outside Earth. These are called
outer planets. Let us take the case of retrogression of Jupiter. The
Sidereal period of Jupiter is 11.86 years and that of Earth is
365.2422 days. Thus the speed at which Earth is revolving around
Sun is much faster than the speed at which Jupiter is revolving
around Sun. We may assume Jupiter to be stationary and Earth
revolving around Sun at a relative angular speed between Jupiter
and Earth. Refer the figure 8.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
To an observer on the Earth, when Earth is at El the longitude of
Jupiter as seen behind the Zodiac will be J 1 when Jupiter is at J.
As Earth moves fromElto E2, E3, E4 the longitudes of Jupiter is
increasing from J lto J2, J3, and J4 respectively. However, when
Earth further moves in the same direction only ffomE4 to E5, E6,
E7, E8 the longitude of Jupiter appears to decrease to an observer
on Earth. The Planet, however, appears to be stationary for few
days at E4 and E8, as the rate of change of longitudes becomes
very slow.
Thus it may be noted that though neither Earth nor the Planet
Jupiter are actually moving backwards, yet the longitude of the
planet appears to decrease. This happens as can be seen from the
diagram, when the planet is nearer to the Earth and almost in
opposition to Sun.
Similarly we can explain the retrogression of Saturn.
Combustion of Planets
If a planet appears to an observer on Earth to be in the same sign
as Sun but at a few degrees away, it is said to be combust. The
degree of combustion is proportional to its longitudinal difference
from Sun, on either side i.e. when the longitude of Sun and the
planet is the same, the planet is said to be completely combust.
Different Astrologers have different opinion about the use of this
apparent phenomenon in predictive Astrology. The degrees of
combustion for the planets fromMoon to Saturn are 12, 17, 14,
11, 10 and 16. It may be noted that a planet can be said to be
combust only when it is behind Sun and is at the farthest point
from the Earth. Viewed from Sun i.e. in heliocentric system, no
such thing will appear. Each planet, to me, appears to be
individualistic and its effect in predictive Astrology needs
only to be taken as per its Zodiacal degree.

Chapter 3:
Zodiac and its Division
To a student of Astronomy, the zodiac is merely an imaginary
pathway where he can locate the planets Sun, Moon, Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Mercury and Venus and also the shadowy planets
Rahu and Ketu. But an Astrologer regards it as a storehouse of
energy which exercises a significant influence on the planets.
However, according to our ancients the different parts or areas of
the Zodiac has different modifying influence. As such to study the
Zodiac, it is pertinent to divide the Zodiac on sound cosmic
principles to enunciate their true significance.
The Zodiac to an Astrologer appears to be a limiting circle of
Earth's aura, the field and store house of all that was, is and is to
be i.e. Past, Present and Future. It is a vast stage upon which the
great drama of life is enacted. The planets are the principle actors
who have to play their role under the direction of the Zodiacal
influence.
Division of Zodiac:
To an observer on Earth the Zodiac appears to be a circle and
subtends an angle of 360 deg. It is divided into 12 parts, each of
30 deg. Each part is called a Sign or Rashi. Starting from the
Vernal Equinox the division of the Zodiac into signs is shown at
page.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
The division of Zodiac is done on the principles of Law of Polarity,
Law of Elements (Tattwa) and Mode of Action.
Positive and Negative Signs:
The Zodiac is first divided into two halves using the Principle of
Polarity as explained in Taoism under the names of yang and yin in
Taoist scripture "The secrets of the golden flower". This gives us
what we call as Positive and Negative signs or Masculine and
Feminine signs. Astrologically the positive signs represent the
manifest. The Sun being the principal ruler. The negative signs
represent the un-manifest. The Moon being the principle ruler.
The division is shown diagrammatically in fig. 9

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
The Zodiac
Positive Signs
Aries, Gemini
Leo, Libra
Sagittarius, Aquarius
Negative Signs
Taurus, Cancer
Virgo, Scorpio
Capricorn, Pisces
Fig. 9
General Characteristics of Positive Signs:
The Principle of Positivism is that which is outgoing, active and
manifest, love for change, performance, look for achievement in
the future, self-assertion, determination, power of will and force,
self-opinionism. Positive sign on Ascendant gives vitality, initiative,
extrovertism, an irresistible attraction, gay abundance. In terms of
psychology we may say the positive signs represent the conscious.
General Characteristics of Negative Signs:
The Principle of Negativity is that negativity is indrawn, passive
and unmanifest, receptive, defensive. Sorrow in some form seems
part of the heritage of the negative signs. Negative signs appearing
on the ascendant make the persons to accept the things as they
are but have generally richer inner life. They look to the past than
the future; feel disappointed; privacy of action is congenial to this
type. In terms of psychology we may say negative signs represent
the unconscious. The negative type requires stimulation.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Fiery-Earthy- Airy- Watery Signs:
The dichotomy (which gives the Masculine and Feminine signs)
operates a second time. The positive or masculine signs, in
accordance with Law of Elements, falls in two groups viz. fire and
air and the negative or feminine signs in two groups viz. earthy and
watery. This is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 10
The Zodiac
Positive Signs
Fiery Airy
Aries, Leo Gemini, Libra Taurus, Virgo Cancer, Scorpio
Sagittarius Aquarius Capricorn Pisces
Fig. 10
General Characteristics of Fiery Signs:
Sri Aurobindo defined Fire as "Strength and force, beauty and
splendour, leading and pre-eminence." They show courage,
strength, determination, aggression and confidence. Fire is related
to spirituality, religion, magnanimity, and self-assertion. It is
characterised by too much emotional development Such characters
soar high but often fall equally low. It produces pseudo-mystics.
It is said; 'Fire is the element of the will and an irresponsible prophet
only acting at lucky hits.' Fire loves the future, it gives rise to
proud, enterprising and commanding disposition with a desire to
lead others possesses a spiritual bent of mind. It gives rise to
fevers and inflammatory diseases. Misuse of fiery element produces
profligates, tyrannical and self-willed.
Negative Signs
Earthy
Watery

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
Fire indicates outward expression of emotion, passion and
enthusiasm. People with a strong emphasis of the fire element are
spontaneous and impulsive, they apply their energies
wholeheartedly. Their emotional response is quick and they have
a lively imagination.
If in a horoscope fiery signs dominate than the person would like
to choose professions like an engineer, trade union leaders,
professions which deal with engines and automobiles, surgeons,
barber etc.
Excess fire can make a person angry, hot-tempered, violent and
aggressive. It may cause heartburn, liver problems such as hepatitis,
and stomach problems such as ulcers, gallbladder problems,
inflammation and fevers. Lack of fire causes poor circulation with
cold extremities, poor muscle tone, low vitality, indigestion, lack
of courage and confidence.
General Characteristics of Airy Signs:
Too great devotion to intellectualism, resulting in a purely
philosophical view of religion. Airy signs are connected with mind
and mental experience, fertile imagination, artistic and idealistic
nature, inquisitiveness, power of reasoning, balanced approach,
but lack assertion.
People withemphasis of Air element are driven by the mind, intellect
and are theoretical in approach. Airy people are quick and
animated. They apply their energies in very diverse ways. They
tend to intellectualize their feelings and expectations. These people
make good astrologers, advisors, lawyers, scientists etc. These
signs denote professions as philanthropists, writers, authors,
accountants, bookkeepers, poets, lecturers, pilots, philosophers
and all kinds of consultants.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Disturbance of Air element brings about difficulties in the
movements of the limbs. The Air element governs the respiratory
and nervous system. An excess of Airy element can make a person
restless, anxious and jittery. Stiffness of joints as in arthritis,
flatulence, asthma and nervous disorders usually manifest when
there is excess of Airy element. Lack of Air element may lead to
difficulties in perception, tiredness, shortness of breath, and lethargic
movement.
General Characteristics of Earthy Signs:
Earth is an element which tends to, too great pragmatism, solidarity
and stability. It is related to concrete mind, that which knows what
the thing is, or what its significance is. The ideal of "common sense
religion" appeals to them. There is desire to make money, to seek
power and position. They are cautious, pre-meditative, secretive,
suspicious, reserved, methodical, economical and materialistic in
approach.
Earth element refers to the practical portion of the mind. Earthy
people react quietly and slowly. They apply themselves with
endurance, Emotionally they are deeply rooted and slow to change.
Earthy signs govern professions such as administration, civil
services, economics, property, buildings, agriculture, mining, food
items coming directly from earth, furniture and other wood or
timbre related business.
When Earth element is disturbed, it results in causing the disease
of flesh, teeth, skin, joints, nails, bones, tendons, muscles, and
hairs. It may also manifest as sluggishness and depression.

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
General Characteristic of Watery Signs:
Loves the past, has the fertile imagination, timid disposition, and
unwilling to act, but receptive, contemplative, sensitive, sentimental,
and psychic; they display love for the occult science. According
to Alan Leo "The watery signs are the least fortunate giving
sensitiveness and often lack of energy. "
Water refers to inner experience of emotion, feelings and their
impact. People with a strongly emphasized water element are
feeling types and are very sensitive. Their imaginative and emotional
lives are deep and rich.
Professions indicated by watery signs are sailors, wine merchants,
shipping business, marine engineers, merchant navy. Such persons
deal in chemicals, petroleum and all sorts of liquids. They also
engage in professions connected with dairy farming, food,
underwater mining and fishing.
Water rules the lymphatic system and all fluids in the body, such
as blood and various secretions. The excited element water brings
about disorders in blood, urine, perspiration, semen, lymphatic
congestion and saliva. Persons with lack of Water element often
suffer from thirst and dehydration.
Rajasic Tamasic and Sattwic Signs:
The next important division of the Zodiac is based on the most
important Law of Motion known in Hindu scripture as Three Gunas
called Rajasic, Tamasic and Sattwic attributes or in common
language as dynamic, static and harmonious or ideal and in
astrological language as Cardinal, Fixed and Common or Mutable.
Refer fig 11.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
The Zodiac
Cardinal Fixed Common
Aries, Cancer Taurus, Leo Gemini, Virgo
Libra, Capricorn Scorpio, Aquarius Sagittarius, Pisces
Fig. 11
General Characteristics of Cardinal Signs:
Prompt in action, enterprise, the doer and the one who dares, go
for fame, recognition and popularity, effect change and refonn,
the capacity to overcome impediments, self assertion and dislike
for dependence.
People with an emphasis on cardinal signs have an urge to take
the lead and to shape things. They are initiators and act according
to their aims and goals.
General Characteristics of Fixed Signs:
Stability, authoritativeness, expert at ordering and arrangement,
strong and determined with remarkable patience, self-reliance and
very pragmatic but conservative in approach, firmness in mental
approach, difficult to change, care for fixity and permanence. All
the fixed signs have ideals of stability and dependability.
People with an emphasis on the fixed signs have a desire to build
on what is already there and to organize it more efficiently. They
tend to preserve a "status quo" and act in response to given
circumstances.

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
General Characteristics of Common Signs:
Mental alertness, inquisitiveness, adaptability, a learner and a
teacher, flexibility, intellectualism, subtle sensitivity, sympathetic
approach, argumentation, discrimination, aversion to strenuous
work..
People with an emphasis on the mutable or common signs tend to
seek change and renewal. They can easily replace one thing with
another and align their actions with unfolding processes.
Other important classification of Signs:
Fertile Signs :
Barren Signs
Mute Signs :
Violent Signs :
Human Signs :
Voice Signs :
Bicorporal or :
Double- Bodied Signs
All watery signs (Cancer, Scorpio,
Pisces) are said to be fruitful.
Aries, Gemini, Leo, Virgo are called
Barren signs.
All watery signs are said to be mute signs.
Aries, Scorpio.
Gemini, Virgo, Aquarius and 1st half of
Sagittarius
Gemini, Libra, Aquarius.
Gemini, 1st half of Sagittarius, Pisces
Short and Long Ascension Signs:
Earth being a sphere, its movement around its axis makes some
signs to take less time to ascend. They are called signs of short
ascension. These are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Capricorn, Aquarius
and Pisces. The signs, which take more time to ascend, are called

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
long ascension signs. These are Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio
and Sagittarius.
Characteristics of Signs:
The philosophy or the methodology behind the analysis of the
characteristics of signs can be stated as follows:
1 . Nature of the sign based on the Law of Polarity, Law of
Element and Law of Motion.
2. Who is the ruler of the sign? Refer chapter 7.
3 . Which planet gets exaltation or debilitation or detriment in
the sign? Refer chapter 7.
4. Correspondence with the house/houses in the natural zodiac.
The purpose of the study of the characteristics of the sign is twofold.
1 . The influence of its characteristics on the significations of
the house where the sign rises in the horoscope.
2. Ho w it modifies the behaviour of the planet positioned in it.
Aries:
It is positive, fiery, Rajasic, barren and sign of Short Ascension.
By the Principle of Correspondence, Mars rules over it and Sun
gets its exaltation. It is detriment to Venus and Saturn gets
debilitation. It rules East direction.
General Significations:
Aries is full of vitality; it's pioneering and independent attitude in
its thinking and comes up with new ideas. There is a burning desire
to dominate. Aries is self-opinionated, dark and go-ahead nature.

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
There is ambition, assertion, audacity and impulse. Unbounded
confidence in his self and in the cause he espouses for the time
being, makes him persistent in his efforts and makes for his
unsurpassed executive ability. Aries chief faults are over-eagerness,
self-will, egoism, a hasty temper, liable to change his views suddenly
and lack of discretion. Arians have so much power and energy
that they tend to bum themselves up. A great many Arians are, in
fact, quiet and ostentatious. Arians are solely concerned with
action, rather than glamour and the trappings of power.
Physical Characteristics:
Long neck, bony or angular face, middle stature, lean and muscular
body. Ruddy complexion; crisp and wiry hair, broad temples;
narrow chin; prodding teeth and round eyes.
Profession:
Defence personals, surgeons, butchers, chemists, hair dressers,
watch makers, dealer in sports goods, mechanics, wrestlers, body
builders, boxers, smiths, tailors, cooks, carpenters, metallurgists,
real estate dealers.
Body Parts:
Brain, cerebral hemispheres, cranium, eyes, face, upper jaw,
internal carotid arteries.
Diseases:
Head injuries, neuralgia; inflammatory diseases, pains, brain and
cerebral hemorrhage, cerebral meningitis, migraine headaches,
small-pox, coma, trance conditions. Aries rules the motor centers
of the brain and the circulation of the blood through the skull region.
Aries is generally involved with the inflammation of the brain that

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
may cause delirium, frenzy, vertigo, dizziness, and sharp pains in
the head. It may also cause Bell's palsy wherein nerves are inflamed
and paralysis sets in.
It also accounts for eczema of the head and face, acne, aphasia,
anxiety, baldness, dandruff, and loss of memory.
By a reflex action Planets in Aries may cause problem in kidneys.
Other diseases caused by Aries are various fonns of toxemia.
The toxemia in kidneys may induce skin ailments. By the principle
of cross flow of energy afflictions of Aries may also cause diseases
of Cancer and Capricorn namely edema, digestive problems, hiatus
hernia, loss of appetite, cysts in the breast region, gallbladder
problem, knee problem etc.
Education:
Agriculture, Electronic, Civil and Mechanical engg. Zoology,
Botany, Petro-chemical engg. Home science. Industrial
organization. Printing technology. Dental Surgery.
Places: Hilly ground. Stables for small cattle, lands recently
ploughed hide-outs of thieves.
Commodities: Cotton, Barley, Wheat, Woolen, Beans, Leather.
Countries: England, Germany, Peru, Syria.
Taurus:
It is feminine. Earthy and fixed sign. By the principle of
correspondence Venus is said to rule this Sign; Moon gets its
exaltation and Mars gets its detriment It rules over South direction.
It rules over neck and throat.

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
General Characteristics:
It is passive, comfort-loving, and content, looks to the past, accepts
things as they are. Taurus produces tremendous sexuality,
materiality and love for the enjoyment of pleasures of life. It is
sensuous, amorous, passionate, obstinate, proud, determined. It
is stubbornly self-willed, unyielding. The mind tends to be shallow
and stupid. Fidelity and consistency are the sign's virtues; obstinacy
and a refusal to recognize the necessity for change are its
weaknesses. Being sensualists, many Taureans are fond of smart
clothes, jewelery, and perfume, but their desire for a comfortable
and leisured lifestyle can mean quite the opposite-that they prefer
their old and comfortable clothes.
Taurus person is slow to anger, but when provoked, he is difficult
to be appeased. Possessing much self-will and self esteem, he
can carry out many a plan cheerfully and successfully. He is often
self-centred and a tittle selfish. Belonging to an earthy sign, he is
patient and persevering, and earns money through persistent and
steady work. The Taurean's knowledge and intuition are deep
set, and hence, the native is not verbose.
Physical Characteristics:
Full forehead, full lips and nostrils; dark eyes, body plumpy, solidly
built and stocky, broad shoulders, heavy thighs. Taureans are said
to be of short, stocky stature, with strong shoulders and large
necks.
Profession:
Musicians, Film producers. Tax collectors. Personals in Agriculture
and Revenue Department, painter, decorators, taxi drivers, dealers
of flowers, glasses, mica, plastic, rubber, sugar, and dress makers.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
The occupations governed by Taurus also include dealers in
property, cement, luxury goods, entertainment and amusement
industry, sugar, milk and cotton.
Body Parts:
Neck, throat, palate, larynx, tonsils, lower jaw, ears, occipital
region, cerebellum, atlas, axis, external carotid arteries, jugular
veins, pharynx, thyroid gland, cervical vertebrae.
Diseases:
Goiter, diphtheria, disease of cervical vertebrate. Fistula, piles,
venereal diseases, irregular menses, nasal mucous, polyps in the
throat, laryngitis, mumps, fungus infection of the mouth, enlarged
tonsils, tonsillitis, loss of voice, suffocation and hypo function of
thyroid gland, croup and apoplexy. By reflex action it reacts upon
the opposite sign Scorpio parts and cause disease of the colon,
venereal diseases, constipation.
Taurus rules the neck, throat, palate, larynx and tonsils, lower
jaw, ears, and occipital region. The cerebellum and cervical
vertebrae is also under the rule of Taurus. It also rules over the
veins of the thyroid gland.lt maintains homeostatis (harmone
regulation, keeping things in equilibrium).
By the principle of cross flow of energy, afflictions of Taurus may
also cause diseases of the other signs of the fixed cross namely
Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius. This may be atrophy of the heart,
myocarditis, blood poisoning, and colon stasis, stones in the
bladder, underdeveloped ovaries or testicles
Education:
Cost Auditing, Music, Chemical engg, ENT, Veterinary', sociology,
psychology, plastics, designing, interior decoration, hotel

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
management, petro-chemical engg, nursing, skin, dentist, Automobile engg, Cinematography, film making, sculpture.
Places: Cow- houses, cattle shed furniture marts, low rooms and
sellers.
Commodities: Flowers, Barley, wheat, clothes, mineral products.
Countries: Ireland, Persia, Poland, Cypress, Asia-Minor, Russia.
Gemini:
It is Positive, Airy, Mutable, humane, bicorporal but barren.
Mercury rules over it. No planet gets exaltation or debilitation
here. Jupiter finds it as its detriment. It rules West direction.
General Significations:
It stands for Mind and the creative process of manifestation. It
symbolises intellectual perception; it is artistic, learned, curious,
and eloquent in speech or writing, Gemini's approach and
expression are basically materialistic. Conflict and instability are
important characteristics of Gemini. It may give rise to depression,
suicidal tendencies, excitement and a great thirst for indulgence,
argumentation for the sake of arguments. Negative attributes of
Gemini's are creating disorder everywhere and a scatter- brain.
The positive Gemini is quick in perception and quick in action.
The native of this sign is bold and upright with a keen understanding
of human nature. He is quite humane and sympathetic. As Mercury
rules this sign, the person of Gemini tries to have smattering of
every branch of learning. But this unusual versatility in him does
not enable him to finish to perfection every pursuit. Contradictions
are not uncommon with him. However due to his unusual power
of adaptability, he fits in everywhere most admirably.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Geminians are often maddeningly inconsistent; they can argue one
point of view one day and the completely opposite view on the
next. Geminians are, however, versatile and can turn their hands
to more than one thing at the same time. If their talents are spread
too thinly, they may not achieve their aims.
Physical Characteristics:
Tall, slender, elegant, wide fore-head, long face, fine expressive
eyes, straight nose.
Profession:
Gemini indicates such profession as connected with literary field,
communications, journalism, and marketing.
Professors, teachers, publishers, editors, solicitors, advocates,
Astrologers, mathematicians, typists, clerks, traveling agents,
employees in communication, transport and railway department,
postal employees, stationary dealers, engineering contractors,
poets, authors, painters, brokers, successful merchants,
accountants.
Body Parts:
Shoulders, arms, hands, upper ribs, lungs, trachea, bronchi,
capillaries, breath, oxygenation of blood, nervous system.
Diseases:
Mercury the ruler of Gemini rules over all three humours and
elements Earth and Air predominantly. It controls the function of
thyroid, right cerebral hemisphere, and the motor segment of the
spinal cord, the central nervous system, hands, arms, shoulders
and the vocal cord. Above all Gemini rules over all tubes in the

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
body like fallopian tubes, the bronchial tubes of the lungs, the
trachea, and the ureter tubes from the kidneys and urethra from
bladder to outside opening.
Dry cough, shallow breathing, edema of the lungs, asthma,
pneumonia, bronchitis, pleurisy, blood and lung disorders, cuts,
fractures and wounds of the arms Eosinophilia, T.B, affection of
hands and shoulders, influenza, rheumatism or arthritis of the arms;
hands or shoulders; dislocation of the arm or shoulder, lung
congestion, fibrosis of the lungs or tumors in the lungs.
By the principle of cross afflictions of Gemini may also cause
diseases of the other signs of the mutable cross viz. sclerosis of
the liver, lymphatic stasis, hip-joint disease, dislocation of pelvis.
Education:
Telecommunications, Textile engg. Journalism, Statistics,
Astrophysics, Atomic energy, printing, commerce, company
secretary ship. Auditing, financial management, revenue collection.
Places : coffers, suit cases, hills, mountains and high places, dining
rooms, schools, nurseries, places of learning.
Countries: U.S. A, Belgium, North Africa, Wales, London, New
Orleans.
Commodities: Creepers, Autumnal crops, lily root, cotton.
Cancer:
It is a feminine, water)', moveable, fertile but mute sign. By the
principle of correspondence Moon is said to rule over this sign;
Jupiter gets exaltation; Mars gets debilitation and Saturn finds it
as its detriment. It rules over North direction.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
General Characteristics:
It provides sustenance, protection, prudence. It is sympathetic,
imaginative and romantic, inclined to public life, roving disposition,
changeful. It is conservative, generous to the point of sacrifice.
On the negative side it is domineering, possessive and demanding,
as well as weak. Cancer is a creature of moods. Hypersensitivity
is of course the secret, and it finds emotional strain hard to bear.
Cancer is a sign of compassion and embodies all that is best in the
caring, maternal instincts, but it often hides its emotions behind a
mask that denies these inner feelings. They are vulnerable and
easily hurt. Concerian emotions fluctuate, but they are tenacious,
even ruthless, when it comes to defending their family and friends.
Physical Characteristics:
Wide chest, rounded body, broad forehead, grey eyes, full face,
fleshy body, double chin, mature ears. Hands and feet are small.
Profession:
Historians, personals working in ship and sub-marines,
archaeological department. Dealers in pearls, conches, fishes.
Sailors, sea captain, explorers. State ministers and advisors, liquid.
Body Parts:
Stomach, esophagus, diaphragm, the mammae, lacteals, upper
lobes of liver, thoracic duct, pancreas, serum of blood, peristalsis
of the stomach, chymification.
Diseases:
Cancer rules overall coverings in the body like uterus, pericardium
of the heart, meninges of the brain, eye socket. It rules the

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
esophagus, stomach, diaphragm, upper lobes of liver, and thoracic
duct.
Afflictions in cancer causes gas trouble, stomach disorders,
indigestion, cough, Hi-cough, dropsy, hypochondria, hysteria,
gallstones, breast disorders and edema caused by the hypo
functioning of the pituitary gland or lack of sufficient potassium to
regulate the balance with sodium in the body, and jaundice. It also
cause after birth pains, abortion, falling of womb, miscarriage,
acidity, carcinoma.
By the principle of cross flow of energy afflictions of cancer may
also cause diseases of the other signs of the cardinal cross viz.
loss of blood in the brain, apathy, suppression of urine, poor
functioning of kidney, renal retention, hypo functioning of gall
bladder, the release of too little bile causing digestive problems.
Education:
Political science. Marine engg, water works engg.. Bookbinding,
agriculture. Drafts man. Agricultural, economics. Instrumental engg.
Music, Marketing education. Geology.
Places: Rivers, sea, canals, wells, springs, marshes, ditches, car
stand, fields near the sea.
Countries: China, Holland, Canada, New Zealand, and New
York.
Commodities: Grass leaves. Barks, plantain fruits, milk and milky
products, cabbage, mushroom.
Leo:
It is masculine, fiery, fixed, barren, bestial and of long ascension.
By the principle of correspondence Sun rules over this sign. No

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
planet gets exaltation or debilitation in it. Saturn finds it as its
detriment. It rules over East direction.
General Characteristics:
Leo is Self-centered, aspiring, ambitious, arrogant, fierce in action,
calculating in sexual encounters, choosy in social relationship. It
represents frankness, magnanimity, self-sufficiency, creativity,
susceptibility to praise and flattery. Its supreme quality is its
suddenness, aggression and frontal attack. Leo is ostentation,
egotistical, proud and showmanship. Classic Leo types are often
recognized by their colourful dress, red and gold being their
favourite colours.
Leo's passion is deeply attractive, but the very depth of its feeling
means that it can be difficult to love or to work with. Lor Leo
types, “Love is blind". Their affections are more self-centred rather
than universal. Honour to Leo types comes almost unsought for.
Leo individuals are very generous by nature and find it very easy
to express themselves. They easily forgive people who have hurt
them and seldom carry grudges. Most of them are theistic by
nature and believe in the 'Supreme Being'. Leos have a very fiery
spirit and love to indulge in adventurous activities.
It is said that a Leo-bom is not satisfied with the material heights
he attains; he is always aspiring towards greater intellect, greater
wealth, greater status, and greater respect. Often he thinks that he
has achieved more than he really has; nevertheless, he is never
satisfied.
Physical characteristics:
Strong, broad shoulders, upright wall wavy hair, cheerful
expression, majestic appearance, fearless eyes.

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
— r-T-i.» T
Profession:
Share brokers, gold smith, managers of corporation, sports coach,
director of cinemas, officers, doctors, sales managers. Their ideal
career is acting, and they are often found in work connected with
the performing arts. The sign also gives civil servants, politicians,
ministers, connected with government in any manner, C.E.O of
large enterprises, ambassadors.
Body Parts:
Heart, dorsal region of spine, spinal cord, aorta, superior and
inferior vena cava.
Diseases:
Leo rales the heart, the dorsal region of the spine, the spinal cord,
and the aorta.
Afflictions in Leo cause palpitation, feeling giddy, fainting,
convulsions and heart problems, spinal meningitis, angina pectorisis,
anemia, regurgitation of blood, hypertrophy, pancarditis, muscular
rheumatism in the back, cholesterol-related degeneration of the
heart or aortic arteries, constriction of the arteries or veins leading
to the heart.
By the principle of cross flow of energy afflictions of Leo may
also cause diseases relate to other signs of fixed cross viz. hardening
of arteries, retina problems, blood poisoning, colon stasis etc.
Education:
History, Ayurvedic medicine; general medicine, chemistry, computer
system engineering, obstetrics, architecture, B.Ed., M.B.A., chest
diseases, radiology, electrology, hospital administration.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Places:
Forests, High hills, social club houses; Govt, buildings, stock
exchanges, gold mines, mint, furnace, chimney, oven, ball-rooms.
Countries: Australia, Argentina, Japan, Burma, France, Rome,
Prague, Damascus, Philadelphia, Chicago.
Commodities: Juice, Food Grains, Lion's skin.
Virgo:
It is Feminine, Earthy, and Mutable, barren and humane sign. By
the principle of correspondence Mercury rules over it and also
gets exaltation; Venus gets debilitation and Jupiter finds it as its
detriment. It rules over South direction.
General characteristics:
It strives for perfection, arouses conscience and suffering for noble
cause; produces intense activity in the realm of intellect and psychic
consciousness, but no merriment. It is a sign of great sensitivity,
precision, resentfulness, self-pity, versatility. Virgo is industrious,
a real business person with logical outlook and with few
pretensions. Virgoans are often too fussy, over concerned with
cleanliness and order, and unable to deal with spontaneity and
chaos.
Virgoans are natural bureaucrats, but socially they tend to be shy
and lack confidence when expressing their feelings. They have
very high standards but can be overcritical. If critical of themselves,
they can seriously erode their confidence.
It is said that a Virgo-born is easily frustrated and his passionate
nature often leads to serious psychological complications.

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
Physical characteristics:
Straight nose, active walk, quiet voice, tall with a slender body,
curved eyebrows with much hair growth, young appearance, honest
and frank eye expression.
Profession:
Medical doctors. Personals working in Public Health Department,
Govt. Sendee, Aviation Department, Teachers, Auditors, caterers,
confectioners, paper dealers, computer and software experts,
astrologers, psychiatrists, land owners.
Body Parts:
Abdominal region, large and small intestines, lower lobe of liver,
spleen, duodenum, chylification, peristalsis of the bowels.
Diseases:
It rules abdominal region, lower lobes of liver, pancreas, large
intestines and spleen. Virgo's main function is to break down,
analyse and organize. These functions are especially evident in the
functioning of liver and pancreas.
Afflictions in Virgo may cause gastroenteritis, hyper insulinism,
enlarged liver, abscess of the liver, jaundice, typhoid, cholera.
Appendicitis, Loose motions. Tapeworm, round worm, hook
worms, peritonitis, diabetic or hypoglycemic complaints as well
as colitis and diarrhea.
By the principle of cross flow of energy afflictions of Virgo may
also cause diseases of the other signs of the mutable cross viz.
constriction or malfunctioning of some Lubes in the body, lymphatic
stasis which may incline towards severe and continued colds and
flue, dislocation of pelvis etc.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Education:
Doctor of literature. Neurology, Health education. Dental Surgery,
Tourism, Teacher Training, Electrical Engineering, Diploma in
Leprosy.
Places:
Gardens, corn-fields, places where fruits and vegetables are kept,
the store-room, book-shelves, first aid-box, libraries, diaries.
Countries: T urkey, Greece, Switzerland, West Indies.
Commodities: Barley, Horse-gram, wheat, common flax. Kidney
beans.
Libra:
It is masculine, airy and moveable. Venus rales over it and Saturn
gets exaltation; Sun gets debilitation and Mars finds it as its
detriment. It rales over West direction.
General Characteristics:
It operates on the principle of Reciprocity or Mutuality. It is
enigmatic, artistic, critic, restless, independent, changeable and
sentimental. It never remains stationary; there is a thirst for greater
and greater achievement. It bestows material riches but does not
allow the person to enjoy them. There is quietude at the surface,
but inwardly there is dissatisfaction. It is a sign, which operates
primarily in the region of materiality. Libra being an airy sign, and
a cardinal one, it's native is leader in mental realms, and is an
ardent lover of nature and its beauties. He always craves for
society. Above all he has humanitarian instincts and unassuming
nature.

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
This sign's paradox is that it aims to create a balance that can
never really exist in a world undergoing constant change. Libran's
artistic qualities enable them to create beautiful and pleasing
environments, so they can be cordial company both at home and
at work. They thrive in social groups, being bom diplomats, bringing
enemies together to make them friends. It is said that a Librabom is also subject to contradictory thoughts and actions; he is
justice loving but easily irritated. He may have a strong desire for
artistic achievement but fail to actualize it.
Physical Characteristics:
Tall, elegant figure, well proportional body, slender but strong limbs,
fair skin, attractive countenance, eye brows add to the beauty,
gets bald in adult age, nose bent a little like a parrot.
Profession:
Druggists, chemists, painters, dealers in foodand milk, juicy fruits,
biscuits and confectionary, musicians, artists, architects, nursery
owner, profession connected with fine arts, cinema actors, music
composers, and dancers. The professions related with Libra also
include Judges, diplomats, management consultants, officers of
law, actors, interior decorators, photographers, perfume
manufactures, fashion designers, owners of cabaret and night clubs,
prostitutes, air hostesses, pilots, liaison officers and receptionists.
Body Parts:
Kidneys, adrenals, lumbar region, skin, ureters, vasomotor system,
buttocks

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Diseases:
Libra rules kidneys, private parts, the lumbar region of the spine,
the vasomotor system and the skin, urinary tract.
Afflictions of Libra may cause suppression of the urine, polyuria,
inflammation of the uterus. Blight's disease, lumbago. Rheumatic
pains. Eczema, skin disease, kidney problems like nephritis. Libra
also rules the basal metabolism, specifically the acid-alkaline
metabolism. Blood disorders from simple anemia to a pseudo
leukemia and high white blood cell count can also be caused by a
malfunctioning of kidney.
By the principle of cross flow of energy af flictions of Libra may
also cause diseases of the other signs of the cardinal cross.
Education:
Agriculture, Ayurvedic medicine. Chemistry, Master of Arts, library
and information science. Master of Surgery, Dermatology,
Radiology and electrology. Homeopathic medicine. Textile
Engineering.
Places: Sawpits, ground near windmills, outhouses, mountain tops,
sides of hills, inner chamber.
Countries: Bunna, Indo-China, China, Argentina, Upper Egypt,
Libya, Austria.
Commodities: Black grain. Mustard seed, wheat.
Scorpio:
It is feminine, watery, fixed and fertile sign. Mars owns the sign
and Moon gets debilitation. No planet exalts here. It rules North
direction. It is considered as a very violent sign.

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
General Characteristics:
It represents perceptiveness, shrewdness, penetration,
perseverance, loyalty and creative desires. Secrecy rules supreme
in all aspects of life. It brings much conflict, destruction and chaos,
turmoil, upsets and unexpected developments arise. It has profound
belief in self- training and self- discipline. It signifies energies which,
if properly managed, could lead to a tremendous unfoldment of
psychic powers. Its delusion is that of despotism, and from this
arise the fault of rebelliousness.
Those bom under this sign have an instinctive sense of what is
right and what is wrong, and though this may be in contradiction
to accepted morality, it nevertheless provides a powerful personal
motivation. They are usually interested in all things deep, dark, or
hidden, which covers a wide range of activities. The Scorpionic
solution to any problem is either to hide away, pretending that it
doesn't exist, or go to the other extreme and strive for complete
and total change, even at the risk of total and hard-hitting
confrontation.
Scorpian can never display a superficial knowledge till he thinks
he is thorough. Enormous confidence in his executive ability makes
him put off things to the last moment. Unnecessary and undeserved
false talks cannot be easily borne by him. It is said that the life of
a Scorpio-bom is a bag of mixed achievement and frustration.
Physical Characteristics:
Dark or dusky complexion, well-proportioned body, hands are
generally long, stature above average, broad face, commanding
appearance, short and curly hair. Good personality.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Profession:
Surgeons, military and police officers, profession in science or
technology, chemistry, medicine, beverage, boilers, dam
construction, labour department, machinery, tea, coffee, tobacco,
rice mills, detectives, house construction, nurses, criminals, police
and defence officials.
They may become psychologists, therapists, archeologists,
historians, healers, miners, astronomers, astrologers, detectives
or members of mysterious religious cults or political groups.
Body Parts:
Bladder, urethra, genitals, descending colon, prostate gland,
sigmoid flexure, nasal bone, pubic bone, red coloring matter in
blood, reproductive system, sexual organs, bowels, excretory
system.
Diseases:
Scorpio rales over the prostrate gland and the reproductive system,
and function governing the colon and bladder infection.
Affliction of Scorpio may cause diseases of prostrate glands, nasal
catarrh, venereal diseases, infection troubles in urethra and
generative organs, piles, fistula, rectum, bladder, descending colon,
irregularities of menses, renal stone, diseases of the womb and
ovaries, and leucorrhoea; disorders of the fallopian tubes or
testicles, stones in bladder and fungus infection.
By the principle of cross flow of energy affliction of Scorpio may
cause diseases of the back and heart (Leo), thyroid (Taurus) and
eyes (Aquarius) the other signs in the fixed cross. The upshot is
that cataracts or glaucoma, back ailments or heart conditions may
actually be caused by malfunctioning colon.

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
Education:
Civil engineering, agriculture engineering, Business administration,
Law, medicine, surgery, Physical education, literature, Corporate
secretaryship.
Places: muddy and moist places, kitchen- garden, sluggish
streams, slaughterhouse, meat markets, tannery, cremation ground.
Countries: Brazil, Norway, Sweden, Syria, Algeria, Queensland,
Morocco.
Commodities: Wet grains, sugarcane, metals, woolen fabrics.
Sagittarius:
It is masculine, fiery and mutable. Jupiter rules over the sign and
Mercury finds it as its detriment. No other planet has any special
impact on this sign unless it operates under Jupiter's authority and
jurisdiction. It rales over East direction.
General Characteristics:
It is called the sign of Cosmic Progress or Cosmic Abundance. It
represents enthusiasm, initiative ness, enterprise, adaptive ness,
versatility. It has an independent spirit, an unquenchable desire for
freedom, and a profound love for knowledge and learning. It is
outspoken, extrovert, looks to the future but with a balanced
approach. Being positive and fiery it can be remarkably impulsive
and being mutable it can be deceptive too. The delusion is,
therefore restlessness, or the love of novelty for its own sake;
inconsistency, over-optimism, wastefulness and prodigality.
Sagittarians are often possessed by wanderlust. The purpose is
the search for truth. The combination of mutability with fire makes
the sign unstable and its plans are often dropped before completion.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Sagittarius has a continually changing view of life's possibilities.
This sign's great strength lies in its optimism and enthusiasm; its
weakness is its impracticality.
Physical Characteristics:
Tall, well composed body, high and bushy eye brows, rather long
face, bright eyes, charming appearance, fair complexion, and
handsome figure.
Profession:
Detective agencies, industrial security, employment in law courts,
document section, law college, advocate, judge, politician,
bankers, housing finance, information and broadcasting
department, C.B.I officer. Journalists, News paper organization,
atomic energy, photographer. Income tax officer. Gynecologist
Body Parts:
Hips, thighs, femur, ileum, coccygeal vertebrae, sacral region,
sciatic nerves, ischium.
Diseases:
Sagittarius rales the hips and thighs, the coccygeal and sacral
regions of the spine, the iliac arteries and veins, sciatic nerves, the
femur.
Affliction of Sagittarius may cause diseases related to thighs, hips,
locomotors ataxia, sciatica, rheumatism, and fracture of collar
bones, varicose veins, and bronchitis; gout and nervous disorders,
paralysis of hips and thighs, injuries to hips and thighs from riding
horses or other violent physical exertions, pelvic operations.

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
Education:
History, Economics, Telecommunication, computer science,
electrical and electronics, chartered accountants, dental surgery,
and pharmacy.
Places: Places next to oven, stables of healthy horses, places
where weapons are preserved, churches, temples, schools and
colleges, courts, woods and bushes, top most room in a house.
Countries: Hungary, Australia, part of France, Spain, Italy.
Commodities: Horses, cloth, weapons, seeds, roots, salt, gingili.
Capricorn:
It is Feminine, Earthy and Rajasic. Saturn rules this sign; Mars
gets its exaltation and Jupiter its Debilitation. Moon finds it as its
detriment It rales over South direction.
General Characteristics:
The realm of operation of this sign is mundane existence. It operates
under the Cosmic Order and Justice, embodied in the truth that
"As ye sow so shall ye reap". Destruction, disillusionment of
traditional values and anew alignment of forces all occur under
this sign. When Capricorn begins to operate, past karmas are
activated. Being negative and Earthy, it is methodic, cautious and
practical; being Rajasic also looks to the future for new alignments.
It is jealous, self-pitying and melancholic.
Capricorn's central belief is that fancy ideas are far less important
than the need to get the job done and keep the world ticking over.
Capricorns harbour emotions as powerful as those of any other
sign but, as it's a Saturnine Earth sign, they may find their feelings
difficult to express. They are often victims of circumstances.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Periods of gloom and melancholy overtake them. It is difficult for
them to cultivate friendship with strangers.
Physical Characteristics:
Long nose, firm lips, strong but narrow chin. Prominent features,
dark thin hair, eyes deep set, tall and slender body.
Profession:
Manufacturer of steel furniture, employment in research
department, biology department, service in high courts, M.P.
MLA, MLC, Telecommunication department, dealer of sports
materials, electricity department, anesthesia specialists, cardiology
surgeon, plastic surgeon, army, traffic inspectors, building
contractors, drainage and sewage department.
Body Parts:
Skin, knees, joints, hair, and skeletal system.
Diseases:
Capricorn governs the knee and skin. By the principle of cross
flow of energy it also affects the functioning of stomach, brain,
kidneys etc.
Afflictions of Capricorn may cause diseases: skin diseases, knee
problems, eczema, irregularities in the function of heart,
Rheumatism chills, gout, neuralgia, melancholia, blood disorders,
and arteriosclerosis.
Education:
Computer science; economics, anesthesia, business administration,
medical laboratory technology, chemical engineering.

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
Places: Cells, safe vaults, isolation hospitals, barren land, old
buildings, caves, thickjungle, dunghills, low houses, tombs.
Countries: Bulgaria, Mexico, Albania, Afghanistan.
Commodities: Trees, bushes, wet grains, sugarcane, gold, black
lead.
Aquarius:
It is Masculine, Airy and Fixed. Saturn rules over the sign. No
planet gets exaltation or debilitation in this sign, however, some
believe Mercury exalts here. Sun finds it as its detriment. It rules
over West direction.
General Characteristics:
It helps and guides others towards their fulfillment It is inventive,
ingenious, persistent, stubborn, reliable, loyal, sincere and
aesthetic. Esoteric study of this sign indicates that whenever
Aquarian appears, there is reaction, opposition and difficulties
arise. Turmoil in one's life is immensely increased as the individual
begins to work in accordance with the divine plan and annihilate
his personal ego. In this Saturn is ruthless in achieving this task. It
completely destroys the traditional values. Probably this might be
one of the reasons why some Astrologers, by using the
correspondence principle, consider 11th house as not good.
Because Aquarius is a fixed sign, Aquarians often develop a
lifestyle, or a set of attitudes, which they find impossible to change.
Aquarius is concerned, sometimes to the point of obsession, with
being new, radical and different. Often it is eccentric, frequently
awkward and always demanding complete personal freedom.
Aquarians specialize in producing new ideas, but because these
are impractical, they need the help of other signs to implement

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
them. Aquarians loves to work for the common people and the
down-trodden classes. All psychic subjects appeal to Aquarians
and due to the inspiration, love of solitude and keen occultic
penetration, they often turns out ascetics or preachers.
Physical Characteristics:
Tall, full figure, fine clear complexion, defects in teeth, oval face,
and brown hair.
Profession:
Industrialists, Mechanical and mining engineers, professor of
mathematics, bakery manufactures. Civil engineers. Designers,
financial brokers, departmental stores. Government sendee, non
vegetarian hotels. Neurologists, Phannaceuticals, manufacturer of
sanitary garments. Technical advisors for paint and chemical
manufacturers, wireless and telecommunication engineers.
Body Parts:
Lower limbs, ankles, circulatory system.
Diseases:
Aquarius rules the lower legs, calves, retina and oxidative process.
Affliction of Aquarius may cause diseases: Dropsy, irregular
functioning of heart, skin diseases, left shoulder, left ear, sprain in
ankles, crippling of legs, retinas problems, cataracts and glaucoma
By the principle of cross flow of energy afflictions of Aquarius
may also cause diseases of the other signs of the fixed cross like
heart ailments like coronary thrombosis, dorsal region of the spinal
cord(vertebrae), thyroid and parathyroid related diseases, toxemia
of colon.

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
Education:
Bank management, nursing, gynecology and obstetrics; medicine
and surgery, pathology, microbiology, agricultural engineering.
Places:
Mines, ores, places where radio sets, T. V. and phones are placed,
place recently excavated, trenches, tunnels, and windows.
Countries: Sweden, Russia, Arabia, Poland, Prussia.
Commodities: Water fruits, flowers, gems, articles of various
shapes.
Pisces:
It is Feminine, Watery and Mutable. Jupiter rules over this sign;
Mercury gets its debilitation and Venus exalts here. It rules over
North direction.
General Characteristics:
It being the last sign of the Zodiac symbolizes the cessation of all
worldly efforts, the final merging of the individual into the universe.
There is no conflict, no contradiction, and no more lust for life.
Being negative, watery and mutable it represents the principle of
sociability, sentimentality, sympathy, perception, intuition,
imagination and adaptability.
Pisceans often withdraw from the world into a safe refuge.
Emotional, sensitive, impressionable, and vulnerable, Pisceans lack
the hard shell of those under the influence of the other two Water
signs Cancer and Scorpio. Pisces is exceptionally imaginativeand just as perceptive as Scorpio. They can be excellent artists

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
but they are also self-sacrificing, wanting to find a role that has a
greater meaning.
Physical Characteristics:
Short stature, plumpy, muscular and spherical shoulders, big and
protruding eyes.
Profession:
House keeper, Interior decorator, Investigation department,
financer, repair and service engineer of refrigeration, clearing
agencies, imprisons, architects, singers, water works and sewerage
boards, astrologer, agriculturists, dealer in kerosene, catering
department, software engineer, corporation employees, furniture
dealers.
Body Parts:
Feet, toes, fibrin of blood, Lymphatic system, adipose tissue.
Diseases:
Pisces rales the lymphatic system, feet and toes.
Affliction of Pisces may cause diseases of the feet and toe like
gout and loss of immunity. It affects intestine, dropsy, delirium,
complication due to drags, drinks. By the principle of cross flow
of energy afflictions of Pisces may cause diseases of the other
signs of the mutable cross like cirrhosis of liver, hernia, appendicitis,
enlarged liver, jaundice, fatty degeneration of the liver and
cholesterol, blood and lung disorders, hemorrhaging in the lungs,
arterial ailments, dislocation of the pelvis, hypo insulinism,
constipation.

Chapter 3: Zodiac and its Division
Education:
Leather technology. Textiles, Accountancy, Electrical engineering,
commerce, doctor of medicines, industrial instrumentation
engineering.
Places:
Pond, ocean, fish canneries, damp and wet places, asylum, old
heritage, jails, oil fields.
Countries: Portugal, Nonnandy, Egypt, Galicia.
Commodities: Pearls and other shells, gems, diamonds, various
oils, fish.

Chapter 4:
Casting the Rashi Chart
The horoscope or the rashi chart cast for an event (Birth is also an
event) should indicate the following:
1 . The Ascendant i.e. the, degree, minutes and seconds of
the Zodiac rising in the Eastern horizon at the place of
happening of the event as per time & date of happening of
the event.
2. The Planetary Positions viz. the degrees, minutes, and
seconds of the Zodiac over which the planets are transiting
at the time, date, and place of happening of the event.
The horoscope, therefore, is a Zodiacal representation of the
Ascendant and Planets for the happening of the event at a specified
time, place and date. Hence to cast a horoscope (specifically the
rashi chart) we need to know the following:
1 . Date of birth (Event)
2. Time of birth (Event); and
3 . Place of birth (Event) i.e. exact latitude and longitude of the
place
Why Different Ascendants
Earth revolves round the Sun from West to East and the path
traced by it is called Ecliptic. It takes 365. 2422 days to complete
360 degrees. Suppose on a particular date, say 1 3th April, Sun

Chapter 4: Casting the Rashi Chart 57
appears to be at 0 degree Aries. To an observer on Earth, as
Earth moves from West to East, it appears as if Sun is moving
from East to West against the background of the Zodiac at an
average speed of 59 min. 10.68 sec. (360/365.2422). Thus to
this observer on Earth, it will appear that Sun moves from one
sign to the next in about a month.
There is another motion of Earth, which is Earth also moves around
its own axis from West to East and completes its revolution in 23
hrs 56 min. 4 sec. To the observer on Earth, it gives an impression
that the Zodiac is moving from East to West and completes 360
degrees in the same time. The Zodiac appears to be a circle to an
observer on equator. How ever the Zodiac appears to be Elliptic
to an observer on Earth at any point North or South of the Equator.
Thus different degrees of the Zodiac take different time to move
from East to West. Let us say, that on a particular day, say 13*01'
April, Sun enters the sign Aries at some time; and on 14* April, at
sun rise at the place of observation, the degree rising in the eastern
horizon will co-incide with the degree occupied by Sun. However
due to the revolution of the Earth around its own axis, it will appear
that Sun is no longer in the eastern horizon what has moved upward
and the degree rising in the east horizon will also be different than
the degree of the Sun at this time of sun rise. This difference will
be dependent on the time that has elapsed since sunrise and the
speed at which the Zodiac appears to move from East to West.
This gives rise to different ascendants or different ascendants
degrees to rise in the eastern horizon as the time passes from
sunrise time.
Basis of Time Measurement
lime is one of the most important parameter that is used for casting
the horoscope. It is, therefore, essential to understand the basis of
its measurement The basis of time measurement is the rotation of

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Earth upon its axis with reference to the apparent angular motion
of the heavenly bodies.
Sidereal Day:
A day can be defined as the interval between two successive transits
of the object over a particular meridian. In the case of Sun it is
known as Solar day and in case of a Star or first point of Aries it
is known as Sidereal Day. We may say that there are two methods
of time-keeping.
1. Solar Time : It is kept with reference to Sun.
2. Sidereal Time : It is measured with reference to the Stars.
Solar time and Sidereal time are, therefore, of unequal lengths.
Mean Solar Day:
There are two reasons for unequal solar days.
1 . Sun does not move along the Ecliptic at a uniform rate due
to varying distance of the Earth from Sun during the year.
2. Sun moves in the Ecliptic and not along the celestial Equator.
Its celestial longitude is in general different from its right
ascension. Revolution causes the Sun to appear about one
degree of arc to the East each day. Therefore the Earth
must turn an additional degree of arc or four minutes of
time to bring the Sun to the meridian the following day.
To overcome the variation of true Sun's motion, a fictitious mean
Sun is used which move Eastward along the celestial equator at a
uniform rate equal to the average rate of the true Sun along the
Ecliptic. The time between two successive lower transits of the
mean Sun is defined as a mean solar or civil day, which is
approximately four minutes longer than a sidereal day.

Chapter 4: Casting the Rashi Chart 59
Sidereal Time:
It measures the rotation of the earth relative to the first point of
Aries (Vernal Equinox) and is identical with the right ascension of
the meridian. Sidereal time at any instant is the hour angle of the
Vernal Equinox expressed in time. Sidereal time is zero when the
Vernal Equinox is on the meridian. It increases due to the constant
rotation of the celestial sphere at the rate of 1 degree per four
minutes.
Longitudinal Equivalent:
Sidereal Time is always local. The difference between local sidereal
Time and Greenwich Sidereal Time corresponds to the longitude
of the observer expressed in time. This is called Longitudinal
Equivalent in time and consists of converting the longitude of the
birth place into time at the rate of 15 degrees per hour. If the birth
place is East of Greenwich this longitude correction is added, and
if the birth place is West of Greenwich this longitude correction is
deducted.
Places on the same meridian always have the same local Sidereal
Time.
Mean to Sidereal Time Correction:
A mean solar day is equivalent to 24 hours 3 minutes 56.56
seconds of sidereal Time. Therefore, the calculations of Sidereal
Time from a given Mean Solar Time require a correction at the
rate of 9.86 seconds per hour.
A tropical year (or solar year is the interval between two successive
returns of the Sun to the same tropic or Equinox) of 365.2422
mean solar days is equivalent to 366.2422 sidereal days. An
astronomical clock will indicate 24 hours in 23 hrs56 min 4.09
seconds of ordinary clock or mean time. In other words, the

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Sidereal clock gains9.8565 Sidereal seconds on the mean time
clock in one hour of mean time. To get correct Sidereal time we
need therefore, to deduct the quantity at the rate of 9.8565 seconds
per hour of the mean time.
Local Mean Time:
The mean solar time at any given meridian is the true mean time of
any place on Earth's surface along the same meridian. Thus LMT
is the same for all places having the same longitude.
Standard Time:
To regulate civil life, each country has selected a particular place
on a particular meridian to keep uniform time irrespective of the
place in the country with reference to the Greenwich meridian.
For example, in India, the reference meridian is 82.5 degrees
passing through the place Ujjain.
Difference between Greenwich Mean Time and the standard time
is calculated by adding or subtracting the time difference obtained
by multiplying the longitude of the reference meridian by four. This
difference is added for the places, which are East of Greenwich,
and subtracted for the places, which are West of Greenwich. For
example, in case of India, the time difference is 82.5x 4/60 =5.5
hrs. Since Ujjan's longitude is 82.5 degrees E. This difference
indicates that the standard time of India is 5.5 hrs ahead of
Greenwich Time.
Conversion of Standard Time to LMT
For casting the horoscope we need to calculate the sidereal Time
corresponding to the Local Mean Time from the time of event as
noted by the clock. For this we need first to convert the standard
time as noted by the watch/clock to LMT. This is done as follows:

Chapter 4: Casting the Rashi Chart 61
1 . First calculate the equivalent Greenwich meantime by
subtracting or adding the standard time difference (For
example for India -5.5hrs) from the standard time. For
example the equivalent Greenwich Time for Delhi (India)
time 8 pm will be 20hrs -5.5hrs i.e. 14.5 hrs
2. Calculate the local time difference between Greenwich and
the place by multiplying the longitude of the place by 4. For
example, for Delhi (India) it will come to 77.2 x 4 = 308.8
minutes = 5 hrs 8 mins and 48 secs. For places in the east
of the Greenwich this difference will be +ve and for the
places in the west of Greenwich it will be - v e. LMT at the
place will be equal to the equivalent Greenwich Time plus
or minus the difference as calculated in Para 1.
Longitudinal Correction:
Sidereal Time at Greenwich increases at the rate of 4 minutes per
24 hours because of the earth's rotation on its axis to cover 1
degree by which Sun would have moved. Similarly the Sidereal
time at other places will change (increase or decrease) depending
upon the longitude of the place West or East of Greenwich. Since
the Side real time changes by 4 minutes or 240 seconds for one
revolution of earth round its axis, the change per degree longitude
will be (240/360=2/3 sec per degree of longitude).This is called
longitudinal correction. For each degree east of Greenwich, we
need to deduct 2/3 seconds from the Side real time at the place of
birth. For places west of Greenwich this correction is to be added.
Calculation of Sidereal Time:
We can calculate the Sidereal Time for any event happening at
any place using the Ephemeris as follows.
1. First convert the time of happening of the event into LMT.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts “
2. Calculate the longitudinal correction seconds by multiplying
the longitude of the place by 2/3.
3 . Note the Greenwich Sidereal T ime at noon for the date of
happening from the Ephemeris. If the LMT is before noon
on that date, use previous date.
4. Add the longitudinal correction as obtained above in 2 to
3 . This will give the Sidereal T ime at noon at the place of
happening.
5. Calculate the time interval between noon and the LMT.
6 . Calculate the mean time correction by multiplying the interval
as obtained in 5 by 9.86.
7. For place east of Greenwich add, for place west of
Greenwich; deduct the figure obtained in 6 to the figure
obtained in 4 and 5. That is Sidereal time at the place is
(4+5) ± figure at 6. This will give the Sidereal Time of
happening of the event at that place.
How to fix the Ascendant Position:
The Ascendant is, as we have defined earlier, the degrees, minutes
and seconds of a sign which will be rising at the time of birth of a
person.
Importance of latitude in the Calculation of
Ascendant:
If we observe the Zodiac from the Equator, it subtends an angle
of 360 degrees and appears to be a circle. As such the time taken
by each degree of the Zodiac to rise at the horizon will be same.
But if we move to the North or the South of the Equator, the time
taken by different degrees of the Zodiac to rise will be different

Chapter 4: Casting the Rashi Chart 63
because the Zodiac no longer appears to be circular. Thus the
latitude plays a significant role in fixing the Ascendant
Why use Geocentric Latitudes:
Casting of the horoscope should be done using the geocentric
latitude of the place of birth. The reason for this is explained here.
The longitudes of the places where the planets are seen, in the
background of the Zodiac, by an observer at the center of Earth
are called their geo-centric latitudes. However, if the observer is
at some other place North or South of the Equator than the center
of the Earth, the planets longitude as seen in the background of
the Zodiac is likely to undergo a slight variation. Since the Atlas
invariably provides us the geographic latitudes of places on the
earth, we need to convert them into geocentric latitudes to counter
balance the tilt of the Zodiac due to the obhquity of the place of
observation. This is done by using the following formula.
Where A is the geocentric latitude and B is the geographic latitude
of the place.
Example: Geographical latitude of Chennai = 13°.04'
Its Geocentric Latitude will be = Tan 13°.04' x 0.99330546 =
Method's of Ascendant Calculation:
First Method:
Degree rising on the Ascendant can be calculated by referring to
the tables of ascendants for various latitude published by N.C.
Lahiri and others using the Sidereal Time calculated for the time of

True Astrology- "Basicand Traditional Concepts “
event against the column of the latitude of the place. If the table
for the exact latitude is not available, the nearest latitude tables
can be used to find the exact degree by interpolation of the tables.
Second Method:
We can also calculate the position of the Ascendant in another
way. The degree rising on the Ascendant will be equal to how
much the Sun has moved in the sky after sunrise at the place of
happening of an event, plus how much the Sun has moved in the
Zodiac on that particular day in terms of time i.e. if we take that
the Sun crosses the whole Zodiac in one Sidereal day of the earth.
Let X is the time interval between sunrise (it is reckoned from the
time when Sun's center is on horizon) and the time of happening
of the event at a place on a particular day. This is called Ishtkaal.
From the Ephemeris, we may note the position of the Sun at the
time of sunrise on that date. Let it by Y in degrees, minutes and
seconds. We then need to find out the speed at which Sun is
moving on that date. Let it be S in degrees, minutes, seconds. The
speed may be positive or negative i.e. increasing or decreasing
respectively. Thus,
S (speed per day) = S1-S2/N
Here S 1 is the speed on the midnight of a date say 2 1 st March.
And S2 is the speed of the Sun say on 28th March. N is the
number of days i.e. here equal to 7.
Sun's position at this time of event will be calculated as follows:
Sun's longitude Z= Y ± (S/24) X. This will indicate how Sun has
moved in the Zodiac.
Now from the Ascendant table for the particular latitude we may
note how much time a sign / degree takes to rise at that place. Let
us say on the date of happening Y degree rises at a particular time

Chapter 4: Casting the Rashi Chart
say T1 and the next degree i.e. Y+lriseatT2. Then(Tl-T2) will
indicate the time taken by the Sun to move 1 degree in the sky.
Therefore, in X hours. Sun will cover X/(T2-T 1) degrees of the
zodiac.
Ascendant degree will be Y+XJ (T2-T1).
Example:
Let us see how we can calculate the Ascendant for the given birth
date.
Time of Birth 03.50 AM 1ST
Place of Birth Bombay (Longitude 72.50 Latitude 18.58)
1st Method
Step 1 : Calculate LMT
LMT = (IST-5.30)+Time calculation at the rate of 4 minutes
for each degree of longitude.
= 3hrllm20s.
Step 2: Calculation of Sidereal time for the given date , time and
place of birth. For this we need Table of Ascendant (say
Lahiri's Table of Ascendants).
Sidereal Time for 10th December 17hr 14m 07s
Longitudinal correction for Bombay 06s
(page 101)
Correction for year 1993 lm 52s
(Table II)

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Sidereal time at noon for Bombay 17hr 16m 05s
Let us now calculate the Sidereal time at Birth.
As the birth is before noon, deduct
From 12h Qm Os
LMT 3h 11m 20s
Add mean time correction at the rate of 9.86 seconds per hour of
the interval calculated above. This will come equal to lm 27s.
So the exact time interval will be 8 hr 50m 07 sec.
T o get the Sidereal time at Birth, we need to deduct (For births
before noon) this interval from the Sidereal time at Noon.
Therefore Sidereal time at Birth = 8h 25m 58s
Step 3: Look for the page in the book of Table of Ascendants,
which indicates the Ascendants as per Latitude nearest
to the place of Birth. On page 29, Table for Latitude 19
degree N is given. The Latitude of Bombay is 1 8 deg.
58 min. N. In this page look for the Ascendant for the
Sidereal time calculation above. You may have to apply
interpolatiofi method to calculate the exact degree. In
this case it will come to 6s. 11°. 14'. Now to get the
correct Nirayana Ascendant for 10.12.1993 we need
to apply Ayanamsha correction for the year 1993 which
is - 46' from the table of Ascendant.
Thus the Ascendant comes to be Libra 10 deg. 28 min.

Chapter 4: Casting the Rashi Chart 67
j
Calculation of Ascendant by 2 Method: (Birth Data same as
above)
Tune of Birth =03.50 AM
Sunrise on 9. 1 2.93 = 05.30 (Say to simplify calculations)
Therefore Ishtkaal = 22h 20m
Longitude of Sun at sunrise on 9.12.1993 = 7s 23 deg. 8 min.
Since speed on that date is 1 deg. 1 min. Therefore in x hrs
(22 hr 20 min) Sun will cover 0 deg. 57 min.
Therefore, Longitude of Sun at 03.50 AM on 10. 12. 1993 will be
At the time of Sunrise on 9. 12. 1993 Scorpio 23 deg. 8 min. was
rising. Now we have to calculate the time taken by each degree at
thd place of birth to rise. Knowing it from the Tables we can
calculate using Ishtkaal the number of degrees that will have to be
risen before the birth time.
War Time Correction:
During World War II, the clock time was put ahead of the standard
time by one hour in many countries. India also followed this time
adjustment from 1.9.1942 to 15.10.1945. While casting the
horoscope, it must be ascertained whether the time given by the
individual is the standard time or the clock time if the birth has
taken place during above dates.
Summer Time Correction:
Many countries put their clocks ahead of the standard time during
summer. This point should be noted while casting the horoscope.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Calculation of Longitude of Planets
This is done with the help of annual Ephemeris, which indicates
the longitudes of planets for each date at 05.30AM. From the
two consecutive dates, we can find the difference in longitude of
each planet From this difference we can calculate the rate at which
the longitude of the planet is changing on the date of the event.
Knowing the time difference between the time of event and 05.30
hrs we can calculate the longitude of each planet.
Example:
Let us calculate the longitudes of planets at 03.50hrs on
Time difference between 05.30 AM on 9.12.93 and 03.50 on
From the Ephemeris, we can see the difference of longitude of
planets as on9.12.93 and 10.12.93. It is as shown below.
Planet
Sun
Moon
Mars
Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn
Rahu
Ketu
Difference
i.r

Chapter 4: Casting the Rashi Chart 69
Calculation of longitude of Sun:
Sun's longitude on 9.12.1993 at 05.30AM 7s 23.08'
Calculation of Moon's Longitude
Calculation of Mars longitude
LongitudeofMarson9.12.1993at05.30AM 7s 27.58'
Longitude of Mars on 10.12.1993 at 03.50AM + 00.42'
Thus the longitude of other planets can also be calculated. These
will be as follows:
Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn
Rahu
Ketu

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Lord of the House:
It may be noted that the sign appearing on the house determines
the lordship of the house. Suppose Leo sign appears on the 10th
cusp, then Sun will be termed as the lord of the 10 house.
Southern Style:
Refer fig. 12a. Here the places of signs are fixed as shown in the
diagram. As per the sign rising on the Ascendant, the word is
written as in the respective sign block. Planets are also placed in
the blocks as per their sign longitudes.
Fig 12a

Chapter 4: Casting the Rashi Chart 7 1
Traditional Method for Calculation of Ascendant
Before vve discuss this method, it is essential to explain the
traditional concept of time measurement
Indian day: It is reckoned from sunrise to consecutive sunrise.
Division of Day: A day is divided into 60 parts. Each part is
known as Ghati. Each Ghati is then divided into 60 parts and each
part is called Pal. Each Pal is further divided into 60 parts and
each part is called Vipal.
Conversion of time in hours etc. into Ghati's etc. and vice-a-versa
can be done using the following formulas :
24 hours = 60 ghatis
1 hour = 2.5 ghatis
1 minute = 2.5pals
1 second = 2.5vipals
Philosophy and Techniques of Calculation:
The principle behind the method is similar to what we have explained
in 2nd method above. Here also the Ascendant is calculated by
finding how much Sun has moved in the Zodiac and in the sky
from Sunrise to the time of birth. The disc of the Sun takes 7 to 8
minutes to rise in the Eastern horizon. However, Sunrise and Sunset
is calculated with reference to the center of the Sun's disc. Time
of Sunrise and Sunset at different latitudes can be known from the
Lahiri's Ephemeris.
To calculate Ascendant we need to know the following:
1. Ishtkaal i.e. the time interval between Sun rise on the date
of birth and the time of birth. For births before Sunrise, the
Sunrise time of the previous date is taken.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
2. Rashimans of a Place: Rashiman means oblique
ascension. The time taken by each sign in the eastern horizon
is dependent on its latitude. Hence Rashiman's are different
for different places and are computed for Sayana Zodiac
with the help of Palbha and Charkhandas. Sayana longitudes
are then converted into Nirayana longitudes by subtracting
the Ayanamsha for the date of birth.
Palbha for various latitudes are given in the following table:

Chapter 4: Casting the Rashi Chart
Charkhanda:
Signs Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces are
called signs of short ascension and the remaining signs are called
signs of long ascension. How much time a sign will take to rise will
depend on Palbha and Charkhanda. Charkhanda is found by
multiplying Palbha by 10(Aries, Pisces), 8(Taurus, Aquarius), 10/
3(Gemini, Capricorn). For short ascension signs the rising time of
each sign is calculated by subtracting the Charkhanda from the
rising time of each sign at the Equator. For long ascension signs,
the rising time is calculated by adding the Charkhanda to the rising
time of the sign at the Equator. Charkhanda thus means the time
difference of rising time for various signs at the place of birth with
respect to the times they take at the equator.
Example:
Take the case of Delhi whose latitude is 28.39'. To calculate Palbha
of Delhi we have to refer to the table above. Note Palbha at 28
and29 Degrees and find out the Palbha difference for 1 degree.
This will be equal to (6.65-6.38) = 0.27
Charkhandas of Delhi
6.56x10 (Aries & Pisces) = 65.6 pals approximately
6.56x8 (Taurus & Aquarius) = 52 pals approximately
6.56x10/3 (Gemini & Capricorn) = 21.87 say 22 pals

True Astrology- "Basicand Traditional Concepts"
Rising Time of Rashis in Delhi will be as follows:
Calculation of Ascendant:
Let us say that we need to calculate the Ascendant rising at lOhrs
30m on a date at Delhi. Let the Sunrise time on that date be 5h
Step 1 : Find out the Sayana longitude of Sun at sunrise on that
date. Let us say it is 3s 14° 57' i.e. Cancer sign 14° 57'
has risen at the time of sunrise.
Step 2: Calculate the balance of the sign that has yet to rise.
Step3: Now Ishtkaal is 10h.30m-5h33m=4h57m= 12Ghati
22Pals
Step 4: We have now to see from 14 deg.57 min. of Cancer
which degree will be rising after 12 ghatis 22 pals
knowing the time taken for rising by Cancer, Leo, Virgo
signs.

Chapter 4: Casting the Rashi Chart 75
Time required for 903' of balance of Cancer = 345x903/1 800
= 2Gh.53Pals
Time required for rising Leo = 5Gh.51Pal
Ishtkaal = 8Gh.44Pal
= 218Pals
Degree of Virgo that will rise after 218 pals = 1800x218/344
= 19deg. 1 min.
Sayana longitude of Ascendant = 5s 19 deg. 1 min.

Chapter 5:
The Houses and Their Significations
The Traditionalists invariably believe in the correspondence
between the signs and the houses. Aries, for example, symbolizes
the characteristics of first house. To me the relationship between
signs and houses is more often the relationship of spirit and matter.
As spirit - the true self- is not subjected to the vagaries of weather
or the strifes and struggles of life so do the signs, which are
permanent storehouse of energy obtained from the fixed stars.
Houses, on the other hand, are concrete expressions of mundane
affairs of life in the physical body. They may be equated to matter
- the body - which operates under the law of ultimate dissolution
and the signs with the inner man. "Know ye not that ye are the
temple of god, and that the spirit of god dwelth in you?"
The Ascendant or what we call as lagna is formed at the time of
birth as per the degree of the zodiac rising in the eastern horizon at
that time and place. The selection of the time of birth is controlled
by the life giving planet Sun [self] and Moon [Non-self] and the
positions of planets in the various but specified degrees of the
Zodiac. As Varahamihira said, "The planets offer a lawful channel
for the outward operations of cause-effect equilibriums that man
has set into motion in the past as a free agent." That is planets
occupy specific position in the Zodiac and in the houses to reflect
our past karmas. Our soul or inner mind is carrier of our karmas,
both past and present but it is our body, which is responsible for
the execution of karma or bear the fruits of our past and present
karmas. Thus, we may say houses bear direct linkage to our destiny

Chapter 5: The Houses and Their Significations 77
while the planets in the signs refer to our inner mind. In other
words, planets in signs indicate with what capabilities or
characteristics our soul has incarnated.
How beautiful or boring is a film depends upon the quality of the
script, the talent of the actors etc. Similarly the strength of nativity,
no doubt, depends upon the strength of the planets as per sign
and house position. How logical it is to say if a sign is afflicted by
a malefic like Rahu or Saturn that it will cause the body to suffer
from diseases signified by that sign. Rahu or Saturn remains in a
sign for a pretty long time. Will every body suffer similar disease?
It may not even be correct to say the same for the placement of
the planet in house position.
Methods of House Formation:
During the last few centuries various methods of house formation
have been devised. They can, however, be broadly classified into
three categories.
1 . The Ecliptic systems
2. The Space systems.
3 . The Time systems
The Ecliptic System, of which, the most simple to construct is
the equal house system. In this system the Ecliptic is divided in 12
equal parts coming from the Ascendant. For example if the
Ascendant is 1 5 degree Cancer, then the 2nd house will start
from 1 5 degree Leo, the tenth will be 15 degree Aries and the 12th
house will be Gemini 15 degree. This system merely reflects the
Zodiac on to the mundane sphere, but the 1 Oth house cusp [the
beginning point of a house] does not necessarily coincide with the
mid-heaven.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
The Space System, of which the most popular systems are those
devised by Sripati and Porphyry [in3rd century AD], The Porphyry
system is based on trisecting the semi-arcs of Ecliptic between
the horizon and meridian i.e. in this system, the eastern quadrants
of the Ecliptic are each divided into three equal arcs. The cusps of
the ligand the 12th houses are found by adding the one third
and two third of the diurnal Semi-Arc respectively to the M.C.
For the 2nd and 3rd house cusps, one-third and two thirds of the
diurnal semi-arc respectively added to the Ascendant. The other
houses are diametrically opposite. Sripati's system is similar except
for the fact that the mid- point of the house space is considered to
be the strongest point.
Calculation of Houses (Bhavas) [Sripati System]
After calculating longitudes of Ascendant and various planets,
equally important is to know the stretch of each House. Detailed
calculations are done to know the beginning and end of the Houses,
to know the exact span of the Houses.
Sidereal time for the above birth 8 h 25 m 58 s
Now refer to Table of Tenth House on page 8 of Tables of
Ascendants.

Chapter 5: The Houses and Their Significations 79
Less Ayanamsha Correction 46'
Longitude for Xth House 3 s 10° 24'
This is the mid-point of the Xth House.
Remaining longitudes of Houses can be worked out in the following
manner

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Thus we have got the longitudes of Houses I, II, III, IV, X, XI,
and XII.
Add 6s to 1st House, to obtain Vllth House, which is opposite to
1st House.

Chapter 5: The Houses and Their Significations 81
Similarly, add 6s to Xlth house, to obtain Vth House, which is
opposite to Xlth House:
Similarly, add 6s to Xllth House, to obtain Vlth House, which is
opposite to Xllth House.
xnth House
Add 6s
Vlth House

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Now, we have got the stretches of all the Houses. These could be
written in a Bhav Chakra/Bhav Table/Bhav Spasht Table, as under:
BHAV SPASHT TABLE
Lord of the House:
The sign appearing on the house determines the lord of the house.
th.
Suppose Aries appears at the 6 house, then Mars is said to be
til
the lord of the 6 house.
The Time System, of which, the most commonly used is the
system of Placidius. This system is based on the tri-section of the
semi-arc of each degree of the Ecliptic. It does not divide time,
nor does it divide space between the horizon and meridian in a
simple way. The basis of this system is to take the time for any
degree to move from the Ascendant to the mid- heaven and to
equally trisect this time to ascertain the time at which this degree
will become cusps of the 12th and 11th houses. Likewise, the
semi - nocturnal arc from I. C. [Nadir] to the Ascendant is trisected,
and the times are those at which the same degree will become the
cusps of the 2nd and 3ld houses. The other houses are diametrically

Chapter 5: The Houses and Their Significations 83
opposite. The cusp means the degree minute and seconds rising
on the house.
Division of the Houses:
T o facilitate the study of the characteristics of houses, they are
also divided like Zodiacal signs using the Law of Polarity, Law of
Elements and Law of Mode of Action.
The houses are divided into two halves viz. positive and negative.
They are called Day Half or the Eastern or the Rising Half and the
Night Half or The Western or Setting Half. Houses from 12 to 7
are called Day Half as they have already risen. They are also
called visible houses. Houses from 6 to 1 are called Night Half.
They are also called the Invisible houses. However, Ascendant is
also treated as Day Half being twilight house. The cusp of the
Ascendant is the point of Sunrise; The 10th cusp that of noon
[Zenith] ; the cusp of the 7 house that of Sunset [descendent] ;
the 4th cusp that of mid-night [Nadir] . The cusp means the
degree minutes and seconds rising on a house.
Division of the houses as per Law of Elements is shown below:
Fiery Earthy Airy Watery
Houses
Triplicity Concept:
It is based on the division of the houses on the basis of Law of
Mode of Action and is shown below:
Cardinal or Fixed or Mutable or
Angular or Succedentor Cadent or
Rajasic Houses Tamasic houses Sattwic houses

True Astrology - " Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Influence of Houses
The Eastern or the Rising Half or the Day Half represents
manifestation, individualization, involution, creation, and openness;
publicity, separation from others, the gain of powers and faculties.
The Western or the Setting Half or the Night Half signifies
concealment, latency, withdrawal, dissolution decrease of self,
altruism, involution, cessation, of activity.
The Cardinal or Angular Houses:
Since the mode of action is Rajasic, these houses are directly
related to the physical and the external world and represent
outgoing activities originating in the self but directly affecting the
non-self. They generally show the nature of things, which are openly
expressed and therefore, denote fame, reputation, public position
and general activities. Mars the energetic, impulsive significator of
latent fire in every individual and Moon- that rules over our etheric
body, the mind, mannerism, idiosyncrasies, the seat of desire,
panting and longing are the most characteristics of the heavenly
bodies that belong to the cardinal cross. The characteristics of
these houses are - rapidity of motion, frequency of change,
restlessness, separation, individualization.
The Fixed or Succedent Houses:
These houses operate under Tamasic influence. They are
connected with desires, feeling and emotion. There is lack of action;
they are not open and expressive. They are less changeful.
Experience and characteristic or even faults or virtues which arise
due to the influence of planets on these houses are more or less of
permanent nature. The Sun- the fragment of the primeval force
which ensouls every species on earth, the withdrawal of which
leads to the cessation of life itself and Saturn- the symbolic of

Chapter 5: The Houses and Their Significations 85
discipline, restraint, purification and penance are the two heavenly
bodies that belong to this cross. The characteristics of these houses
may broadly be classified as: fixedness, lack of action, aversion to
change, self-centeredness, and strength to resist outside influence,
will power, tenacity and steadfastness.
The Cadent or Common Houses:
These houses operate under both action and desire. Events that
are denoted by these houses taken alone originate in cognition
rather than feelings and action. Mercury- which symbolizes
rationalization, intelligence, learning and teaching, seeker of
information, the meaning and value of ideas but also the agent of
restlessness and hitch- hiking; and Jupiter-the symbolic of wisdom
prosperity, abundance, lavishness, pomp, display, diplomacy and
religion, are the two important heavenly bodies that have mle over
these houses. Thus they represent rhythmical motion, adjustment,
and the establishment of relation, coherence and research into
unknown areas.
Signification of Houses:
In the following paragraphs an effort has been made to present
the general significations of a house and also what the house stands
for the various significant aspects like profession, education,
diseases, marriage mode of death etc. when a particular planet
significator of these aspects establishes a relationship with
the specific house. These significations are meant for the native.
First House or the Ascendant:
Carl Jung said "What ever is born at this moment of time bears
the qualities of this moment" Why the soul has chosen this moment
of time to incarnate in the form of a human being? It is so because

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
this moment or the Ascendant reflects the very being of the
individual. The oerson's nature, his capacity to enjoy the pleasures
and struggles 01 life; his/her style of functioning; what is destined
for him in this incarnation as per the wisdom acquired from earlier
lives is depicted by the Ascendant In other words, study of the
Ascendant, in fact is the study of the whole horoscope in general.
Nay it is the epitome of the whole horoscope.
It is a Cardinal or Angular house and thus represents the Rajasic
propensities- the outward expression. It represents the quantum
and the quality of energy at the disposal of each individual. It is
called ADI- the beginning of ideas, aspiration, Udhyam-power of
taking initiative, nature of participation in activities. Deham-physical
vehicle, health, Rupam-for it symbolizes the form, identity and
mode of expression contained within.
Broadly speaking, the first house stands for one's individuality,
personality, temperament, physical structure, state of health,
longevity, name and fame, virtues, capacity to face struggles of
life, direction and aspects of life in which the native will channelise
his energies, proneness to accidents or untoward happenings. This
house needs to be analysed for all matters concerning the native.
The owner of the Ascendant placed in 6th or 8th or the 12th house
with a malefic planet will impair the health of the native.
Profession:
If the Ascendant lord is connected with the tenth house the person
may take up professions as psychiatrist, a specialist in treating
cerebral cases, neurologist, coma, treating head injuries, a yoga
practitioner, physical instructor, professor of psychology, selfventures, and advisor in his own field.

Chapter 5: The Houses and Their Significations 87
Education:
Psychology, yoga, neurology, gymnasium, art of counseling,
athleticism.
Diseases:
If the Ascendant or its lord or both are afflicted by malefic
i.L i.L i.L
Planets or lords of 6 or 8 or 12 house then the person
will suffer disease in the parts or organs represented by the
first house. The nature of disease will depend upon the
nature of the Planet that causes affliction. In the case of
first house the native may suffer diseases like Meningitis,
headache, brain tumor, brain fever, vertigo, head injury, insanity,
forgetfulness, depression, epilepsy, Parkinson's disease, Bell's
palsy and cerebral hemorrhage.
Mode of Death:
Sudden, self- undoing or suicide, head injury.
Marriage:
By self-efforts, personal choice.
Second House:
It is an invisible house and operates under Tamasic mode. It is an
important part of materialistic triplicity and represents physical
possessions, wealth and accumulation of money, speech, family
relation, eye sight, gems, jewels, death, and metals. The quality
and quantum of the significations of the second house will depend
upon the sign rising on the second house, the strength of the lord
of the second house and the influence of planets on second house
and its lord.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Profession:
If the lord of the second house is connected with the tenth house
the person may take up the profession as professionals in financial
institution, revenue departments, economists, accountants, cashier,
professor of mathematics or economics, dentist ophthalmogist,
gastro-entremologist, announcer, sound engineer, receptionist,
dealer in metals, jewelers, gemonologist, moneylenders.
Education:
Economics, mathematics, financial management, cost accountancy,
auditing, sound or acoustic engineering, ophthalmology, dentistry,
cosmetics and plastic surgery, company secretary ship, public
speaking.
Diseases:
If the second house or its lord or both are afflicted by malefic
i.L i.L i.L
Planets or lords of 6 or 8 or 12 house then the person
will suffer disease in the parts or organs represented by the
second house. The nature of disease will depend upon the
nature of the Planet that causes affliction. In the case of
second house the native may suffer diseases like eyes, throat,
tongue, speech, teeth, oral cavity, tonsils, neck, cerebellum,
cheeks, and gums.
Mode of death:
Natural death, assassination if there is a common link between 2
and 8.
Marriage:
Within the family or through the assistance of the family members.

Chapter 5: The Houses and Their Significations 89
Third House:
It is the first cadent house and belongs to the Airy triplicity. It
operates under Sattwic influence. It signifies mind, younger cobom, courage, confidence, fairness, short-journeys, mental
inclination and ability, memory, communication skills, change of
residence, writing capability, rumors.
Profession:
If the lord of the third house is connected with the tenth house
then the person may take up profession as professionals in ENT
department, communication department, print media information
center, stage artists, journalists, news correspondents, neurologists,
chest specialists, physic therapists, anesthetist, traders, commission
agents.
Education:
Physics, electronics, computer, electrical engg. Journalism,
communication, art of publication and writing skills, ENT, thoracic
and chest, pranayama, physiotherapy, radio engg. AIDS.
Diseases:
If the third house or its lord or both are afflicted by malefic
I'll i'll i'll
Planets or lords of 6 or 8 or 12 house then the person
will suffer disease in the parts or organs represented by the
third house. The nature of disease will depend upon the
nature of the Planet that causes affliction. In the case of
third house the native may suffer diseases like Audio- visual
sensory organs, arms, shoulders, bronchitis, breasts, and
respiratory system.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Mode of Death:
Sudden due to a stroke, death while in journey.
Marriage:
Through correspondence or with the assistance of neighbors or
younger co-bom in a nearby place.
Fourth House:
The fourth house stands for education, mother, house, and private
life, transport, landed property, domestic happiness, old age, and
seduction.
Profession:
If the lord of the fourth house is connected with the tenth house
then the person may take up the profession as real estate, interior
decorator, civil and production engineers, manufactures,
industrialists, cardiologist, lung specialists, agriculturists, veterinary
doctor. Timber merchants, manager, restaurants, dairy farming,
builders.
Education:
Civil engg, agriculture engg, veterinary' service, farming, automobile
engg, machinery, geography, botany, home science, cardiology,
chest disease.
Diseases:
If the fourth house or its lord or both are afflicted by malefic
Planets or lords of 6th or 8th or 12th house then the person
will suffer disease in the parts or organs represented by the
fourth house. The nature of disease will depend upon the

Chapter 5: The Houses and Their Significations 91
nature of the Planet that causes affliction. In the case of
fourth house the native may suffer diseases like heart, lungs,
blood vessel, and cardio vascular system.
Mode of Death:
Due to accident, at home, old age, debris.
Marriage:
With a near relative, with the help of mother, with a person bom at
the same place.
Fifth House:
This operates under the fixed- fire combination and it represents
an individual's reaction to his past. Our ancients related this house
to wisdom, religion, traditional laws intelligence. Intuitive
perception of the future, socially accepted forms of courtship i.e.
romantic affairs, progeny, sports and cultural activities, artistic and
creative pursuits, speculation.
Profession:
If the lord of the fifth house is connected with the tenth house then
the person may take up the profession as related to stock
exchange, sports organization, arts and culture, cinema, places of
amusement, manufacturing units of toys for children, pediatrician
gynecologist, general physicians, nuclear scientists, atomic energy
department, religion teachers, pundits, and allergist.
Education:
Atomic energy, nuclear science, arts and sports, music,
architecture, gynecology, pediatrics, cinematography.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Diseases:
If the fifth house or its lord or both are afflicted by malefic
til tVi tit
Planets or lords of 6 or 8 or 12 house then the person
will suffer disease in the parts or organs represented by the
fifth house. The nature of disease will depend upon the
nature of the Planet that causes affliction. In the case of
fifth house the native may suffer diseases like Viral disease,
disease due to blood cells, liver, upper abdomen, intestinal and
stomach problems, diarrhea, spinal affections heart troubles.
Mode of Death:
During celebration, sports activities, delivery, death may take place
in gambling house, stock exchange or playing field.
Marriage:
Love marriage, marriage with a sportsperson or artist. It may be
through the family of the mother.
Sixth House:
The sixth house in the horoscope is essentially the house of
difficulties, struggles, oppositions of various kind, painful incidents.
Being an invisible house all these may be attributed to the acts of
omission and commission of past lives. It is an important house of
the materialistic triplicity and such represents employment and
service. This is also the house of sickness, debt enemies and
litigation. It represents the separation from the partner. However
this house is called the house of victory and gain over opponents
because this is the 12th house to 7th house.

Chapter 5: The Houses and Their Significations 93
Profession:
If the lord of the sixth house is connected with the tenth house
then the person may take up the profession as public health
department, chemists, repairing units in a factory, poultry farms,
veterinary department, advocates, doctors, nurses, dealers in
leather, labour oriented jobs, dealers in plastics.
Education:
Textiles chemistry, medicines, law, biology, drugs, radiology.
Diseases:
If the sixth house or its lord or both are afflicted by malefic
Planets or lords of 6th or 8th or 12th house then the person
will suffer disease in the parts or organs represented by the
sixth house. The nature of disease will depend upon the
nature of the Planet that causes affliction. In the case of
sixth house the native may suffer diseases like Large
intestines, pancreas, diabetes, peptic ulcers, colic, worms,
appendicitis and hernia.
Mode of death:
Sickness, shock from separation of partner, over exhaustion, out
of fear.
Marriage:
With or through a colleague, servant, cousin or a subordinate.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Seventh House:
The seventh house is nearly as open, prominent and inevitable as
the first, although to a less extent. The experience of the seventh
house comes through others viz. partners and associates whose
interests are blended with those of the native whether in love or
hate, help or rivalry. It is called “Kshetra” the sphere of action
wherein life's battle is fought. It is also known as “Kalatra
Sathanam” - the place of wife, specifically it signifies spouse, sexual
union, the winning of one's object or desire, semen, genitals, and
all secret pleasures arising from sexual union. Seventh house is the
counterbalancing force of the first house. It also signifies trade,
private business, foreign places, social relationships and a break
in journey.
Profession:
If the lord of the seventh house is connected with the tenth house
then the person may take up the profession as Judge in a court of
Law, Public relations officer. Embassy, Marriage bureaus.
Advocate dealing divorce cases or marital problems.
Nephrologists, Public administration departments. Employment
in private companies. Brothels, Prostitution, Sexologists, Doctors
dealing in venereal diseases. Private business.
Education:
Business Management, International Law, Sociology, Gynecology,
Nephrology, Sexology.
Diseases:
th
If the 7 house or its lord or both are afflicted by malefic
Planets or lords of 6th or 8th or 12th house then the person
will suffer disease in the parts or organs represented by the

Chapter 5: The Houses and Their Significations 95
7th house. The nature of disease will depend upon the nature
of the Planet that causes affliction. In the case of 7th house
the native may suffer diseases like Urinary system. Kidneys,
Uterus, Ovaries, Testicles, Prostrate glands. Semen, Venereal
diseases. Impotence, Frigidity/sterility, Menstrual disorders.
Mode of Death:
Natural death, death in a combat, at a foreign place, due to kidney
failure or AIDS.
Marriage:
Legal or registered marriage. Marriage with a business partner or
a known public figure.
Eighth House:
The eighth house represents the hidden aspects of one's life, serious
diseases, unexpected gains or losses, concealed wealth,
knowledge of the hidden laws of nature, psychological applications
or mental sufferings. Death, Longevity, storehouse of expansive
energy latent in microcosm. Rectum, Accidents, Quarrels, False
allegation, damage in reputation, unearned income, surgery,
slaughter house, rapes, gift cheques, earth quakes, incurring losses,
insurance claims, hurdles in journey.
Profession:
If the lord of the eighth house is connected with the tenth house
then the person may take up the profession as historians.
Archaeologists, Geologists, Personals working in insurance,
mining, tax collection. Auditing, CID, CBI Departments, pension
cells, surgeons, ONGC department. Death and Estate duty

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
collectors. Advocates practicing criminal cases or cases dealing
with legacies and wills, urologists.
Education:
History, geology, mining engg, urology, study of secret parts,
sanitary engg, surgical equipments, auditing, investigations,
criminology, archaeology, old pathies, dermatology, surgery,
orthopedics.
Diseases:
th
If the 8 house or its lord or both are afflicted by malefic
Planets or lords of 6th or 8th or 12th house then the person
will suffer disease in the parts or organs represented by the
8th house. The nature of disease will depend upon the nature
of the Planet that causes affliction. In the case of 8th house
the native may suffer diseases like genitals, rectum, scortum,
piles, fistula, tumours, ulcers, incurable diseases, hydrocele.
Mode of Death:
Sudden death due to serious disease or self-undoing, accident,
surgery, suicide.
Marriage:
Sudden and unexpected marriage, marriage with or through old
friends.
Ninth House:
The ninth house, known as Bhagya Sthanam, operates under the
influence of the principle of Mutability and Fire and thus shows

Chapter 5: The Houses and Their Significations 97
introspections, aspirations towards future and the possibilities of
the higher mind. It represents religion, philosophy, austerity, worship
and poorvapunya or the accumulation of auspicious karma from
past lives, divine wisdom, spiritual disciplines, mystic initiations,
enlightenment, higher education, long journey, legal disciplines,
internal and external communications, long distance
communications, extra marital relationships, second marriage and
father.
Profession:
If the lord of the ninth house is connected with the tenth house
then the person may take up the profession as and in research
organizations, university, religious organizations, honorary' posts,
export houses, pilot, travel agents, politicians. Aeronautical
department, space technology organizations. Advocates.
Education:
Aeronautical engg, space technology, religion. Law, colorectal
surgery', genetic disorders, transplant of organs, Sanskrit.
Diseases:
If the 9th house or its lord or both are afflicted by malefic
Planets or lords of 6th or 8th or 12th house then the person
will suffer disease in the parts or organs represented by the
9th house. The nature of disease will depend upon the nature
of the Planet that causes affliction. In the case of 9th house
the native may suffer diseases like Paralysis, femoral arteries.
Groin, hips, swellings, diseases caused by increase of fat, blood
and water. Bronchitis sciatica.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Mode of Death:
Death at a far off place or during long journey, during transplant of
an organ.
Marriage:
Legitimate second marriage or marriage with an unknown person
from distant place, family, marriage with the younger co-bom of
the partner.
Tenth House:
The tenth house signifies the highest point of one's glory, the target
set for the soul in a specific birth. It relates to the outward
development and expression of the inherent qualities of the
individual during his process of social interactions. Success in life
is determined on the basis of the 10 house. The Ascendant
represents the quantum and quality of energy at the disposal of
the individual. If the Ascendant is powerful, we can expect that
the individual will attain his target. But if the Ascendant is weak or
is not commensurate with the requirements of the 10th house, the
th
life of the individual may promise much but little success. The 10“
house represents profession, honour, the quality of leadership,
Karma of the soul. Government sendee, administrative jobs, and
achievement in the material world.
Profession:
If the lord of the tenth house is connected with the tenth house
then the person may take up the profession in Government
organizations, production houses, politics, self-venture, managers.

Chapter 5: The Houses and Their Significations 99
Education:
Production technology, professional diseases, politics,
administration.
Diseases:
If the 10 house or its lord or both are afflicted by malefic
Planets or lords of 6th or 8th or 12th house then the person
will suffer disease in the parts or organs represented by the
10th house. The nature of disease will depend upon the
nature of the Planet that causes affliction. In the case of
10th house the native may suffer diseases like Knees, spinal
cord, and back pain.
Mode of Death:
Death at work place or at the place of the partner.
Marriage:
With a person at work place, marriage that brings honour and
status to the native.
Eleventh House:
This house is traditionally known as the house of fulfillment of
one's desires, gain or profit, political status, friends, elder cobom, satisfaction of personal needs, hopes.
Profession:
If the lord of the eleventh house is connected with the tenth house
then the person may take up the profession as and in Computer

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
hardware, general physicians, charitable institution, commercial
houses, and journalists.
Education:
Commerce, polymer technology, general medicines, gynecology.
Diseases:
th
If the 1 1 house or its lord or both are afflicted by malefic
Planets or lords of 6th or 8th or 12th house then the person
will suffer disease in the parts or organs represented by the
1 1th house. The nature of disease will depend upon the
nature of the Planet that causes affliction. In the case of
11th house the native may suffer diseases like pain or injury
in lower Legs, left ear, tibia and calf muscles or circulatory system.
Mode of Death:
Death at a time when the person has achieved his ambition, at a
friend's place.
Marriage:
With a member of a family of friend, or through the efforts of the
elder co-bom.
Twelfth House:
This house represents the end of all activities of one’s life, death,
expenditures, foreign travel, imprisonment, hospitalization,
renunciation, the pleasures of bed, and all kinds of misfortune. It
also signifies how the individual will discharge his debt It is known
as the house of secret activities and enemies.

Chapter 5: The Houses and Their Significations
Profession:
If the lord of the 1 2th house is connected with the tenth house
then the person may take up the profession as a personal in Jail
department, Hospitals, Investigating agents, detectives, research
organizations, asylums, foreign countries.
Education:
Foreign language, secret arts, research.
Diseases:
th
If the 12 house or its lord or both are afflicted by malefic
i.L i.L i.L
Planets or lords of 6 or 8 or 12 house then the person
will suffer disease in the parts or organs represented by the
12th house. The nature of disease will depend upon the
nature of the Planet that causes affliction. In the case of
12th house the native may suffer diseases like: Injury in Feet,
left eye, heel, sole, and insomnia, lymphatic system.
Mode of Death:
In a hospital, at a far off place, may be due to involvement in
secret activities or serious illness.
Marriage:
With a foreigner, or at a far off place.

Chapter 6:
Nakshatras
Our ancients used to analyse the influence of the zodiac on planets
by dividing the zodiac into 27 parts, each of 13 deg. 20 min. each
part is called a Nakshatra or the lunar mansion. Other names in
vogue for Nakshatra are Star, Constellation, and Asterism. For
minute analysis they have further divided each Nakshatra into four
parts, each of 3 degree 20 minutes; these parts are called Padas
or Charans or Quarters. According to the Vedas, Nakshatras
represent the abodes into which the fruits of our labour, our karmas,
are transferred and stored. Our ancients, therefore, knew clearly
and categorically that why at the time of native's birth each planet
takes a specific position in the zodiac so as to reflect the destiny
of the individual. The following table indicates the names of the
Nakshatra, the area of their influence and also the planet which
has been assigned its lordship over the Nakshatra and its quarters.
Divisions of Nakshatras:
They are divided as per the Law of Polarity, Motivating Impulse
(corresponding to Element Theory) viz dharma (life purpose), artha
(wealth), Kama (fulfillment of desire), and moksha (enlightenment),
and Law of Mode of Action as illustrated by the following T able.
This table also shows the direction over which the Nakshatra has
the rulership.

Chapter 6: Nakshatras
Nakshatras Area Sign Nak Nak Qtr Ruller
of the Ruler Ruler 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
Zodiac
Ashwini 0° to 13°. 20’ Mars Ketu Ma Ve Me Mo
Aries
Bharani 13°. 20' to 26° .40' Mars Venus Su Me Ve Ma
Aries
Krittika 26°.40f to 30° Mars Sun Ju Sa Sa Ju
Aries
00° to 10° Venus Sun Sa Sa Ju
Taurus
Rohini 10°.00? to 23°.20’ Venus MoonMa Ve Me Mo
Taurus
Mrigshira 23°. 20' to 30° Venus Mars Su Me Ve Ma
Taurus
00° to 6°. 40' Mercury Mars Ve Ma
Gemini
Ardra 6°. 40' to 20° Mercury Rahu Ju Sa Sa Ju
Gemini
Punarvasu 20°. 00' to 30° Mercury Jup Ma Ve Me Mo
Gemini
00° to 3°. 20’ Moon Jup Mo
Cancer
Pushya 3°.20' to 16°.40' Moon Sat Su Me Ve Ma
Cancer
Ashlesha 16°.40' to 30°.00' Moon Merc Ju Sa Sa Ju
Cancer
Magha 00° *0' to 13°.20' Sun Ketu Ma Ve Me Mo
Leo
Purva 13°.20' to 26°.20' Sun Venus Su Me Ve Ma
Phalguni Ixo

True Astrology - " Basic and Traditional Concepts "

Chapter 6: Nakshatras
Pisces

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Nakshatras and their Significations:
Each Nakshatra and its quarter are assigned a particular area in
the Zodiac. Since each quarter of the Nakshatra is under the
influence of a particular fixed star, they have specific energy
content To facilitate learning and their use in predictive Astrology,
each Nakshatra and its quarters have been assigned planetary
rulership on correspondence principle. The significations of each
Nakshatra for various aspects are shown in the following
paragraphs.

Chapter 6: Nakshatras
Nakshatras and their General Significations
Sr. Nakshatras Significations
No.
1. Ashwini Extravagant, brother's ailment, avaricious,
worried about landed properties, dispute with
brother, partition, black magic, they can pray
Lord Ganesha or Subramanya or Anjaneya.
2. Bharani Mind always fond of pleasure, enterprises,
avaricious, amorous, aspiring, chain smokers,
slayers, cruel men, low-bom person, wanting
in character but nothing holds them down
for too long.
3. Krittika Militant temperament, push-up, go ahead
spirit, normally robust health, good health,
competitive mind, argumentative ability, will
eat much, will be drawn to other people's
wives.
4. Rohini Good nature, enjoys nature, taste in music,
art, drama, enjoy life in company of other
sex, pure maternal affection, sweet tongued.
5. Mrigshira Enthusiasm, sharp, quick- witted, alert tongue
more poisonous than snake, gives mental
energy, fluent, magnetic, Acme of
selfishness.
6. Ardra Unsuccessful in literary pursuit, good
character reader, resourceful mind, active
mind, ingenious and critical, slayer,
adulterers, thieves, rogues, will be perfidious,
haughty, sinful, ungrateful and mischievous.
7. Punarvasu Good memory, correct intuition, Marketing/
Financial Management, Insurance, I.A.S,
Journalism, Astrology, English Literature.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts”
Attentive, self -reliant, position of truth
careful, sober, economical, frugal, has a
Systematic and methodical action Minister,
King, fisherman, person engaged in big and
small sacrifices, honest folk, forests, wheat,
barley, rice and sugarcane.
Good writer, ingenious, versatile, quick wit,
fluent and copious in speech, acquires other
languages easily, inclined to eat any tiling,
sinful, ungrateful.
Sensual, impulsive, proud short tempered,
enthusiastic and energetic, good sportsman,
fiery temper, outspoken, defencive, hasty,
contact with people in very high position,
will enjoy healthy and have many servants,
worship the god.
11. Purva Phalguni Fond of pleasure, true, honest, cautious, able
to fulfill his desires, competence in music,
art, kavi-poet, warm hearted, affectionate,
taste in drawing, sculpture and paintings,
photography as hobby, artists, young
damsels, amiable persons, merchandise,
cotton, salt oil, honey, manly boys. Will speak
sweetly and loyal to his sovereign..
12. Uttar Phalguni Tactful, intelligent, good reasoning, mind
good in mathematics or engineering, clever,
diplomatic, eloquent and educated, hygiene
and sanitary engineer, accounts, business,
acumen, advertising.
13. Hasta Traders and energetic men, man versed in
Vedas, merchandises, will be industrious,
fond of drinking, merciless and thievish,
elephant driver, robbers, artisans, elephants,
husked grains.
8. Pushya
9. Ashlesha
10. Magha

Chapter 6: Nakshatras
14. Chitra
15. Swati
16. Vishakha
17. Anuradha
18. Jyestha
19. Mula
Courageous, energetic, humorous,
dexterous, practical, business like,
enterprising, active or quick tempered,
sarcastic, impatient, over working and
irritable. Will wear beautiful garments and
flowers and will have beautiful eyes and
limbs.
Honest, courteous, compassionate, just,
intellect, perceptive, flexible, sweet nature,
fond of company, slow to grasp but
remembers well, slow to loose temper,
sympathetic, powers of comparison, traders,
feeble character, fickle minded friends,
ascetic. Will be modest; may be clever in
trade, and sweet in speech.
Polite, faith in god, attractive appearance,
pleasant manner, universal love, generous,
broadminded, talented, cultural, will be
envious, covetous, of bright appearance,
clever in talking, quarrelsome.
Dominant, forceful or selfish, determined,
energetic, untruthful, dishonest, harsh, cruel,
and unscrupulous.
Ingenious, good humour, bold, studious, quick
in action, resourceful, learned, blunt, fond
of wit, exaggeration, poisonous tongue, great
maternal heroes, those that are endowed
with noble family and wealth, and fame,
intent on consequence, commandants and
thieves. Will not have many friends, will be
virtuous and exceedingly irritable.
Commanding others esteem, honest, cordial,
respectful, generous, law-abiding, god
fearing, charitable, religious, buoyant, always

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
20. Purvashada
2 1 . Uttarashada
22. Shravana
contemplative, social. Will be proud, healthy,
firm minded, happy but luxurious in living.
Broad minded, honest, loves others, polite,
educated, pleasing manner, optimistic,
moderate, loves expensive and ultra
comfortable things, fond of drama and art.
Navigators, fishermen, tenderhearted men,
aquatic animals, those that live by water,
devoted to truth, purity and wealth. Will have
an amiable wife, will be linn in friendship.
Nobel aspiring disposition, philanthropic,
law-abiding, funny and jovial, cheerful,
hopeful, no mind to have "tainted money",
pillars of good society, cheerful, proficiency
in some branch of learning.
Conservative, cautious, economical, careful,
sober, true, sincere, faithful worker, attentive,
perseverance, devotees of Vishnu, righteous
men and truthful person, possess a
generously-disposed wife, will be wealthy
and famous.
23. Dhanishtha
24. Satbhisha
25. Purvabhadra
Active, alert, firm will, decisive, careful and
forceful, cautious and courageous, vindictive
and violent, occasionally ambitious, fond of
music, men with arrogance and pride,
greedy, eunuchs, rich people, avoiding
disputes.
Independent, strong, forceful, sincere,
preserving, patient, original, lazy, fond of
leisure and holiday, fond of working
separately.
Honest, truth, sincere, hopeful, optimistic,
interest in science, astronomy, astrology,

Chapter 6: Nakshatras
literature, capable of extracting work from
others, helpful, unselfish. If a malefic is in
this zone in the ascendant: murderer, robber,
irreligious, hen pecked, and miser, clever.
26. Uttarbhadra Benevolent disposition, strong character,
fond of society, desire to help the poor and
invalid, visitors of jails, sanatoriums, original,
independent.
27. Revati Human sympathetic, religious, flexible,
impressionable mind, shrewd, clever, ripe
judgment, honest, studious, sober, mental
balance, caring for integrity.
Nakshatras and Profession
Sr. Nakshatras Profession
No.
1. Ashwini
2. Bharani
3. Krittika
Military, medical, police, surgery, jail,
railways, iron, steel, copper, machinery,
Physicians, attendants, horse dealer,
handsome person as traders.
Ait advertisement, mobile, fertilizer, silk,
wrestler, railway, veterinary doctors, hotels,
restaurants, criminal lawyer, judge, optician,
agriculturists, leather, manufacturers, skins
and hides, gynecologists, fertility clinics,
prostitution, biologists and microbiologists.
Travels, industry, medical, surgical, navy,
acquisition of lands, bombs, crackers, match
boxes, iron and steel utensils, war materials,
judges, technical professions, black smiths,
police department, defense department.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts”
4. Rohini
5. Mrigshira
6. Ardra
7. Punarvasu
8. Pushya
9. Ashlesha
10. Magha
Bakeries, bar, oils, milk, ice cream, soap,
sandalwood, paints, dyes, marriage broker,
dress and pearl dealer, liquids, acids, sugar,
cart men, cows.
Mobile structures, fertilizers, tailor,
automobile engineer, skin and hides, tobacco,
estate owner, land, building, veterinary
doctors, animal husbandry.
Post and telegraph department,
communication, transport, bookseller,
advertisement, author, finger print expert,
finance broker, dealing in drugs, beverages,
canned goods.
Story writing, editing, publishing, law,
literature, insurance agency, accountants,
auditors, judges, school master, interpreter,
Astrologer, clerk, clothes, woolen
merchants.
Deals in agricultural lands, mine products,
kerosene, coal, petrol. Holding positions of
trust, sexton, jailor, engineer digging wells;
those who work at nights and underground,
politicians, teachers and education experts.
Business, commerce, international trade,
agent, author, writer, water supply engineer,
dealer in yarn, pen, paper, guide, hostess,
Astrologer, midwife, nurse.
Government services or security in service,
jewelers, manufacturers of nickel, chromium
plated surgical instruments, lawyers, weapon
manufacturer.

Chapter 6: Nakshatras
11. Purva Phalguni Preservation of monuments, government
service, renovation of ancient painting, radio,
transport, disinfectant for crops, veterinary
surgeon, vice chancellor, glass dealers.
12. Uttar Phalguni Any service under government, commerce,
stock exchange, maternity home, lecturer,
education department, communication
department, contractors, physicians.
Overseas, mail order business, clearing
agent, engineer, bridges, canals, dams,
export, import, politician, ambassador.
Supplier to jail, criminal lawyer, tax
department. Finance department, police of
law and order and traffic, defense
department, cost accounts, military
accounts.
Mobile, automobile, transportation, music,
drama, exhibition, x-ray instrument
manufacturer, confectionary, readymade
dress, plastic, mica, pasteurized milk.
Tourist officer, shipping, air travel, race
goers, tax and revenue department, judge,
auditor, professor, principal, auditor, actor,
jewelry, perfumeries, minting.
17. Anuradha Mechanical engineer, mine engineer,
medicine, actor, homeopathy, brothel, water
diviner, judge, watchman, plumbers, mine ore
dealer dentist, service in jail.
18. Jyestha Insurance agent, surgical instrument, tonics,
scrums manufacturers, publication, textile
mill, session judge, cable and wire
manufacturer.
15. Swati
16. Vishakha
13. Hasta
14. Chitra

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts”
19. Mula
20. Purvashada
21. Uttarashada
Religious endowment, social worker, judge,
teacher, physician, councilor, provision dealer,
assembly speaker, exchange, imports,
dealing in fruits, flowers, dentists, police
officers, detectives, judges, astronomers,
astrologers, nuclear physicists.
Banker, cashier, accountant, director,
revenue and finance department, social
studies welfare officer, foreign trade,
exchange, restaurants, hostels, women and
children hospital, health center.
Position of trust, mine, coal, scientific
research, finance department, control
department, monuments, archaeology,
antiquities, ancient language, skins, hides,
wool.
22. Shravana
23. Dhanishtha
24. Satbhisha
Minister, kings, fishermen, plumber, mine
products, wells, trenches, excavation,
agriculturist, drivers, those who serve at
night, underground, submarine, pearls.
Homeopathy, Jail department, mine and
ground engineer, insurance, philosopher,
murderers, slaughter house, labour
department, industry, tools, spares parts.
Scientist, atomic theory, air travel, occult
subject, astronomer, astrologer, ration officer,
censor, census, Jail department, translation,
translators, of old manuscript, factories,
tanneries, counterfeit.
25. Purvabhadra Minister, councilor, politician, president,
judge, criminal lawyer, visitors of jails,
planning commission, explorer, physician,
bank, foreign exchange, prisoners of wars.

Chapter 6: Nakshatras
26. Uttarbhadra
27. Revati
Nakshatras and
Sr. Nakshatras
No.
1. Ashwini
2. Bharani
3. Krittika
4. Rohini
5. Mrigshira
Engineer, public appointment, export, import,
storekeepers, asylum, shipping, C.I.D.,
education, tourist home, manufacturer of
raincoats, umbrellas, boats, tunnel
construction, canal, trench excavators,
writers, poets, historians.
Editor, publisher, lawyer, judge, auditor,
industry, finger print expert, share broker,
diplomat, astrologer, purohits, governor, clerk,
excise, accountant, successful diplomat,
mathematician, agent, bank.
Education
Education.
Engineering- Agriculture, Electronics,
Chemical, Civil, Arts, Law, Mathematics,
Zoology, Botany.
B.A, Home Science, Foreign Language,
Law, Banking, Insurance, Computer
Science, Engineering - Chemical, Civil,
Pharmacy, Electrical.
Bachelor of Dental Surgery, ENT, M.B.A,
Journalism, Literature, Foreign Language,
Publication, Civil/Chemical Engineering,
Aeronautical.
Pharmacy, Dr.-Eye, dental, Veterinary,
Geology, Water works, Dermatologist,
Criminal Law, Interior Decorator, Catering
Engineering - Mechanical, Textile,
Chemical, Sound, Electrical, Law, Eye /
Dentist, Cinema,

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts”
6. Ardra
7. Punarvasu
8. Pushya
Transport/Agriculture/Rubber Engineering.
Animal Husbandry, Atomic research,
Journalism, Physician.
M.Com, Company Secretary, Auditor,
Marketing/ Financial Management,
Insurance, I.A.S, Journalism, Astrology,
English Literature, political science.
Drafts man, B.A, Agricultural/Hardware/
Water works engineer Mathematics,
Economics, M.A
9. Ashlesha Civil/Mechanical/Transport/Instrumental
Engineering, Ground water, Waste water,
Pharmacy, Master of Law, Sales &
Marketing
10. Magha Bachelor of Medicine, Surgery, Ayurvedic,
Child health, Pharmacy, Music, History.
1 1 . Purva Phalguni
Diploma in Gynecology, Obstetrics, Medical
Radiology, Nursing, B.Ed, M.Tech,
Computer Engg., M.B.A.
1 2. Uttar Phalguni
M.Tech, Electrical Engineer, Tourism,
Teaching, Master of Surgery, Heart, Chest,
Veterinary, Hospital Management.
13. Hasta
Diploma in Venereology, Neurology,
leprosy, Forensic Medicine, Dental Surgery,
Mining Engg. Hospital's Administration.
14. Chitra
B.A, Law, Literature, Bachelor of Science
in Agriculture/Fisheries/Ayurvedic medicine,
Bank Management, Civil engg. Environmen
Management.
1 5. Swati Bachelor of Library, Master of Arts, M.B.A,
Diploma in Gynecology, obstetrics,
dermatology, venerology, Master of Surgery.

Chapter 6: Nakshatras
16. Vishakha
17. Anuradha
18. Jyestha
19. Mula
20. Purvashada
B.Sc, B.Tech B.A, Law, Diploma in
Homeopathy Medicine, Surgery, Radiology.
Textile/Civil Engg. Architecture, City &
Regional Planning.
Master of Law, M.B.A, Mining/ Agriculture
Engg, Pathology.
B.A, Literature/Corporate/Secretary,
M . B . B . S , Medicine/Surgery/ Ay urvedic
Environmental Management, C.A.
B.A History, Economics, Physics, B.Sc.
Computer, Engineering- Civil/Chemical/
Computer/Electrical & Electronics and
Ophthamology.
B.A, M.Sc, C.A, Mathematics, Telecom,
Textiles.
2 1 . Uttarashada
22. Shravana
23. Dhanishtha
24. Satbhisha
25. Purvabhadra
B.A, Arts/Economics, Dental Surgery,
M.Tech. B.Sc. Computer, Chemical
Engineering.
M.B.B.S. Medicine/Surgery /Anesthesia/
Chest Disease, B.Ed, M.Tech, Chemical
Engineering, B.B.A.
B.A, Bank Management, M.B.A, Literature,
Textiles, Hospital Management, Nursing.
M.B.B.S, Medicine/Surgery/Dental/
Gynecology /Obstetrics/Pathology/
Microbiology, Agricultural Engg.electronics,
technology experts, radar and X-ray experts,
astronauts, astrologers.
Undergraduate, B.A, B.Ed, M.Sc. Diploma
in Radiology/Electrology/Pharma

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
26. Uttarbhadra B . E. Electrical/Textile/Marine/Mining
B.Com, M.B.A, B.D.S.
27. Revati Engineering- Industrial Instrumentation/
Electronics/Chemical/Polymer/Civil,
Architecture, Arts & Crafts, Leather &
Printing Technology, Doctor of Medicine.
Nakshatras and the Body Parts
Sr. Nakshatras Body Parts
No.
1. Ashwini
2. Bharani
3. Krittika
4. Roliini
Head, cerebral hemisphere.
Head, cerebral hemisphere, eyes, organs
within head.
Head, eyes, brain, vision, 2nd, 3rd, 4th qtrs:
face, neck, larynx, tonsils, lower jaw.
Face, mouth, tongue, tonsils, palate, neck,
cerebellum, cervical vertebrate.
5. Mrigshira
6. Ardra
Face, chin, cheeks, larynx, palate, arteries,
veins, inflamed tonsils throat, vocal cord,
arms, shoulders, ears, thymus, upper ribs.
Throat, arms, shoulders.
7. Punarvasu Ear, throat, shoulders, blades lungs, chest,
stomach, diaphragm, pancreas, lobes of liver,
respiratory system, thoracic.
8. Pushya Lungs, stomach, ribs, lips, mouth, ears.
9. Ashlesha Lungs, stomach, esophagus, diaphragm,
pancreas, liver.

Chapter 6: Nakshatras
Magha
Purva Phalguni
Uttara Phalguni
Hasta
Chitra
Sv/ati
Vishakha
Anuradha
Jyestha
Mula
Purvashada
Uttarashada
Shravana
Dhanishtha
Satbliisha
Purvabhadra
Uttarbhadra
Revati
Heart, back, spinal chord, spleen, dorsal
region of spine aorta.
Heart, spinal cord.
Spinal Cord, intestines, bowels and liver.
Bowels, intestines, secreting glands,
enzymes.
Belly, lower part, kidneys, loins, hernia,
lumber region of spine, vasomotor system.
Skin, kidneys, urethra, bladder.
Lower abdomen, bladder parts, kidneys,
pancreatic gland, bladder, urethra, genitals,
rectum, prostate gland, descending colon.
Bladder, genitals, rectum, nasal bones, bones
near genitals.
Colon, anus, genitals, ovaries, womb.
Hips, thighs, femur, ileum, sciatica nerve.
Thighs, hips, filial arteries and veins,
coccygeal and sacral regions of spine.
Thighs, tumour, arteries, skin, knees, patella.
Lymphatic vessels, knees, skin.
Knee cap bones, ankle, limbs, portion
between knees & ankles.
Portion between knees and ankles, calf
muscles.
Ankles, feet and toes.
Feet
Feet and toes.

True Astrology - " Basic and Traditional Concepts' '
Nakshatras and the Diseases
Sr. Nakshatras Diseases
No.
1. Ashwini Congestion in brain, thrombosis, epilepsy
fainting, head injury, strokes, spasm, coma,
malaria, trance, small box, headache,
neuralgia, cerebral hemorrhage, Bell's Palsy,
meningitis,
2. Bharani Forehead injury, cold, venereal distemper,
syphilis, reins afflicted, affected face and
vision, catarrh in the head, dissipating sexual
habits & weakness, catarrh in the head.
3. Krittika Cerebral meningitis, carbuncle, sharp fever,
malaria, plague, small box, cuts, wounds,
brain fever, injury, accidents, explosions, fire
accident, pimple, reddish eye, throat
troubles, swelling above neck, polypus of the
nose.
4. Rohini Apoplexy, breast pain, swellings, sore-throat,
cold, cough, goiter, leg-feet pain, irregular
menses.
5 . Mrigshira Inflamed tonsils, pimples, throat pain, goiter,
adenoids, diphtheria, constipation, venereal
distemper, polypus, corrupted blood, itches,
wounds and fracture of arms, collarbone,
pains in the shoulders near collar bone,
sciatica.
6. Ardra Septic throat, mumps, asthma, dry-cough,
pus in the ear, eosnophillia, diphtheria, eartrouble.

Chapter 6: Nakshatras
7. Punarvasu
8. Pushya
9. Ashlesha
10. Magha
Bronchitis, pneumonia, lacteals, thoraces,
chest, beriberi, upset stomach, corrupt blood,
tuberculosis, liver trouble, dyspepsia,
jaundice.
Tuberculosis, gastric ulcers, gall stone, cough,
nausea, belching, bruises in breast, cancer,
jaundice, hiccups, eczema, dyspepsia.
Ulceration in respiratory system.
Cold-stomach, dropsy, windiness, knees &
leg pains, hysteria, nervousness, indigestion,
phlegm, flatulence, wind-pressing diaphragm
making breathing difficult, nephritis.
Sudden heart shock, grief, poisoning,
backache, cholera, fainting, spinal-meningitis,
palpitation, gravel in kidneys.
11. Purva Phalguni Spine -curvature, anemia, leg pain, swelling
of ankles, B.P, affected valves, hydraemia,
aneurysm swelling of heart and swelling of
ankle.
12. Uttar Phalguni Spotted fever, pains, B.P, fainting, madness,
brain, blood, clotting, palpitation, stomach
disorders, sore throat, bowel-tumours, neck
swelling.
13. Hasta Gas formation, loose bowels, short breath,
worms, hysteria, typhoid, diarrhea, cholera,
dysentery, fear complex, weakness of anus
& shoulders, bowel disorders, amoebic.
14. Cliitra Excess urine, renal stone, brain fever,
lumbago, kidney hemorrhage, ulcers, sharpacute pains, wounds, choleric humour,
itching, irritation, worms, leg-pain, dry

True Astrology- " Basic and Traditional Concepts "
15. Swati
16. Vishaklia
17. Anuradha
18. Jyestha
19. Mula
20. Purvashada
21. Uttarashada
22. Shravana
gripping pains, appendicitis, hernia,
headache, sun stroke, poly urea,
inflammation of urethra, Blight's disease,
pains in head.
Body gasses, leprosy, urinary and skin
trouble, hernia, eczema, Bright’s disease,
urethra-ulcerated, poly urea.
Womb disease, nose-bleeding, renal stone,
dropsy, rupture, prostate-enlargement,
fibroid, tumor, menstrual abnormal bleeding,
urinary trouble, diabetes, sluggish kidneys,
skin eruption, congestion of brain, uterine
tumours, nose bleed.
Suppression of menses, constipation, sterility,
piles, nasal catarrh phlegm, fracture of hipbones, sore-throat strictures, colon stasis.
Bleeding piles, bowel-infection, tumors,
fistula, distemper in secret parts, leucorrhoea,
pain in ami & shoulders.
Rheumatism, hip-disease, pulmonarytroubles, loco motor ataxia.
Sciatica, diabetes, rheumatism, hip gout,
respiratory disease, lung cancer, putrifaction
of blood, surfeit cold.
Eczema, skin disease, leprosy, dull pain,
digestive trouble, palpitation of heart,
rheumatism, cardiac thrombosis, stomach
trouble due to gas.
Eczema, skin disease, leprosy, pus
formation, tuberculosis, rheumatism, boils,
pleurisy, filarial, poor digestion.

Chapter 6: Nakshatras
23. Dhanishtha Malaria, filaria, high fever, boils,
elephantiasis, dry cough, hiccups, leg-injury,
lameness, H.B.P, insomnia, cardiac
thrombosis, heart failure, fainting, overheated blood.
24. Satbhisha Rheumatic heart, H.B.P, palpitation,
insomnia, amputation, leprosy, eczema,
constipation, guineas -worm, fracture,
rheumatism.
25. Purvabhadra
26. Uttarbhadra
27. Revati
Irregular circulatory system, ulcerated gums,
swelling feet, enlarged liver, hernia, jaundice,
abdominal tumour, corns in feet, perspiring
feet, intestine defect.
Drop foot, hernia, dropsy, indigestion, cold
feet, foot-fracture, constipation, flatulence,
tuberculosis, rheumatic pains.
Intestinal ulcer, gout in feet, deafness, earpus, cramps, foot deformities, lassitude,
nephritis, abdominal disorders.

Chapter 7:
Planets and their Significations
Astrology is basically the study of the influence of planets on human
life. Each planet is said to posses its natural significations. However,
their significations are subjected to modification by the particular
zodiacal area through which the planet transits. Therefore, how a
particular planet behaves for a particular individual depends upon
its placement in the Zodiac and also its placement in the horoscope.
To understand this we first need to know the natural significations
of the planets, with respect to various aspects of human life.
Sun and its Significations
Astronomical Data: Sun is a star located close to the Sagittarius
in Carina spiral arm, called the "Brion Spur". It is believed to
complete one revolution of our galaxy in 200 million years. It has
a mean distance of 14, 96, 00,000 kms from Earth. It is nearest
to the Earth on 3ld January every year when it is 14, 71 , 03,000
kms from Earth and farthest from Earth on 4 July when it is 15,
21, 06,000 kms away from Earth.
Astrological Significations:
In Astrology Sun is considered to be a planet. It takes one year to
go round the Ecliptic. It has only direct motion. There is no latitude
for Sun. It is said to be the soul of the Kala Purusha (the cosmic
man). It is dry, masculine, positive and fiery. It belongs to Rajasic
propensity. It rules over the East direction. It is the source of our

Chapter 7: Planets and their Significations
inspiration, vitality, and the seat of what we project, emanate,
produce and create. It mles our fame, renown and reputation. It
symbolizes ego, character, innate tendencies, brilliancy,
magnificence, splendour, omnipotence, invincibility,
accomplishment, divinity, leadership, royalty, aristocracy,
dominance. It is an ideal but wrongly viewed, it represents
autocracy, despotism, dictatorship, tyranny, vanity, boastfulness,
pride, arrogance, contempt, haughtiness, either moral or congenital
blindness. The Sun represents truth, reality, the Absolute, God,
supreme states of conciousness like nirvana, Samadhi, exposure
and nakedness in all senses. As a rule Sun types are bom limelights
and exhibitionists and want to impress at all times.
It likes chilliness, radish, and its abode is temple i.e. place of
worship.
Rulership:
It mles over the sign Leo. It exalts in Aries; maximum point of
exaltation is 10 degree Aries. It debilitates in Libra.
Karaka Significations:
Sun is considered to be the Karaka of body, head, heart, right
eye, stomach/abdomen, fire, inflammation, father, honour, status,
vitality, self-esteem, ego, will power, arrogance, government and
place of worship.
Professions:
Govt, service or service in an organization that provides reasonable
security. Business financed by father or taken over from father.
Dealer in cloth, sandle wood, raw silk, gold, medicine, jewellery,
saffron and copper. Administrators, excavators and discoverers.
Teaching relating to chemistry or general administration, Jobs in

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts “
hospitals, asylums. Manufacturers of thick rope. Ambassador to
foreign countries.
Vitamins and Minerals:
Sun mles the vitamins A and D and minerals Magnesium and Iodine.
Diseases:
Headaches, baldness, inflammation of liver and gall bladder, heart
trouble, blood disorders, stomach ailments, eye diseases, fever
and pains, bone disorders, leprosy, bone cancer, weak immune
system, fits and gonorrhea.
Education:
Medicine, chemistry, alchemy, astrology, geography.
Metals:
Gold and copper.
Gem: Ruby
Body Parts:
Heart, Bones, Stomach, Constitution, Blood.
Colour:
Orange, Golden, Red.
Symbol: ©
Taste: Pungent

Chapter 7: Planets and their Significations
Moon and Its Significations:
Astronomical Data:
Moon is the only satellite of the Earth. It completes its one revolution
round its own orbit and Earth's in 27.32166 Earth's days. It always
keeps one face to Earth. Its orbit is an ellipse and is inclined about
5.08 deg to the plane of Earths orbit(Ecliptic). Moon's mean
distance from Earth is 384,402 kms.
Astrological Significations:
Moon for all practical purpose is considered as a planet in
astrology. It rules over North-West direction. It is feminine, watery,
and Rajasic.
Moon rules over the etheric body, the mind, mannerisms,
idiosyncrasies, likes and dislikes, the apparent and the unconscious.
It is symbolic of personality, figure, change, ovulation, menstruation.
The Moon is the seat of desire, panting, longing, craving, lust,
appetite, consumption, whim and fancy, feelings, sexual and
material needs. Moon is flirtation, receptivity, dependency. It is
adaptable and flexible. Viewed negatively it represents unsocial,
parasitism, mediocrity and frustration. It cannot be trusted.
The Moon is fantacy, myth, fable, legend, dream, illusion, mirage,
because unlike the Sun which revels in truth and reality, the Moon
is incapable of putting its feet on the ground. It has to imagine
things or hear things or reproduce things and that's why it is a
bom medium, spiritist, psychic, actor and actress. Like a mother
it is believer in equality and democracy. Because of its dependence
upon the Sun for survivafit can be at times insatiable, unsocial and
very strange.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
It likes all cold substances and tender fruits and vegetables. Its
abode is wells, swimming pools i.e. watery places.
Rulership:
It rules over the sign Cancer. It exalts in Taurus; maximum point of
exaltation is 3 degree T aums. It debilitates in Scorpio.
Karaka Significations:
Moon is considered to be the Karaka of breasts, mind, mother,
place of residence, emotions, ovaries, uterus, pregnancy, left eye,
sleep, upper and lower halves of lungs, the sympathetic nerves,
parenting, masses, subconscious and feelings, all coverings in the
body like pericardium meninges in the brain, eye socket, lymphatic
system and synovial and all fluids in the body.
Profession:
Related to shipping, water works department, dealer of corals,
fish, pearls, perfumes, kerosene, petrol, milk, boilers, vegetables,
fruit grower and supporters. Nurses, cooks, stall managers,
naturopaths, psychologists, psychiatrists, general merchants.
Vitamins and Minerals:
Moon rules the vitamin B-2 called Riboflavin and the minerals
Potassium and Flourine.
Diseases:
Infancy, Insanity, Insomnia, T.B, Pleurisy, dropsy, dyspepsia,
diarrhea, cholera. Anemia, epilepsy, enlargement of spleen, ovary,
uterus, menstrual disorders, breast, chest, saliva, hysteria, salivary
gland, lefteye, lungs, diabetes, appendicitis, and vomiting.

Chapter 7: Planets and their Significations
Besides psychic problems it causes sleep disorders, lethargy,
drowsiness, lung problems, mouth problems, neurological
disorders, digestive complains, blood disorders, frequent cough
and cold and weakness etc.
Education:
Textile, chemical, engineer, psychology, water engineer, or
hydraulics, music, marketing, violin, veena.
Metal: Silver
Body Parts:
Heart, lungs, mind, blood, left eye, kidney, alimentary canal and
water in body, lymph, breasts.
Symbol: D
Colour: White, Opal, Pearl.
Taste: Saline
Mars and Its Significations:
Astronomical Data:
Mars is the fourth planet in its distance from earth. It revolves
around Sun and completes its revolution in 686.9804 mean Earth
solar days. The eccentricity of its orbit is 0.0934. Its equatorial
radius is 3393 ± 4 kms and polar radius is 3352 kms.
Its nearest distance to Earth is 56 million kms and farthest distance
is almost 400 million kms. Its synodic period is 779.94 earth's
solar days.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Astrological Significations:
Mars is masculine, fiery, and tamasic. It rules over South direction.
It symbolizes impulsiveness, animosity, combat, will power,
bravery, determination, drive, initiative, invasion, penetration. It is
heroism, activity, agitation, excitation, manliness, athletics, sports,
martial arts, stamina, toughness, and health and vitality. Mars
accepts no weakness, panic, delay, cowardice and reason. It is
straightforward. It is reckless, ferocious and impatient. It is the
seat of burning desires and of strong sexual feelings. It rules over
the instincts, and the will power and welcome danger and difficulty.
Mars does not wait and long passively under the stars, but rather
forces issues and undauntingly goes after its meat kike a jaguar. It
is violent, aggressive, short-tempered, rude, impudent, curses a
lot and is anger itself. Mars is also vivacious, lively and pressing
agent of survival.
It likes substances of fleshy nature, groundnut, and grains. Its abode
is fire place.
Rulership:
It rales over the signs Aries and Scorpio. It exalts in Capricorn;
the maximum point of exaltation being 28 degrees Capricorn. It
debilitates in Cancer.
Karaka Significations:
Mars is considered to be the Karaka of courage, inflammation,
injury, accident, male genitals, blood, bone marrow, rectum,
prostrate, homeoglobin, the muscles and the motor segment of
the spine, enemies, disputes, litigation, younger siblings, immovable
property, kilting, dynamic energy, self affmnation, initiative, and
violence.

Chapter 7: Planets and their Significations
Profession:
Defense personals, chemists and druggists, surgeons, butchers,
real estate businessman, machinists, dealer of guns, weapons, hair
dressers, iron and steel, boilers, steam engines, dacoits, murderers,
executioners,watch makers, gamblers, blacksmiths, athletes,
mason, and sports person.
Vitamins and Minerals:
Mars rules the vitamins B-12folicacid and fatty acids (vitamin F).
It rules minerals chlorine, cobalt, iron, phosphorus, selenium and
sodium.
Diseases:
Inflammatory diseases, hypertension, blood disorders, brain
fever,abortions, miscarriage, smallpox, gall bladder stone, jaundice,
measles, piles, epilepsy, itching of the skin, bleeding, dry and rough
skin, accident, fracture of bone, electric shock, injury due to acids,
prostrate, cough, tumours and abscesses, and surgery. It may cause
cancer in muscular parts in the body when closely associated with
Rahu.
Education:
Surgery, mechanical and civil engineer, machines, structural design,
architecture, physics, military sendees, martial arts.
Metals: Iron and steel, copper
Gem: Coral

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Body parts:
Skull, blood, testicles, marrow, neck, rectum, forehead, digestive
section, nose, veins, red-corpsell.
Colour: Red, Scarlet.
Symbol: cf
Taste: Bitter
Mercury and Its Significations
Astronomical Data:
Mercury is the closest planet to the Sun. Its mean distance from
the Sun is 58 million kms. It revolves around the Sun at a velocity
of 170,000 km per hour. Its nearest distance from earth is
45,000,000 km. Eccentricity of the orbit is 0.206. It is never seen
at a distance of more than 28 degrees longitude from the Sun.
Mercury, like moon, always has its one face to Sun. It is called the
evening star and the morning star because it can sometimes be
seen before sunrise or some time after sunset.
Astrological significations:
It is effeminate. Earthy and Sattwic. It rales over North direction.
It signifies intelligence, reasoning, education, learning and teaching,
infonnation seeker, communication, the meaning and value of ideas.
It can't stand silence. It believes in versatility, flexibility and mobility.
It is restless and is the agent of tourism, hitch-hiking, trekking,
pilgrimage and travel. Mercury is incapable of being alone or sad
for long. It loves to trade, master the skills of business and
commerce. It has excellent argumentative and analytical power.

Chapter 7: Planets and their Significations
Mercury types are difficult to seize and size up. They do not
possess one face but many faces and this polydimensiona
characteristic is best found in the writer, journalist, editor,
newspaper critic, driver and mathematician. However, unlike the
Moon Mercury's multiple interests are mostly of a mental order
and not emotional or sexual.
It represents plantation, brinjals, lady finger, beet root. Its abode
is play-grounds.
Rulership:
It rales over the signs Gemini and Virgo. It exalts in Virgo; the
maximum point of exaltation being 15 degrees Virgo. It debilitates
in Pisces.
Karaka Significations:
Mercury is considered to be the Karaka of communication, central
nervous system, intellect, memory, speech, all sense perceptions,
short journey, education, friends, all tubes in the body like fallopian
tubes, urethra, trachea; business, trade, commerce, writing and
journalism.
Profession:
Editors and publishers, accountants, mathematicians, analysts,
travel agents, stenographers, book binding, ambassadors,
personals in communication department, post and telegraph
department, finger print experts, railway employee, insurance
agents, sculptresists.
Vitamins and Minerals: Mercury rales the vitamin B-l called
Thiamine.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Diseases:
Chest, nerves, mental disorders, abortion, neurological disorder,
defects in speech, stammering, skin diseases, vertigo, leucoderma,
ear, nose and throat, impotence.
Mercury causes psychic diseases, insomnia, nervous breakdown,
loss of memory or speech, deafness, asthma, disorders of intestines,
dyspepsia etc. and it creates tensions in life, lack of confidence,
situation of indecisiveness etc.
Education:
Mathematics, Engineering, astrology, puranic studies, auditing,
logic, journalism, advertising, astronomy, public speaking.
Metals: Bronze
Gem: Emerald
Colour: Green, Slate colour.
Body Parts:
Nervous system, tongue, arms, skin, thyroid, spinal system, naval.
Symbol: ?
Taste: Mixed

Chapter 7: Planets and their Significations
Venus and Its Significations
Astronomical Data:
Venus is the second closest planet in order of distance from the
Sun. Its orbit is nearly circular and is inclined to the Ecliptic at an
angle of 3 deg. 39 min. It is never more than 48 degrees away
from the Sun. It can be seen up to 5 hours before the sunrise and
5 hours after the sunset (when it is 48 degrees away from Sun). It
is the nearest planet to Earth. Its sidereal period is 224.7 Earth
days and synodic period is 583.92 Earth days. One day of Venus
or time interval between one sun rise to next sun rise equals to 1 1
Earth Days. It takes 243.01 days to rotate once round on its axis.
Venus achieves its brilliance in the evening sky after every 584
days.
Astrological Significations:
Venus is feminine, Rajasic and watery. It rules over South- East
direction.
Venus is the epitome of delicacy, softness, tact, diplomacy, love,
devotion, adoration, fidelity, kindness, sympathy, peace,
compromise and good will. It believes in brother hood, loves
fashion, pretty and artistic dresses. Venus adorns itself and also
decorates house. It knows how to magnetise, fascinate and please
others. Venus is sensuousness, eroticism, and symbolic of sexual
relationship (marriage). It is fertility, procreation.lt is cohabitation,
intimacy, cooperation, partnership, synthesis and affinity.
Venus is a poet, a self less lover. It looks after dancing, singing,
acting, ornaments and luxurious items, furniture. On the negative
side, perhaps, it is in its nature to under go prostitution, incest, and
homosexuality. It mles over the skin, the flesh, the erogenous zones
of the body.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
It represents all exotic vegetables, potatoes, cabbage. Its abode
is bedroom.
Rulership:
It rales over the signs Taurus and Libra. It exalts in Pisces; the
maximum point of exaltation being 27 degrees Pisces.
Karaka Significations:
Venus is considered to be the Karaka of vehicle, romance, sex,
wife, kidneys, glands, skin, the erogenous zones of the body and
female genitals; art, poetry, jewelry, thyroid, tongue, venous system
tissue tone,nutritional functions, beauty, sensuality, left nostril, smell
and organs of inhalation, fat, milk, and hormonal secretions.
Profession:
Poets, stage actors, musicians, jewelers, perfume sellers, dealer
of gems, silk merchants, confectioneries, sweet makers, and
dealers in ghee and fat foods. It also signifies profession like that
of Painters, sculptors, dancers, profession related to textiles,
cosmetics, veterinary doctors, drivers, dairy and poultry farmers.
Hotel business.
Vitamins and Minerals:
Venus rales the vitamins B-3 called Niacin and Vitamin E. It also
rales mineral copper.
Diseases:
Main diseases of Venus are venereal diseases, eye diseases,
indigestion, diabetes, urinary diseases, throat trouble, impotency,
glandular diseases, loss of luster in body, and fits.

Chapter 7: Planets and their Significations
Venus causes illnesses of the kidneys, womb and genitalia, illnesses
of the belly, back and navel. It causes all venereal/sexually
transmitted diseases, priapism, impotence, hernias, and diabetes.
Venus also rales over the veins and indicates such disorders as
varicose veins, hemorrhoids, vascular spiders, etc.
Education:
Chemistry, electronics, computers, agriculture, dairy fanning,
veterinary, chemical engineer, textile, plastic, naval science, poultry,
music, foreign literature, logic, grammar, sexology, naphthrology,
ophthalmology, gynecology.
Metals: Silver
Gem: Diamond
Colour:
Blue, to some it represents mixture of colours. VTBGY OR, Lemon
yellow and Pale blue.
Body Parts:
Face, vision, semen, urine, body lustre, throat, body water, glands,
ovaries, chin, productive organ, left ear.
Taste: Sour
Symbol: 2).

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Jupiter and Its Significations
Astronomical Data:
It is the most massive planet in the solar system and it is fifth in
order of distance from the Sun. Jupiter is said to possess a magnetic
field like Earth. It is a source of intense bursts of radio emissions.
Jupiter has 16 satellites, small and big. Jupiter is self-luminous. Its
mean distance from Sun is 77, 83 million kms. It revolves around
its own axis very fast and completes one revolution in 9.841 hours.
Its sidereal period is 1 1 .862 years and eccentricity of the orbit is
Astrological Significations:
It is masculine, sattvvic and is said to represent Ether. Its direction
is North-East. It is considered to be a planet of expansion, wisdom
abundance, growth. It must feel big, important and healthy, out of
a sense of status. It is a finn upholder of the hierarchical system.
Ceremony, ritual, protocol, pomp, display, demonstrations, parade
are part of its intimate world. It needs to show of but in order to
protect, guide and feed. It is a status seeker. Its laughter is roaring
and hearty. It knows no inhibitions to express its emotions. It is
symbolic of optimism, felicity, confidence, hope, and success. It
stresses refinement and elegance. But it has likewise big vices that
are explicit viz Jupiter's inordinate ambition makes it shoddy,
exhibitionistic, extravagant, exaggerating, and imperialistic. It eats
and drinks too much, become fat, obese, silly and too compliant.
It ruins its failure by becoming too extravagant unable to become
apart of elite it pretends and thus becomes ridiculous and surrounds
itself with frivolous friends and cheap looking objects.

Chapter 7: Planets and their Significations
It represents all native roots and bulbs, pumpkin, plantains. Its
abode is storeroom, treasury, place where jewelry and money
are deposited.
Rulership:
It rales over the signs Sagittarius and Pisces. It exalts in Cancer;
the maximum point of exaltation being 5 degrees Cancer. It
debilitates in Capricorn.
Karaka Significations:
Jupiter is considered to be the Karaka of expansion, abundance,
wisdom, philosophy, religion, politics, diplomacy, big ventures,
liver, pancreas, management, administration, wealth, and
prominence in society
Profession:
Teachers, priests, advocates, judges, scientists, bankers,
physicians, philosophers, writers, high ranks in government and
society, member of parliament or legislature, mayors, yoga teachers.
Vitamins and Minerals:
Jupiter rules the vitamins B-6, biotin, cholin, inositol and pangamic
acid (vitamin b-15).It rules minerals chromium, manganese and
zinc.
Diseases:
Appendicitis, diabetes, philganatic diseases, anemia, liver
complaints, eartrouble, spleen problem, dropsy, diseases in thighs.
Jupite causes lymphatic and circulatory congestion, thrombosis,
tumors, jaundice and asthma.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Education:
Law, medicine, military science, administration, instmctional
techniques, philosophy, religion, politics, international, law, business
management, banking, astrology.
Metals: Gold
Gem: Yellow Sapphire or Topaz
Colour:
Tawny, yellow like molten gold, Violet.
Body parts: Back, hip, thighs, feet
Taste: Sweet
Symbol: ?
Saturn and Its Significations
Astronomical Data:
Saturn is the sixth planet in the order of distance from the Sun. It
is surrounded by rings and provides the most beautiful sight in the
solar system. Like Jupiter, it radiates more heat than it receives
from Sun. Its mean distance from Sun is 142.70 million kms. It
revolves in its orbit at a velocity of 9.64 kms per second. Its
eccentricity is 0.056. Its sidereal period is 29.4577 years and
synodic period is 378.09 Earth days.

Chapter 7: Planets and their Significations
Astrological Significations:
It is tamasic, effeminate and airy. It rules over West direction.
It represents discipline, self-control, restraint, moderation, sacrifice,
penance, renunciation, patience, austerity, humility, modesty,
immobility. Knowledge is its main concern. Lacks desire, longings,
wishes-exactly opposite to Moon.
It is science, investigation, concentration, contemplation,
introversion, introspection, transformation. It respects seniority,
ascendancy, old age, longevity, immortality and classics. It is a
planet of constriction. It is constructive, a traditionalist-never a
liberal. It knows only responsibility, obligations, gratitude. It has
its feet on the ground, solidly planted and having forsaken
sentimentalism and passions, its system of work is meticulously
planned and organized to the minutest details. It is very diligent. It
distrusts the new and young, it loves the past. Loneliness, suffering,
pain, diseases, sickness, paralysis, deformity and all the evils of
the world accompany its sinister ghostliness. It sterilizes and
provokes frigidity, impotence, vasectomy. It is dogmatism,
fanaticism, narrow-mindedness, celibacy. It prefers to be alone.
It has no feelings, knows no laws, cruelty, abuses are nothing to it.
Fear, apprehensions, despair, anguish envelop its deranged mind.
Saturn remains a sinner and monster at heart. It eats shit, plays
with it and puts its hands inside garbage cans. It is unclear and
filthy. Saturn is patron of scandal, disaster, calamity, doom and
catastrophe. Saturn undermines every thing.
It represents bitter gourd, onions, drumstick, betel leaves, tobacco,
greens, thorny, and poisonous trees. Its abode is prison, dungeon,
a monastic cell, an ashram or an asylum.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Rulership:
It rales over the signs Capricorn and Aquarius. It exalts in Libra;
the maximum point of exaltation being 20 degrees Libra. It
debilitates in Aries.
Karaka Significations: Saturn is considered to be the Karaka
of death, teeth, sickness, danger, longevity, discomfort, servant,
subordinate, sorrow, melancholy, joints, bones, gallbladder,
sigmoid flexure, ligaments, history, self discipline, restraint, atrophy,
crystallization.
Profession:
Farmers, politicians, beggars, servants, pilots, space scientists,
electronic engineers, police constables, watchmen, jailors, grave
diggers, dealers in leather, iron and steel, plumbers, labourers in
mines.
Vitamins and Minerals:
Saturn rales the vitamins C, K, PAB A and bioflavonoid (Vitamin
P). It rales minerals Calcium, fluorine, sulfur and vanadium.
Diseases:
Belly ache, windy and phlegmatic complaints, paralysis,
rheumatism, indigestion, bodily deformity, gastric and stomach
troubles, gaseous troubles, and teeth problems.
Saturn causes constant and painful diseases, leg fracture, cancer,
skin diseases, arthritis, gout, emaciation, rickets, consumption,
indigestion, dyspepsia, insanity, numbness, windy diseases,
impotence in men, asthma, retention of urine, intestinal obstruction
etc.

Chapter 7: Planets and their Significations
Education:
Geology, petrochemical engg., refinery techniques, civil engg.,
mining, electronic engg., sanitary engg., labour law, black arts,
industrial engineer.
Metals: Iron and steel
Gem: Blue Sapphire
Colour: Black, Indigo.
Body Parts:
Bones, teeth, nails, hair, subconscious mind.
Taste: Astringent.
Symbol: h
Rahu and Ketu and their Significations:
Rahu and Ketu being only two points of intersection of Moon's
orbit and Ecliptic are called shadowy or invisible planets. They
have no body, shape or mass. They have no life and radiating
power by themselves. It is, however, an established fact that Rahu
and Ketu play a significant role in analyzing the nativity of aperson.
Rahu and Ketu have been termed the Karmic planets of Astrology
and their depositors have gained the category of karmic controlling
planets. They don't own any house. Like Ascendant they also
represent the signs and the stars they are in. i.e. Rahu and Ketu
represent the planets who are the lords of the signs and the stars
in which they are in a horoscope. Rahu and Ketu are considered

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
more powerful than the planets they represent. Traditionalists
believe that nature of Rahu is like that of Saturn and of Ketu tike
that of Mars.
General Significations of Rahu:
Rahu represents distribution, discharge, exaltation, new luster,
brilliance, richness. It conquers, gain, triumphs, it is a royal planet,
a solar and a Jupiterian point. To some Rahu symbolises creativity,
growth, militancy, high power, prestige, honour, renown and
luminosity at its greatest. Rahu is, according to some, fertilization
and Ketu is impotence. It also represents jails, fetters, poison,
thefts, losses and indulgence with sick woman. It is an outcast.
Karaka Significations:
Rahu is considered to be the Karaka of fraud, maternal
grandmother, paternal grandfather, riots, undiagnosable disease,
greed, and blowing tmmpet with self-pride, over interest in sexual
contacts, large organs, perverted sex, respiratory system diseases,
and addiction to drags.
Profession:
Jails, Criminal Courts, Radiologist, Photographers, Space scientist,
Electricity propellers.
Diseases:
Accidents, Heart attacks, Cancer, Paralyses, Fits, Small-pox, and
the diseases of the planets it represents.
Rahu causes diseases of phlegm, intestines, skin, nervous system,
ulcers, blood pressure, heart trouble, psychic disturbances, insanity,
leprosy, insect bite, and cancer etc.

Chapter 7: Planets and their Significations
Education:
Radiology, Photography, Space science and the type of education
as indicated by the planets it represents.
Gem: Gomed.
Symbol: ft
General Significations of Ketu:
Ketu represents maternal grandparents, absorption, deception,
humiliation, disintegration, surrender, fall, and disease at best. It
symbolizes what is old, ancient, sordid, dark, sinister, and fatal. It
is impotence, it is vulgar. It represents cunningness, unexpected
death.
Karaka Significations:
Ketu is considered to be the Karaka of morbid growth, ulcers,
cancer, dehydration, acidity, sudden shortage of fluid in the body,
secret planning's, criminality, immoral acts, ramormonger, apathy,
false allegations, forged documents, law, adultery, innovation,
Profession:
Represents profession mled by Mars, Snake charmers.
Diseases:
Measles, itches, and the diseases of the planets which it represents.
Ketu causes wounds, injuries, diseases in spine and nervous
system, consumption, surgery, ulcers, inflammations, fevers,
intestinal diseases, mental aberration, low blood pressure, bad
habits, skin diseases etc.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Education: As per the planets it represents.
Gem: Cat's eye. /
Symbol: Rahu - fl ; Ketu - U

Chapter 8
Aspects
Both the Traditional and the Western Astrologers firmly believe
that each planet as per its position in the Zodiac influences the
other planets and houses. This is termed as aspect. The approach,
however, of both is different. Westerns claim to be more scientific
because they compute the aspects on the basis of specified
longitudinal positions of planets and house cusps whereas the
T raditionalists compute the aspects from sign to sign positions of
the planets and houses. The T raditionalists also believe that even
signs also aspect other signs in specific ways. Aspects, according
to both are classified as benefics and malefics. Both believe that
benefic aspects symbolize progress, harmony and concord,
whereas malefic aspects denote disharmony and discord. I, am
however, not able to convince myself of the rationale behind
the theory of aspects. Behavior of the planet, according to
me, is individualistic and conditioned by its actual
longitudinal degree obtained in the Zodiac at the time of
birth and its placement in the cuspal positions.
Traditional Theory of Aspects:
T raditionalists consider the influence of aspects according to the
following:
1) Nature of planets as a) Positive or negative
b) Fiery, Earthy, Airy, or Watery
c) Rajasic,Tamasic, Sattwic.

True Astrology • "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
2) Essential and Accidental dignities.
3) Functional nature of planets. A planet may be a natural
benefic or malefic but owing to its lordship of a house /
houses as per the ascending sign it may change its nature.
This is called functional nature of planet.
For example: Saturn in a horoscope if it becomes the lord of the
fh fU
4 and 5 house it becomes a functional benefic planet for that
nativity. The functional nature of the planet is also considered taking
into consideration the effect of the lord of the sign in which it is
placed and also as per the planet who has occupied its sign. This
is generally called in T raditional Astrology as the Theory of
Disposition. For example, if Sagittarius sign in a horoscope is
occupied by Rahu or Saturn or Mars, Jupiter loses its benefic
nature. Similarly if Jupiter occupies a sign whose lord is placed in
6th, 8th or 12th house or is conjoined with the lords of these
houses, Jupiter is said to lose in its benefic nature.
Planets and their major aspects are shown below. It may be
noticed that Mars, Saturn and Jupiter have special aspects.
Planet
Sun
Moon
Mars
Mercury
Venus
Jupiter
Saturn
Rahu
Ketu
House Aspected

Chapter 8: Aspects
It is also believed that Saturn though connected to benefic houses,
by its aspects, will offer only harmful results. Jupiter though
connected to harmful houses, by its aspects will offer only good
and favourable results by its aspects. Mars aspect is always
considered as malefic. Probably, this might have been in the mind
of the ancient seers to call them as natural malefic or benefic. The
special aspects of Mars, Jupiter and Saturn are considered more
powerful than their seventh house aspect.
Taking into consideration the above Theory of Aspects, we may
indicate the effect of a planet on another planet or house through
aspects as follows:
Saturn:
Its aspect on a planet or a house, in general tries to retard and
delay events signified by that planet or house. Saturn's aspect on
Venus may cause disappointment, probably sorrow or depressed
emotion, on Mars, the passionate nature will be affected, on Jupiter
it may cause misfortune, degradation of social and moral faculties,
and generally bringing disfavour and discredit.
Jupiter:
Its aspect is generally considered as benefic. Since it is a planet of
expansion and nobility and it tries to influence the planet with its
own signification to bring about a pleasant and fortunate change in
the affairs indicatedby the aspected planet /house may be health,
finance, occupation or social affairs.
Mars:
When Mars aspects a planet/ house the active, energetic and
forceful side of the nature will be manifested. This includes bodily

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
activity and vigour, muscular energy, the blood and its circulation,
strong desires, passion, positive ness, self-reliance, determination,
disobedience, pride and strengths of will. Mars aspects may give
rise to disputes and quarrels, unwise actions, extravagance etc.
Mercury:
Mercury's aspect is known to arouse the intelligence and reasoning
power in the native, infuse writing or publishing instincts, love for
communication etc. Depending upon its nature in Horoscope it
will influence the aspected planets / houses signification through
its own signification. ,
Venus:
It rales over love, friendship, society, entertainment, is fortunate
and can bestow much financial and general success. Depending
upon its nature as per its position in the horoscope, it will influence
the aspected planets / Houses through its own significations to
cause the desirable or undesirable effects.
Sun and Moon:
One represents the vital force and other is called Mind. The
influence of Sun and Moon on other planets need special
consideration. Depending upon their nature and strengths in the
horoscope they will bring about significant changes in the affairs
of the aspected planel/house.
Special Aspects and Their Significations: Some Astrologers
use the following aspects:

Chapter 8: Aspects
Aspect of Exaltation:
If a planet aspects a planet placed in the sign of exaltation of the
aspecting planet; or the house where its sign of exaltation rises
then the planet or the house is said to receive an Aspect of
Exaltation. It is believed to offer good results.
Aspect of fall:
If a planet aspects a planet placed in the sign of Debilitation of the
aspecting planet; or the house where its sign of debilitation rises
then the planet or the house is said to receive an Aspect of Fall. It
is believed to offer bad results.

Chapter 9
Behaviour of Planets
How a planet is going to influence the various aspects of life in the
nativity of a person is judged in Traditional astrology on the basis
of the following factors.
1 . Essential & Accidental dignity of the planets.
2. Planets disposition in a sign/star; and in a house in the chart
vis-a-vis its houses of lordship & Ascendant.
3 . Shad B ala strength of the planet.
4. Influence of other planets by way of conjunction & aspects.
5 . The position & strength of its dispositor.
6. Natural significations of the planet.
7. Shadvarga Strength.
There is however, another controversial concept called "Avastha
of Planet" which depends upon the degrees attained by the planet
in a sign. Some writers hold that a planet is weakest at the beginning
& at the end of a sign & strongest at the middle; others believe
that the planet is strongest at the beginning of the sign.
Essential Dignities of the Planets:
The strength of the Planet as per the sign it occupies is called its
essential dignity.

Chapter 9: Behaviour of Planets
Own Signs:
On the basis of the principle of correspondence between the
natural qualities of planets & the nature of the energy content of
the signs, the ancients classified the signs in two groups one being
lead by Sun & the other by Moon as shown below.
In this classification, the Sun's group consists of all positive, electric,
male signs and the Moon's group consists of female, negative,
magnetic signs. While Sun & Moon lords over one sign each,
other planets rale over one positive & one negative sign.
Rulership of a planet over positive sign indicates its positive qualities
and its rulership over negative sign highlights its negative qualities.
For example Mars in Scorpio is said to function as the lord of
death, of evils, but in Aries is said to be harbinger of divine life on
the materialistic plane.
The signs over which a planet rules are called their own signs &
the planet in these signs is expected to give strong results as per
the nature of the sign.
Exaltation Sign:
Accordingly to the T raditionalists, each planet is observed to exhibit
its best results when posited in a specific degree of a particular
sign. That sign is called the sign of Exaltation of the planet.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Debilitation Sign:
The sign opposite to the sign of exaltation of the planet is said to
be its sign of "fall" or debilitation. The planet is assumed to give
adverse results when debilitated i.e. posited in the debilitation sign.
The table below indicates the signs of exaltation & debilitation of
planets.
Detriments:
The signs opposite to the signs over which the planet has ruler
ship are called detriments. For example: Tauras& Libra are the
detriments of the Mars.
Other Essential' Dignities of Planets
Planets also show affinity for signs other than their own exaltation
signs. For example Mercury shows favourable results when posited
in Libra & Aquarius which are signs of scientific nature & most
allied to its own nature; Venus joys in ftuitfuLmoist signs as Cancer
& Pisces; Sun & Mars in hot sign Sagittarius; Jupiter in fruitful,
temperate signs-Cancer, Libra & Aquarius; Saturn delights in
Libra& Aquarius; Moon in Pisces.

Chapter 9: Behaviour of Planets
Accidental Dignity of a Planet:
A planet shows favourable or non-favourable results as per its
placement in the horoscope in angular, succedent, cadent, 6th, 8th
(feU* house, or in the house of its friend or enemy. This is called
the Accidental Dignity of a planet. In other words the strength of
the Planet as per its placement in a house is called its accidental
dignity.
From the study of the Essential Dignities of planets, one can observe
that the planets have their friendship & enmities as follows:
Saturn is opposed to Sun & Mars.
Jupiter is opposed to Mercury.
Venus is opposed to Mars.
The signs of these planets are severely opposed to each other.
Similarly, those planets whose houses & exaltations are in the
same sign are friendly. Thus,
Saturn is the friend of Venus, being exalted in Libra.
Jupiter is the friend of Moon, being exalted in Cancer.
Mars is the friend of Saturn, being exalted in Capricorn.
Venus is the friend of Jupiter, being exalted in Pisces.
This may appear to some as contrary to what the T raditionalists
generally believe. But a deep study of Mars & Saturn will reyeal
that both possess virtues of fortitude, duty, and self-control.
Shad Bala
Planets by virtue of their disposition in a chart is said to acquire six
types of strengths. This is called Shad Bala of a planet. The six
types of strength are:

True Astrology ■ "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
1. Sthan Bala or Positional Strength:
Planets occupying exaltation sign, own sign, mooltrikona
sign, friends house & own navamsa are said to be powerful.
They become powerless if they are in depression, if they
conjunct malefic planets, or are combust.
Planetary War: If two or more planets occupy the same
amsa, i.e. division of a sign, they are said to be in a war.
The planet occupying the previous star or amsa of another
planet becomes successful in war.
2. Dig Bala:
Aspects made by benefic Planets make the planet powerful
& those formed by malefic or enemies make it powerless.
3. Naisargika Bala:
The natural strength of the planets as per the following order
is called Naisargika Bala:
1 . Rahu & Ketu
2. The Sun
3. The Moon
4. Venus
5. Jupiter
6. Mercury
7. Mars
8. Saturn
4. Chesta Bala:
The Sun & Moon have Chesta Bala in uttarayana i.e. in
northern latitude. Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus have Chesta

Chapter 9: Behaviour of Planets
Bala, when they are retrograde or winner in the planetary
war. Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus & Saturn possess Chesta
Bala when they pass through Mercury's house.
5. Dik Bala or Directional Strength:
Mercury & Jupiter are powerful in lagna; the Moon & Venus
tU
in the 4 house; Saturn in the 7 and the Sun & the Mars
in the 10th house.
6. Kala Bala:
The Sun, Mercury, Jupiter & Venus are powerful during
day. The Moon, Saturn & Mars are strong at night. Mercury
is always strong. Benefics are strong in bright half of a lunar
month & malefics are strong in the dark half.
Important Rules:
There are a number of mles, which the Traditional astrologer follows
to assertain the behavior of planets. Some of these mles are stated
below.
1 . Malefic in a house spoils the significations of the living things
represented by the house but promote the non-living things.
For example: Mars in 3ld house may provide courage,
boldness, initiative & confidence to the native to develop
his personality through the signification of the 3ld house viz
writing, communication skills etc. but may be harmful to
younger co- boms.
2. A house aspected by its lord becomes strong.
fU
3. A planet placed in 6 or 8 sign fromits own sign does not
give favourable results for its house.
4. The planet' s behaviour is modified according to the nature
of planet who has occupied its sign.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
5. The lord of the 8* house is considered always-bad except
for Sun & Moon.
6. Lords of trines i.e. 5th & 9th houses, irrespective of their
nature always, give good results.
7. Kendra lords cease to be natural benefics or malefic as the
case may be.
Shada Varga Strength:
The Vedic Astrologers construct charts by dividing the degree of
the Ascendant and the longitude of each planet by a number and
then using specific rules, they decide upon the Ascendant position
& planet position for each chart. These charts are called Varga or
Divisional Charts. Each chart, according to them, offers a greater
insight into a specific aspect of native's life. These charts are named
as follows. The number attached to the letter D indicates the
division factor.
Birth Chart (Dl), Hora (D2), Dreshkana (D3), Chaturthamsha
(D4), Saptamamsha(D7), Navamsha(D9), Dashamsha(DlO),
Dwadashamsha (D12), Shodhashamsha (D16), Vimshamsha
(D20), Chaturvimshamsha (D24), Saptavimshamsha (D27),
Trimshamsha (D30), Khavedamsha (D40), Akshavedamsha
(D45), Shastiamsha (D60)
The other use of these Varga charts is to assess the strength of the
planets. For example if Saturn is in Cancer 9 degree in a horoscope,
of Capricorn Ascendant, we conclude that the native is mean,
worthless and devoid of wealth as Saturn is in its detriment, but
detailed considerations of V arga may show that the 9 degree of
Cancer is ruled by all benefic as Sign, Hora, Drekhana, Navamsha
etc. However if Saturn is in 14 degree Cancer, then all these Lords
of Varga charts are malefics; in which case the person may be

Chapter 9: Behaviour of Planets
cruel- hearted, despondent, devoid of all noble ideas and
aspirations and even poor.
Planets and Signs:
We never experience the primary and unmodified planetary energy
because we know that Planets continue to orbit and therefore
continuously occupy different Zodiacal position. Each Zodiacal
position is mled by a particular sign the lord of which reacts upon
the Planet and modifies its nature in accordance with its nature as
well as the nature of sign.
Nature of the sign as we have already stated is defined by its
polarity (male or female), the element (F or E or W or A) it rales
and the Guna (Rajasic orTamasic or sattavic). Similarly each
Planets nature is defined by Polarity, Element and Guna it
represents. We also know that each Planet is a significator (Karaka)
of some aspects of life. Each Planet also mles over certain vitamins
and minerals.
Thus as per the Planet's zodiacal position its nature is modified.
This modification is reflected by the excess or deficiency of the
element; production of vitamins and minerals and also change in
its Guna. Thus we find that each Planet's behaviour is different in
different zodiacal positions and it causes different results in each
horoscope. In other words we say that each Planet's behaviour is
different in different horoscopes.

Chapter 10:
Vimsottari Dasa
The Hindu Astrological literature is pregnant with a number of
Dasa Systems. This provides a huge stage for the Astrologers to
play around and choose according to their own experiences and
by their intellectual correspondence with the philosophy behind
which a Dasa System is based. However, the single most important
edifice upon which the timing of events in predictive Astrology
rests is that the execution of an event is the responsibility of Moon
(Mind). That is no event, may be birth, sickness, accident, divorce,
joining service, making a journey, a quarrel, marriage, child birth
etc. or even death takes place in the life of an individual unless
Moon occupies a particular degree, minutes and seconds in the
Zodiac which position is co-ruled by those planets which are
responsible for the execution of the particular event. Vimsottari
Dasa which is based on the progression of Moon through stars is
popularly accepted to provide a sound technique for timing events.
In Vimsottari Dasa, the life span of a human being is taken as 120
yrs. Dasa periods follow a specific sequence i.e. Ketu, Venus,
Sun, Moon, Mars, Rahu, Jupiter, Saturn and Mercury. Each planet
is allotted a different period as indicated below:

Chapter 10: Vimsottari Dasa
Many Astrologers in the past have made serious efforts to dig out
the reasons for the specific planetary sequence and the unequal
periods allotted to different planets. Though their efforts appear
to be very genuine yet they are not conclusive. Only conclusion
one can draw from their studies is that Vimsottari Dasa must have
been based on very sound principles and it was in use much before
Prasara, the great Indian Sage. Study of Nadi writers also confirms
the use of Vimsottari Dasa. In the present day, one can find the
undercurrent of this Dasa in the system of Progression used by
the Westerns.
Calculation of Periods
In Vimsottari Dasa, the calculation of periods is done with reference
to Moon's longitude in a particular Nakshatra at the time of Birth.
We know that in the division of the Zodiac into 27 Nakshatras,
each Nakshatra is allotted the same space of 13 degrees 20
minutes. However each Nakshatra is allotted a different planet
rulership and the numbers of years are also different as stated
above. It may be pointed out here that though for calculation of

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
the periods, we are considering the progression of Moon in Lunar
Mansions, yet the Dasa for the calculation of the length of a year,
a month or a day is Solar based. That is a year is said to have
been completed when Sun completes 360 degrees i.e. in 365.2422
days from its position at birth. Similarly a month is calculated with
reference to Sun completing 30 degrees and a day is for 1 degree
movement of Sun.
Dasa at Birth
At the time of Birth Moon will be in a particular sign and in a
particular star. Dasa at birth corresponds to the Lord of the star.
For example if a child is bom at a time and date when Moon is
transiting in Bahrani star whose ruler is Venus, we say the child is
bom in Venus Dasa; sometimes called as Maha Dasa.
Dasa Balance at Birth
Total span of a Nakshatra is 13 degrees 20 minutes = 800'
The birth of a child may take place when Moon is in a particular
Nakshatra at a position other than its starting point i.e. some portion
of this total span has already passed. Since Dasa periods are
used for timing events, we need to have a proper idea of the Dasa
period at the specific age of the child at which the event will take
place. Hence we need to calculate the balance period of the Dasa
at birth. It is done as follows:
Let X is the number of minutes that have passed in the Nakshatra
in which Moon is transiting at the time of birth.
Balance span of Nakshatra will be 800' -X = say Y minutes
Planet's Period x Y
Balance period will be =

Chapter 10: Vimsottari Dasa
Let the Nakshatra at Birth be ruled by Venus.
Then Balance Period will be = — x 600
Calculation of Sub-periods
First Sub Period:
It is called Bhukti. Each Dasa period is divided in 9 parts. Each
part is called Bhukti. In Vimsottari Dasa the sequence of periods
and sub-periods is fixed i.e. fromKetu to Mercury as stated earlier.
However, the First sub-period in any period will be the same as
the period itself i.e. if the birth Dasa period is of Jupiter, then the
First sub-period in Jupiter period will be of Jupiter, 2nd that of
Saturn and so on till the last one will be of Rahu. It may be
noted, however, the sub-period in the main-period at the
time of birth will be as per the actual span of the Nakshatra
that has yet to be progressed by Moon.
Allotment of Sub periods of planets in any period is proportional
to the number of years allotted to the planets in Vimsottari Dasa.
Example: Let us say we want to find the period of the sub-period
of Jupiter in Jupiter Dasa i.e. we want to calculate the allotment of
Bhukti period of Jupiter in Jupiter Dasa. It is done as follows:
Bhukti period of Jupiter = — x 16 = 2 yrs 1 month 18 days.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
General formula may be stated as:
A
Bhuktiperiod = xB
Where
A = No of total years allotted to the period lord in
Vimsottari Dasa.
B = No of total years allotted to the sub-period or
Bhukti lord in Vimsottari Dasa.
Suppose we want to calculate the Bhukti period of Sun in Jupiter
Dasa, it will be as follows:
Sun's Bhukti period = — x 6 = 9 months 18 days.
Calculation of Sub-Sub period or Antara Period
Each Sub-period or Bhukti is further divided into 9 parts in
proportion to the number of years allotted to each planet in
Vimsottari Dasa. These parts are called sub-sub periods or Antara
Periods. Antaras like Bhukties follow the same order, i.e. first
Antara of any Bhukti will always be of that Bhukti lord. The general
formula for calculation of Antaras is as follows:
Antara
Period =
Dasa lord yrs x Bhukti lord yrs x Antara lord yrs
For example if we want to calculate Antara period of Moon in the
Dasa of Jupiter and Bhukti of Sun, it will be as follows:

Chapter 10: Vimsottari Dasa
Antara of Moon = yrs = 24 days
Calculation of Sub-Sub-Sub Period or Sookshma
Period
Each Sub-Sub period is further divided into 9 parts according to
the number of years allotted to the planets in Vimsottari Dasa.
This is called Sookshma Periods. Calculation of Sookshma period
is done as follows:
Sookshma Period of a planet Pi x P2 x P3 x P4
in a particular Dasa, Bhukti — —
Antara 120x120x120
Where PI = Main lord (Mahadasa) period yrs
P2 = Sub lord (Bhukti) period yrs
P3 = Sub-Sub lord (Antra) period yrs
P4 = Sub-Sub-Sub lord (Sookshma) period yrs
Suppose we want to calculate the Sookshma period of Moon in
Jupiter Dasa, Sun Bhukti, and Moon Antara. It will be
= yrs
= 2 days.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Application of Vimsottari Dasa Periods
Vimsottari Dasa is representative of the progression of Moon in a
chart, calculated in a specified technique (explained above). The
Ascendant and the planetary positions at the time of Birth in the
chart indicate the quantum and quality of energy apportioned to
the Native and also how he is going to channelise his energy for
outward expression in the material world. The planets co-mling
the Dasa, Bhukti, Antara and Sookshma etc. periods enable the
Astrologer to make prediction about various aspects of the life of
the Native taking into consideration the following:
1 . Potential and Promise of the Ascendant:
It reflects the capacity of the native to enjoy the fruits of the
present and the past karmas. The strength of the Ascendant
puts a limiting action on the strength of other houses. That is
even if the strength of 2nd house is worked out to be very
strong, yet the native may be able to earn wealth to the limit
fixed by the Ascendant However, there are various methods
to determine the strength of the Ascendant.
2. Potential and the promise of the houses under consideration.
3. Potential of the planet significater (Karaka) of the aspect
under consideration.
4. Potential and promise of Dasa periods: There are various
methods followed by Astrologers to determine the strength
of a planet in a particular chart. The Traditionalists mostly
use the following to calculate planetary strengths.
a) Dignity of the planet viz. as per exaltation, debilitation,
own or mooltikona sign;

Chapter 10: Vimsottari Dasa
b) Accidental dignity i.e. disposition of the planet in the
chart from the Ascendant, from its own sign;
placement in friend's sign, combustion, retrogression,
placement of the planet with respect to the house
under consideration, placement of the planet with
respect to Dasa Lord, conjunction, aspects the planet
receives.
c) Shad Bala strengths.
It may be emphasised that each horoscope is
unique. Each planet in a horoscope has a specific
role to play. In a little loose language it can be
said that Sun in A's horoscope is not the same
Sun as in B's horoscope. Therefore, to say that
in the period of Rahu in the sub-period of Mars
the native will lose or gain particular things on
the basis of their planetary positions in the house
may be too far fetched fancy and may even
appear to be contrary to what the native actually
gains or loses. It is, therefore, suggested that
each planet's results should be announced based
on the planet's behavior in the particular chart

Chapter 11:
Traditional Concept of Analysing
Horoscope
Analysing the Horoscope
A horoscope is analysed to determine the following.
1 . What the native is destined for? That is what is promised to
the native for all aspects of human life.
2. Timing the specific events.
This is shown in the following diagram.
Analysis of The Horoscope
r
Timing specific event
Is evert \ No
Vomised?
General Study
Physical & mental characteristics,
health, vitality and vigour, habit Yes
of thinking, success or failure in
attempts, longevity, general,
social, financial, administrative
status.
Money matters, fortune &
favours, capability to express,
vision & right eye, voice &
tongue, nose, teeth, cheeks &
jaws.
Communication, writings,
documents & agreements, corit on next page
Assess the
approximate
time i.e.
D/B/A/S

Chapter 1 1 : Traditional Concept of Analysing Horoscope
courage, fairness, short travel,
accounting, mathematics, telephone,
journalism, change of residence,
contracts.
4. Mother, education, property,
inheritance, vehicle, domestic
environment, rare articles.
5. Progeny, intelligence, sports, game,
fine arts, drawing, creative pursuit,
gambling, lottery, shares.
6. Service, servants, pet animals, loans,
debts, success, disease.
7. Marriage, business partners,
socialization, litigation, opponents,
divorce, reputation & influence in
foreign nations.
8. Mode of death, delays, accidents,
false allegation, unexpected gain/loss,
unearthed money, dejections, sorrow
& strife etc.
9. Fortune, law and justice, father,
higher education, second marriage,
longjoumey.
10. Status and prestige through
profession, honour, dignity and public
esteem, name & fame, authority.
11. Wealth, fortune, influence, society,
accumulation of money, fulfillment of
desires, litigation, speculation.
12. Loss and impediments, research,
foreign travel, investments,
imprisonment, deception, secrecy,
secret enemies.
cont. frcm last page
Fix D/B/A/S
Confirm by
transit of
D/B/A/S,
Sun and Moon
Give
Judgement
End
Fig. 12

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
The principle behind the methodology of analyzing the horoscope
by the Vedic Astrologers appears to be based on the following
universal rules.
1 . "As ye sow so shall ye reap?"
2. If you visit my house, what will you bring forme?
3 . If I visit your house, what will you offer to me?
4. Stress & strains of group dynamics & alliances.
Let us explain these rules in the context of analysing the horoscope.
As ye sow so shall ye reap: or Formation of the Ascendant:
The birth of an individual is believed to be as a result of his past
karmas. The record of past karmas is preserved by the planet
Jupiter & the sign Pisces. Jupiter is called the seed planet of the
physical plane. The moment of birth for an individual is chosen by
the supreme intelligence in accordance with his past kannas to fix:
1 . The Ascendant degree, minute & seconds.
2. The degree, minute & seconds of each cusp
3. The longitude of each planet.
For a birth to take place. Sun, the spark of divine fragrance- the
life force has to reach a particular degree to reflect the spiritual &
hereditary qualities of the individual; Moon has to reach a particular
degree to reflect the psyche of the person; & then corresponding
to these luminaries positions, the Ascendant has to be fonned
under the influence of the Planets controlling hora, tattwa, day,
etc. to indicate the quantum of energy that has been apportioned
to the native. It is the degree of the Ascendant, which is the
keystone of the whole nativity, for in it are, synthesized the whole
of the multifarious elements of the natal chart. It is unique for
each individual.

Chapter 1 1: Traditional Concept of Analysing Horoscope
The potential of Ascendant fixes the limit above which the native
can't rise. The strength of all houses is sub-ordinate to the
strength of the Ascendant. The position of each planet and its
association with houses at the moment of births indicate how the
life pattern of the individual will unfold itself in the external world.
Analyzing a House:
We need to analyse a house to determine the promise of various
significations of that house. It is done using the rules 23,4
enunciated above. It is explained below.
Potential or Strength and Promise of the House: It is indicated
by the following:
a) The sign and star or asterism rising on the house.
b) Planets placed in the house.
c) Planets Aspecting the house.
d) Lord of the house and its strength.
e) Placement of this lord of the house.
f) Planets conjunct or aspecting the house lord.
Points a) to f) correspond to principles 1 to 4. Group dynamics &
alliances may be taken to mean conjunctions, yogas etc. and
aspects.
Why Sun and Moon Ascendants- How rational is this
approach!
Some of the Vedic Astrologers strongly emphasise, that the analysis
of the horoscope for any aspect should also be done from the
Moon and the Sun Ascendants. The Moon and the Sun Ascendants
mean taking the signs occupied by them as Ascendant. Sun is the
spark of divine fragrance- the life force, the vitality. It sends forth

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
the cosmic energy to the surface of Earth, capable of originating
life. The Moon receives these energy impulses from Sun and
transforms them into a medium embryo, which later develops into
the physical body. The moment of birth of an individual is chosen
by the Supreme Intelligence according to the native's past karmas,
of immediate past life or remote past lives. The Sun and the Moon
have, therefore, to occupy a particular position in the Zodiac to
form the Ascendant under the influence of other planets ruling the
hora, the day, the month, the year. The energy content apportioned
to the Ascendant is thus dependant on Sun and Moon. The
Ascendant for example is called deham (the physical vehicle or
the body) and symbolises the state of health of the native which is
also dependant upon the strength of Sun and Moon as reflected
by their Zodiac and house positions.
Other reason for having Sun and Moon as Ascendant is that Sun
represents vitality and constitution; and Moon represents as to
how it functions. Moreover Moon is called the Mind. It is well
known that "Sound mind has a sound body".
Another reason, which appears to be more logical, is as per the
Pre-Natal Epic Theory. According to this theory the position of
Moon and the Ascendant at the time of epic (conception)
interchanges at the time of birth. That is the position of the
Ascendant in the birth chart; in fact reflects the position of Moon
at the time of epic.
One can, to some extent, find some logic to study the strength of
Moon or Sun to determine the state of health of the native, his
individuality, personality and longevity etc. Studying the state of
health for example, from Moon or Sun Ascendants does
not look very rational. Moon and Sun Ascendants will remain
the same in most of the charts for the natives born on that
day. Their study cannot be the study of a particular individual.

Chapter 1 1 : Traditional Concept of Analysing Horoscope
The theory of relative strengths of Ascendants does not equally
justify.
Therefore the analysis of the horoscope should be done only
from the Ascendant. However, the strength of Sun and Moon
may be taken into consideration to determine the general state of
health of the native or those matters which bear strong relationship
to the significations of Sun and Moon.
Timing Specific Event:
It is most difficult and intricate portion of Vedic Astrology.
However, the principle behind the technique used to timing events
can be stated as follows:
It may be remembered that an event happens only if it is promised.
The procedure to check the promise of an aspect of life is explained
above. Apromised event happens only in a particular Dasa, Bhukti,
Antara, Sookshama and Prana. Dasa Lord should be related to
the relevant house to which the event pertains and it should also
be related to the Karaka for the event.
A promised event happens in the Dasa, Bhukti, Antara,
Sookshama, and Prana periods of planets which are responsible
for causing the event, provided their T ransits agree. This statement
has three things:
A. Promise. B. Dasa period and C. Transit.
A. Promise:
Whether an event is promised or not is assessed from the
analysis of the house as explained above.
B. Dasa periods:
What is meant by Dasa periods has been already explained
in the chapter Vimsottari Dasa. How to select the period

True Astrology • "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
for a particular event is a hard nut to crack. The selection of
the Dasa periods is done keeping in mind that
i) Dasa period give results of its own significations, of
the significations of other planets with which it is
related by conjunction or aspect etc. Similarly the
Bhukti and other sub periods should be related to
relevant house and Karaka for the event.
ii) No Bhukti lord can offer the result of an event which
the Dasa lord does not promise. Similarly, no Antara
lord can offer the result of an event which the Bhukti
lord under the direction of Dasa lord is not promising.
C. Transit:
It means the current positions of planets at the time of
happening of the event. Study of Transit of planets forms an
integral part of predictive Astrology whether it is so called
Vedic Astrology or Stellar Astrology or even the Western
Astrology. The Western Astrologers use primary and
secondary directions and the progressed chart. In Vedic
Astrology, there are a number of theories of T ransit. Some
of them are listed below;
1 . T ransit of Planets is examined with respect to the
position of Moon in the Natal chart. Each Planet is
said to provide benefic result when placed in specific
house position from Moon. However these auspicious
results are obstructed under certain conditions i.e. if
another planet is placed in a particular house with
respect to the planet under consideration.This is
called vedha point. This is shown blow:

Chapter 1 1 : Traditional Concept of Analysing Horoscope 1 75
Benefic and Malefic Places
Sun
Auspicious transit places 3
Corresponding Vedha Points 9
Moon
Auspicious transit places 1
Corresponding Vedha Points 5
Mars
Auspicious transit places 3
Corresponding Vedha Points ] 2
Mercury
Auspicious transit places 2
Corresponding Vedha Points 5
Jupiter
Auspicious transit places 2
Corresponding Vedha Points 12
Venus
Auspicious transit places 1
Corresponding Vedha Points 8
Saturn
Auspicious transit places 3
Corresponding Vedha Points 12

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
2. As per Brihat Prashar Hora Shastra and Phal
Deepika, Transit of Planets is also seen from the Natal
Ascendant. The benefic position of planets in transit
from the Natal (Rashi chart) Ascendant is shown
below:
Benefic places from the Natal Ascendant
3. Transit is also studied with respect to Janam
Nakshatra i.e. the Nakshatra occupied by Moon at
birth. Transit over the 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th and 9th
Nakshatras are said to give good results. The transit
over 3rd, 5th and 7th gives bad results while Janam
Nakshatra gives neutral result.
4. T ransit of planets is taken as per their natural strength
as obtained due to their current longitude i.e. in a
sign and in the house in the horoscope.

Chapter 1 1 : Traditional Concept of Analysing Horoscope
5 . Ashtakaverga Theory: It is basically a theory to study
the behaviour of each planet with respect to all other
planets (Excluding Rahu and Ketu) and Ascendant.
Since there are 7 planets and an Ascendant, there
are in all 8 positions. For each planet, a table is
prepared for benefic and malefic points which it
contributes to each sign. Then a consolidated table is
prepared for each sign. If a planet T ransits in a sign
which has more benefic points, it offers good result.
6 . Invariably, the Astrologers consider the T ransit of
Jupiter and Saturn as per their current positions with
respect to the primary house for all events, whether
these planets form part of Dasa periods or not.

Chapter 12:
Analysing the Ascendant
The Ascendant stands for one's Individuality, Personality,
Temperament, Physical structure, State of health. Longevity, name
and fame, virtues, capacity to face struggles of life, direction and
aspects of life in which the native will channelise his energies;
proneness to accidents or untoward happenings. Ascendant, in
other words, reflects the quality and quantum of energy
apportioned to the Native according to which he executes the
Karma or bears the fruits of the Karma. Planets play the role of
actors according to the script written by The Supreme Intelligence
and under the direction of the Divinity within him. The innate quality
of these actors i.e. Planets is defined by their sign positions and
the nature of their role is as per their house position. Study of the
Ascendant, therefore, is the study of the whole Horoscope in
brevity.
Methodology to Analyse Ascendant
The Ascendant like any other house is analysed by studying the
following:
1 . The Sign and Star rising on the Ascendant: Any Sign can
appear on the Ascendant. The general form of the horoscope
will be as follows:

Chapter 12: Analysing the Ascendant
2 . Planets placed in the Ascendant.
3 . Planets Aspecting the Ascendant.
4. Ascendant Lord, and its strength i.e. essential and accidental
dignities, Shadabala strength and Shadvarga strengths etc.
Signification of the Ascendant has, therefore, to be studied as per
the correspondence between the sign appearing on the Ascendant
and the Nature of the 1st House. The 1st House is Positive, Fiery
and Rajasic. It has to be. The incarnated soul in the form of the
human being has to move forward to externalize his innate energies.
Analysing Aries Ascendant:
1. Rising Sign Analysis:
Aries is positive, fiery and Rajasic and as such there is a
perfect correspondence between the nature of the rising
sign and the nature of the house. This results in the
enhancement of the principles of Positivity, Fiery and Rajasic.
The Native of Aries Ascendant, in general, will love to carry
out his outward actions with courage, boldness, optimism,
dare but will have the delusion of individuality, or selfcenteredness, because Aries have the co-ruler ship of Sun
who exalts here. It may give rise to faults as egotism,
arrogance etc.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
If Aries rises on the Ascendant, the 2nd House -The House
of family, wealth, speech, death etc. will rise in Taums, which
is Negative, Earthy and Tamasic sign ruled by Venus and
Moon exalts here. The nature of the sign and its lordship by
Venus does not correspond well with Mars and Sun, thus
the Arians are said to experience problem in expression,
family relations etc. Since the 7th House is also ruled by
Venus and Saturn exalts there; both of whom do not have
natural correspondence or affinity with Mars and Sun, the
Arians will have problems with opposite sex or others i.e.
Partners, Spouse. Mars and Sun loves freedom but Saturn
puts restrictions.
Mars rules eighth House, which is also the ruler of the
Ascendant. Moon gets its debilitation here. The Maraka
houses 2 and 7 are ruled by Venus and Bhadhak Sthana by
Saturn. All these indicate not much longevity for the Arians.
And Mars ruler ship of the 8 House indicates sudden death.
Saturn gets debilitation in Aries. Therefore though outwardly
Arians (because of Sun's and Mars correspondence) look
busy and involved in many activities, but inwardly they can
be lonely, frustrated, depressed and forlorn.
Third House will rise in Gemini - the sign of Cosmic
Distinctiveness, ruled by Mercury - a planet of bipolar
polarity. Mercury indicates indecisiveness - "To be or not
to be". Arians, therefore, at best will be able to take
impulsive decisions.
Sixth house, the house of Sickness, is ruled by Mercury
and Virgo, the negative. Earthy and Sattwic sign rises on
the 6th cusp. Arians, therefore, in general are liable to suffer
from the diseases that pertain to brain, intestines, high fever,
colic, paralysis, inflammatory diseases.

Chapter 12: Analysing the Ascendant
Tenth House is the House of Name and fame, honour,
awards and occupation. It is the Target set for the soul in a
specific birth. Saturn, the Planet of restrain, discipline,
contemplation and the Sign Capricorn, being Negative and
Earthy, is methodic, cautious, practical but also Rajasic. All
these provide a check on the Fiery and Positive elements
of the Arians. Mars, rightly exalts here. Arians will love to
develop their professional activities more pragmatically; they
will look forward to achieve new things cautiously and will
have to put hard labour.
Jupiter mles Ninth and Twelfth Houses. This provides the
Arians opportunities for spiritual attainments, higher learning
and carry out research activities to discover the unknown.
Fourth House, the House of domesticity, is mled by Moon
but Mars gets its debilitation here. This points out to the
fact that Arians will find the house environment in turmoil.
This is how we should analyse the Ascendant characteristics
as per the rising sign. But we know, there are different stars
in the same sign, the characteristics of which are different.
Therefore, we can more specifically list out the general
characteristics of the native if we take into consideration
the rising star at the Ascendant. In case of Aries, the rising
star can be Ashwini, Bhami and the 1 st Pada of Kritika.
Ashwini:
Ruled by Ketu, rising indicates a carefree disposition, very
intelligent, quiet successful, sound financial status, and ability to
achieve success.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Bharni:
Ruled by Venus, rising indicates all sorts of problems to the native
because of others zealous, resentful and antagonistic attitude. The
person's moral is not above reproach.
Kritika:
Ruled by Sun, rising indicates a proud, dignified and honorable
person. He will be ambitious, eager for power, and possesses the
ability to achieve his desires. He has an innate sense of the
importance of his destiny.
2. Influence of Planets in Ascendant -Aries:
A) Sun in Aries Ascendant:
Let us consider how Sun in Aries will influence the
significations of the Ascendant viz the native's
individuality, personality, temperament, health,
longevity, name and fame etc. This can be analysed
as per the following steps.
1 . Sun's own signification of self-centeredness, outward
expression, activity, enthusiasm is enhanced in Aries.
As such it will influence the native's physical and
mental characteristics, mode of expression, selfassertion, ambition with positivity. This may however;
result in excess of fire element which may show into
the native's becoming egoistic arrogant, proud,
profligate tyrannical. The native may suffer health
hazard like magnetics, cerebral hemorrhage, stroke,
fainting, and headaches.
2. Sun as lord of Leo, the positive, fiery and fixed sign
and of fifth house, the house of intellect, creativity,
arts and culture, sports etc. will influence the
signification of the 1st house with the principle of

Chapter 12: Analysing the Ascendant
positivity, royal grandeur, but being the lord of the
fixed sign will make the native more pragmatic,
authoritative. The native may achieve name and fame
as a sports person or as an artist. The native will
possess sharp intellect.
3 . The quantum of influence of Sun on the Ascendant,
however, will be limited by the strengths of the lord
of Ascendant, If Mars, mler of Aries is in debilitation
or afflicted by malefic, then this will reduce the effect
of Sun on the Ascendant. If Mars itself is exalted, it
will make the native extremely bold, a dare devil, but
equally very arrogant. This principle is based on the
analogy that you can receive only as per your own
capacity.
4. The influence of Sun on the Ascendant will also be
conditioned by the planets placed in his own house
and the planets that aspect his house. Let Jupiter, the
lord of 9th and 12“ house occupies Leo, the house
of Sun. It will affect the influence of Sun in the first
house as follows.
a) Being a natural benefic and a planet of
expansion, it will enable Sun to impart more of
magnanimity, generosity, and positive
characteristics to the native.
b) Being lord of the 12th house, Jupiter will spoil
the significations of the 5th house through which
Sun has to influence the significations of the
first house. This may limit the achievement of
the native in the field of arts & culture or sports
activities, or the native may develop interest in
gambling etc.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
i.L
c) Jupiter's aspect on Sun from the 5 house may
force Sun to impart diseases of blood cells,
heart, liver etc, to the native.
Let us consider the case of Saturn in Leo. Saturn, a
natural malefic and a planet of constriction but
calculative and pragmatic will control the assertion,
optimism and activity of native through Sun. Being
lord of 10 and 1 1 , it may enable the native through
Sun to achieve name and fame in the field of sports,
art and culture but with hard labour, patience, and
perseverance and may be even by manipulation or
by unfair means.
it
5. Sun in the first house will aspect the 7 house- the
house of relationships and in general, may cause for
the native's disturbed relationship with spouse or
partner.
B) Venus in Aries Ascendant:
Venus, planet of beauty, compromise-having
sympathy with the emotional and psychic nature finds
itself in a very uncomfortable position in Aries. Being
lord of maraka sthanas, it becomes a death-inflicting
planet. This is an inharmonious relationship. The
person is likely to involve in sexual intrigues, may
squander his money (lord of 2 in detriment), and bring
disgrace to his family. Venus will impel the native to
involve in luxurious living and sexual pleasures. It will,
however, being the lord of a fixed and an airy sign,
and having the mler ship over a fixed and an angular
house will impart in the native the virtue of
pragmatism, and intellectual approach. Venus will give
the native an attractive physical form and artistic

Chapter 12: Analysing the Ascendant
sensitivity. Influence of Venus on Ascendant will,
j
however, be conditioned by the planets placed in 2
and 7 houses over which Venus has the lordship
and also the planets which aspect these houses.
Q Mercury in Aries Ascendant:
Mercury signifies intelligence, reasoning, it is restless,
loves hitch-hiking, it is symbolic of versatility. Mercury
for Aries ascendant is lord of 3ld and 6th house. It
will, therefore, as lord of 3ld house in ascendant will
enhance the native's personal characteristics like
initiative, self-assertion, and confidence to take quick
decisions, make him more argumentative, and enable
him to acquire memory power. But Mercury being
xt xt
lord of 6 placed in 8 house from its own house
calls for difficulties for the native in education, and
health. Mercury controls the earth element and all
the three humours. This may give rise to complicated
health problems related to brain, and nerves. Mercury
from Ascendant will aspect the 7 house may show
up as to get a partner of crooked mind or whose
morality may not be above board. In addition to
above, Mercury's influence will be modified by the
planets placed in 3ld or 6th house and also those who
aspect these houses.
D) Saturn in Aries Ascendant:
Saturn gets its debilitation in Aries. It is a planet, which
is symbolic of pain; sorrow, dogmatism, melancholia
and all the evils of the world accompany its sinister
ghostliness when in Aries. The native, therefore, feels
depressed, fmstrated and gets engaged in deceitful,
mean and sordid acts. Saturn being the lord of the

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
10th and 11 * house will force the native to achieve
status through manipulation and unfair means. He may
keep questionable company and may be dishonored.
From Ascendant Saturn aspects the 3rd, 7th and 1 0*
house. The native will, therefore, have problems with
his younger co-bom or suffer diseases ruled by the
third house. Similarly Saturn's aspect on 7 house
spoils his public image, relations with the spouse,
cause diseases of the 7th house, and involves the
native in sexual intrigues. Aspect on 10th house, as
stated above, will cause for problems in professional
activities but it being Saturn's own house, the native
will surmount the problems but by unfair means and
lot of perseverance. Influence of Saturn on Ascendant
will however stand to modifications due to the planets
placed in 10th and 1 1th houses and also the planets
Aspecting these houses.
E) Jupiter in Aries Ascendant:
The characteristics of Jupiter have perfect
correspondence with the characteristics of the first
house except for the fact that it is Sattwic whereas
the Ascendant is Rajasic. Jupiter in the Aries
Ascendant will make the native generous, graceful
appearance, good-nature, successful in business,
ratherproud, firm, faithful and consistent Jupiter being
lord of 9th and 1 2th house will infuse in the native
love for spiritual attainment and do research to
discover the unknown. However Jupiter's aspect on
5th and the 7th house may cause for multiple romantic
relationships. Jupiter in Aries reinforces the native's
inclination due to Mars and Sun to think of dignified
profession like a judge in the court of law or a dignified

Chapter 12: Analysing the Ascendant
position in Defense department. The net influence of
Jupiter on the Ascendant will depend upon the planets
positioned in the 9 and 12 house and also the
planets that aspect the 9th and 12th house.
F) Moon in Aries Ascendant:
Moon rules over our etheric body and symbolizes
for all our longings, feelings, and sexual and material
needs. It is adaptable and flexible. But Aries is not a
very happy ground for Moon. It may provide him a
good complexion, round face but will make the native
restless, inconsistent in his approach. Moon in this
position may indicate good relation with mother and
the native may possess lands and property. However
Moon's aspect on the 7 house will enhance his
tVi
longing for sexual relationships. Planets in 4 house
or the planets Aspecting 4th house will modify Moon’s
influence on the ascendant.
G) Mars in Aries Ascendant:
For Mars it a very harmonious placement. It provides
the native courage, boldness, freedom, and
independence of action. It makes the native fond of
competition and struggle. The native will be able to
express his best in the world and carve a name for
himself in society. It provides the native not only
strong constitution, high confidence and courageous
disposition with an urge to explore (lord of 8 in 1),
but also makes the native more stubborn, tyrannical
in approach, quarrelsome and prone to blood
diseases and prone to accident. Mars aspect over
fh fU
the 4 is not good for his mother and on 7 not
good for the spouse.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
The native no doubt, will be known for his leadership
but seldom lives for long and meet a sudden death.
3. Influence of Planets Aspecting Ascendant:
Planets influence on a house depends on the following.
1) Natural significations of the planet.
2) Modified signification of the planet as per its Sign
positions in the horoscope and also taking the
influence of aspects
3) Planet drives the signification of the aspected house
through the significations of the houses of its lordship
and the house, which it occupies in the horoscope.
Let us assume Saturn is placed in the 4 house in Cancer
from where it will aspect the Ascendant. It will make the
native depraved and obscene, dull and dejected may cause
for all sorts of delays and disappointments, regarding
acquisition of property.
4. Influence of placement of Ascendant lord in houses:
a) Mars in Second House: Mars placement in Taums,
which rises, as the 2nd house is inharmonious
relationship. The native is always busy in making
money but loses wealth instead of increasing it.
_ vi
However, Mars being lord of 8 house also, the
native gains from legacies, unearned income. From
second house Mars aspect 5th, 8th and 9th house
and the native is deprived of the comforts of the family,
and his own fate. And 9th house being 8th to 2nd
indicates that the native have to face financial crisis,
may be due to the extra marital relationships, or for
higher studies or on his father's wealth & status, or
on long journeys.

Chapter 12: Analysing the Ascendant
b) Mars in 3rd House: Gemini, the sign rising on the
3ld cusp is airy and Sattwic. When Mars is placed
here, it gives direction to the native's life. 3ld house is
the house of courage, confidence. Lagan lord in this
house makes the native a dare-devil, self reliant. From
here Mars aspects 6,9 and 10th houses. Thus with
his own efforts the native obtains professional
excellence, may develop contacts with unknown
persons, may deal in export.
c) Mars in 4 House - Cancer: Mars placement in a
watery and negative sign is not harmonious. It may
cause for ill affects on mother's health and longevity.
Being lord of 8 house, the native may gain valuable
assets, property through inheritance, but cause for
troubled relations with mother. Its aspect on 7* house
from here indicates that the native is liable to get into
problem due to his sexual relationships. Mars aspect
on 10th and 11th may provide the native a sudden
rise in his profession but he becomes extravagant
also.
d) Mars in 5th House -Leo: Mars finds in Leo a very
friendly house. Mars here will arouse native's interests
in sports, in technology, nuclear power etc. His
placement here, however, is not considered to good
for Progeny. His aspect on 8th, 11* and 12th house
cause for the native's committing to unsocial acts,
rapes, secret activities etc.
e) Mars in 6th House - Virgo: Sixth house is the house
of difficulties, oppositions, litigations, debts and
sickness. Lagan lord Mars placement in this house is

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
indicative of the native's subjecting himself to diseases,
oppositions, litigations, accidents (also lord of 8th
house), on account of his ruthless ambition & selfassertion. But Virgo makes him judicious,
discriminative, and pragmatic under the impact of
Virgo's Guna. The native invariably comes out
successful against all confrontations. Mars placement
in the Sixth house may also force the native to make
abode in far off places because of its aspect on 9th
and 12th house.
th
f) Mars in 7 House - Libra: It is the house of social
relationships and spouse. Mars placement in Libra,
a positive, airy and Rajasic sign provides him the
impetuous to involve him more and more in sexual
relationships and thereby spoil bis spouse's peace of
mind, health and even longevity. From here Mars
aspects 10th, 1 st and 2nd house which indicates that
the native through his own initiative, courage and
boldness will attain professional and financial status.
th
g) Mars in 8 House - Scorpio: More than any
house, the study of the 8th house is most paradoxical.lt
is a house of unexpected gains or losses; longevity or
death; a house which puts an end to higher studies
and yet it is a store house of mystical and occult
th
knowledge. What the lagan lord placed in 8 house
will get? Life or Death; gain of wealth or loss of
wealth; unearth hidden treasures of knowledge, or
face impediments in higher study. Let us see what
Mars gets as lord of Aries and also as lord of Scorpio,
t\\ fU
the 8 house when he is in 8 house. Scorpio is
known to be a violent sign; it is negative, watery and
fixed. Mars here, though in his own house, yet finds

Chapter 12: Analysing the Ascendant
the environment charged with the principles of
negativity, fixidity and watery. He can, therefore, at
best display his negative qualities. Negative in the
sense that they are contrary to what for he is known
to be as lord of Aries. His outward expressions, selfassertion, enthusiasm, are put to a check and he
displays more of pragmatism, love for the old, mystical
knowledge, rather than love for the future. His
activities are more emotional than logical. He may
get unexpected wealth; attain knowledge of occult
sciences; gain through legacies. He also gains in
longevity but his death will be sudden.
til
h) Mars in 9 House - Sagittarius: Sagittarius being
a positive and fiery sign provides impetuous to Mars
to make long journeys, jump into spiritual
exploration, to take up higher studies and then acquire
the status of a learned and Wiseman. Mars aspect's
on 4th house, 3 rd house and the 12th house indicate
that he will have to sacrifice his personal conveniences
to achieve success in his higher learning. This also
indicates that native may settle abroad.
i) Mars in 10 House - Capricorn: Capricorn is a
negative and Earthy sign mled by Saturn and strangely
Mars exalts here. Tenth House is a Rajasic house
and the house where the incarnated soul is to achieve
the Target set for the Native. Mars under the
Saturnian's influence of discipline, contemplation,
pragmatism has to labour hard to achieve excellence
in profession. Mars in 10th house makes the native
to display his leadership quality by reaching a dignified
position in his profession.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
j) Mars in 11* House - Aquarius: Aquarius being a
positive sign but ruled by Saturn - the planet of
restraint and caution. Mars here is active but
i.L
calculative. His aspect on 6 house indicates that by
his efforts he will create his enemies and thus social
hostility against him will be present. More over being
Ascendant lord. Mars getting itself associated with
the house of sickness will cause health problems,
which may even result in some surgery(Lord of 8
also). Mars placement in 1 1th house is good for his
professional career.
k) Mars in 12* House - Pisces: Mars in Pisces feels
restless in body and soul; thinks the pleasures of life
as wasted. May seek solace in foreign land. 12
house being 8 to 5 is not good for progeny; and
6th to 7th house indicates deficiency in sex
performance. Mars aspects on 7 house further
heighten this aspect which may cause for the spouse's
dissatisfaction or separation.
Art of Synthesis:
If more than one planet is placed in the Ascendant or more than
one planet aspects the Ascendant, each planet will influence the
significations of the Ascendant in its own particular way. The
common characteristics influenced by all will get prominence.
However during the Dasa periods of a planet, its influence will be
more powerful than others.
Analysing Libra Ascendant
General characteristics of the Native: Libra is positive, airy and
sattwic. Saturn exalts here, Sun gets its debilitation and Mars finds

Chapter 1 2: Analysing the Ascendant
it as its determent. Being Positive, Airy and Sattwic, the native's
outward expression, activity will be through lawful means and his
approach will be more intellectual, discriminative. Debilitation of
Sun and exaltation of Saturn in this sign reflects that the native will
be subjective to contradictory thoughts and actions. Sun loves
action and Saturn stability, contemplation. Mars finding it as its
detriment cause for disturbed relationship with spouse and family
members because Mars rales over 2nd and 7th houses. This also
indicates sexual perversion, emotional instability and disorganized
approach to life. He may develop friendship with well placed
persons because Sun mles the 1 l^house. Sun's debilitation and
Mars detriment may cause for diseases relating to kidneys, urinary
tract infection, left arm, left ear etc. Saturn rules the 4th and the
5th house and as it gets its exaltation in this sign, the native may
like to develop his personality through the significations of those
houses. He will thus have a strong desire for artistic achievement
but does not have the vitality and stamina to actualize it.
Libra rising provides the native attractive appearance, long face,
lean and thin body because Venus mles the sign and Saturn exalts
here. He will get easily irritated, socially unbalanced and extravagant
due to the negative influence of Sun and Mars who rale 2nd, 7th
and 11th houses.
i.L
Since Saturn rules the 4 house and Mercury the Karka of
Education rales the 9th and 12th house, the native may achieve
excellence in his educational pursuits because of Saturn's
methodical and dexterous approach and Mercury's versatility.
Moon rales the 10th house and it gets exaltation in the 8th house
ruled by lagan lord Venus. The native may love to concentrate his
professional avtivities in the areas indicated by the planet Moon
it
and 8 house mled by Venus viz. milk and food products,
petrochemicals, professor in chemistry, electronics, fine-arts,
veterinary surgeon etc.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Moon's exaltation in 8 house is indicative of long life. Death may
be due to failure of functional parts.
Influence of Planets in Libra Ascendant
A) Sun: It is the source of inspiration and vitality and finds
itself debilitated. It will only shape the individual's character
with predominance of selfishness, self-opinion, and selfcentemess, insatiable lust for money and personal gain. The
native will feel frustrated through the loss of his own vitality.
From here Sun aspects the 7 house Aries where it gets
the exaltation. Though debilitated in ascendant, yet this
position promises the native the opportunities to have sexual
pleasure. It is another matter that his perversion may cause
problems in his marital relations. The influence of Sun in
ascendant, however, stands to modification by the planets
placed in 11th house (Leo) or expecting 1 1th house.
B) Moon: It is said; that Moon's placement contributes to the
native's personality, intelligence and beauty but provides a
frail constitution and probability of a phlegm disease. The
native is amiable in disposition and sweet in social
interaction. For Libra ascendant, Moon is lord of 10 and
will enable the native to attain status and honour through his
profession or government. The native generally does praise
worthy deeds, and has high ideas in his mind. Gets influence
in the house of wife.
C) Mars: In Libra Mars finds itself in a little uncomfortable
position. Its natural boldness and dash only provides the
native an insatiable lust and he wastes his wealth to satisfy it
through illegal activities. The native may lose respect and
his relationship with his wife stands to be disturbed. Being
lord of 2nd house, the house of family, Mars is in 12th to its

Chapter 12: Analysing the Ascendant
own house. This indicates strained relations with family
members.
Contrary to the above analysis, we may say that Mars being
lord of 2 and 7 will offer the native honour and status through
his family, wealth and spouse. This would have been the
case if Mars were not in Libra. Here he finds himself
incapacitated to earn any status. It can at best make the
native involved in several intrigues, quarrels and lose
domestic happiness. Influence of Saturn on Mars can further
accentrate his negative capabilities.
D) Mercury: It symbolizes intelligence; reason and versatility
and being lord of 9 and 12 for Libra ascendant will provide
the native opportunities to excel in intellectual pursuits and
research oriented activities, or make him skillful in export
business. He will however, be extravagant and may face
financial exercises due to lordship of 9th & 12th house.
Influence of Jupiter may increase his intellectual capabilities
but make him also more susceptible to diseases.
E) Venus: A planet of artistic beauty, delicacy, diplomacy and
here being in its own house will provide the native a regal
appearance. He will lead a luxurious life and will attain
powerful status in society. But being lord of 8 house; it
may force the native to involve himself in unsocial activities.
Influence of Jupiter may add to his status but the native may
suffer from kidney or liver problems.
F) Jupiter: It is symbolic of confidence, hope, success and a
status seaker. Being lord of 3ld and 6th it will provide the
native the necessary strength and initiative to attain high status
in society but through hard labour. He will face opposition
even litigations. His health may suffer due to problems like

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
diabeties, blindness etc. Influence of Mars on Jupiter may
cause for further health problems
G) Saturn: In Libra, Saturn the planet of restrain, introspection,
introversion, humility, and for whom knowledge is its main
concern gets exaltation. Also being lord of 4th & 5th, Saturn
bestows honor, power, and high status through the
significations of the 4 and 5 house. In spite of all his
social status, the native suffers loneliness and may have
unsocial romantic affairs and suffer humiliation and loss of
prestige at some time, (Saturn being lord of 5th house which
xl xl
is 8 to the 10 house-the house of prestige.)
H) Rahu: Some persons think Rahu in ascendant makes the
native to indulge in mean or perverse acts and to associate
with undesirable characters. Others feel that Rahu represents
the planet who rules the sign in which Rahu is placed. As
such Rahu should provide, infact, more than what Venus is
to provide to the native.
I) Ketu: In general, Ketu enables the native to achieve his
goals through some secretive devices and his selfishness.
Note:
The procedure to analyse the characteristics of an Ascendant and
its modification by a planet placed in the Ascendant has been
explained in detail in the above two examples. The following
Paragraphs only provide the analysis of other Ascendants in brief.
The effect of planets on each Ascendant can be done as explained
earlier.
Characteristics of Taurus Ascendant:
Taurus is negative, earthy and tamasic sign. It is ruled by Venus
and Moon exalts here. It operates under the cosmic rule of stability.

Chapter 12: Analysing the Ascendant
the virtue of which is reliability. With positive potential or benefic
influences, such people tend to be conciliator and have the delusion
that corresponds to staticism - the belief that things are best as
they are and progress, intellectual or material, is unnecessary and
undesirable. They are adverse to change. With negative potential
or malefic influences, the person shows rigidity, stubbornness
tyranny and indecisiveness. The approach of the individual towards
life will thus be conditioned by the principle of negativity, earthiness,
and tamasicness.
Taurus people will generally have small thick neck, plump thighs,
well-built muscular body, broad shoulders and a pleasing face.
They are usually artistic in nature and amiable by temperament.
They love peace but may become ferocious if provoked. Taurus
people are in general laborious, over cautious, pragmatic and
possess business skill and musical talent.
Characteristics of Gemini Ascendant:
Being airy, positive, sattawic, it operates under the law of cosmic
distinctiveness and inculcates in the native love of detail, virtue of
knowledge of differences, the principle of appreciating interrelationship. Native's actions originate more in thought than feeling.
The native tries to blend head and heart through perception,
foresight and artistic ability. He loves travels, sporting with the
opposite sex.
He is flexible and adaptable. His success in life depends upon
intuitively understanding other people's thoughts and emotions.
The native is usually tall, lean and thin with beautiful eyes and
sharp nose. Venus has specified affinity for Gemini ascendant and
being lord of 12 in 1, provides the native opportunity to earn
overseas; he will have romantic affairs, love for art and culture.
But being of dual nature, he will lack consistency. Mars, Sun,

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Jupiter, in general produce adverse results. Saturn occupying
ascendant may cause family problems and respiratory troubles.
Characteristics of Cancer Ascendant:
Being negative and watery sign, it exhibits a very inharmonious
relationship when it rises in the first house; Cancer ascendant people
lack the fire and zeal of Arians (Mars gets its debilitation) and
operate more at the imaginative level. He looks for his success to
others. There always appears to be an inherent contradiction in
his approach to life. The native will exhibit a certain amount of
timidity, reserve and mistrust. The virtues of this sign are economy,
respectivity and sincerity. As Saturn, the planet of restriction rales
the 7th house it calls for all sorts of marital problems; he often
surrenders himself to the partner either in emotional excitation or
through some kind of infatuation. Cancer bom is generally shy,
unable to express bis feeling and thoughts.
The native is generally of medium height, a thick neck and pleasing
appearance.
Characteristics of Leo Ascendant:
It is ruled by royal planet Sun and Leo being positive and fiery
provides the native self-assertion, courage, enthusiasm, and proud
disposition. There is naturally an inherent magnificence in real
greatness. The human virtue is magnanimity. There is suddenness
in his actions. He loves to lead than to serve. The delusion is
pretence, or the belief that the outward show constitutes real
grandeur. This may give rise to faults as vain glory, vulgar
pretentiousness if the potential is negative or malefic influences
are there.
Leo native has a broad face with strong bones, beautiful and
expressive eyes. He is a sincere friend but as Saturn finds this sign
as its determinent, to some Leo native appears to be ungrateful

Chapter 12: Analysing the Ascendant
and a person too self centered & capricious. As Saturn rales the
6 and 7 house, compatibility with the partners becomes difficult
and the native may suffer from some chronic disease. Mars in
ascendant helps the native to acquire property, and Sun makes
the native invincible enduring and victorious over his enemies. Moon
being lord of 12th in ascendant may cause unbalance of the mind,
make the native extravagant and may force him to settle abroad.
Mercury provides him the sharpness of intellect but Venus in
ascendant may produce contradictions, but the native may become
manipulative and selfish.
Characteristics of Virgo Ascendant:
Virgo is negative, earthy and mutable sign that operates on the
principle of correspondence and perfection. When it rises at the
ascendant, it asks the native to strive for perfection through the
intense activity in the realm of intellect and psychic
consiousness.There is great sensitivity, self-pity, and versatility.
The native is capable of interpreting the thoughts of others. He is
easily frustrated and his passionate nature often leads to serious
psychological complications. Due to his pragnmatic, cautious and
intellectual approach, he is well suited for business pursuits.
Virgo provides the native young appearance, straight nose, quiet
voice, and a tall slender body.
Sun in ascendant may make the native secretive. He may desire
to concentrate his activities at a far off place from house. Moon in
ascendant is good for wealth. Mercury in Virgo ascendant ushers
in essentially a soul with matured levels of consciousness. Venus
in ascendant provides health, amiable disposition. Mars in
ascendant, being the lord of 8 house, heralds warning of some
impending danger but being lord of 3 rd house provides the native
confidence, boldness and courage to explore and discover new
theories. Jupiter in Virgo, being lord of the 4 and 7 house

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
provides him a happy environment, protection and stability. Saturn's
presence in ascendant causes the native to feel suffocated,
miserable and suffer from blood pressure problems and mental
t\\ fU
constrains (lord of 5 & 6 house in ascendant).
Characteristics of Scorpio Ascendant:
Scorpio is negative, watery and tamasic and is known to be fierce
and violent sign where the negative aspects of Mars are prominent.
The native loves to take law into his own hands. His life in general
tends to be a bag of mixed achievement and frustration. The native
has profound belief in self-training and self-discipline. If the native
utilizes his energies properly it could lead him to a tremendous
unfoldment of psychic powers. Its delusion is that of despotism,
and from this arises the fault of rebelliousness. Venus ruling the 7th
and the 12th house signifies secret alliances, secret pangs and
sufferings. Scorpio being the lord of the 8 house in the natural
zodiac indicates native to become drag addict, or involve in unsocial
activities. The person becomes his own enemy.
Scorpio provides the native well-proportioned body, stature above
average, commanding apperance, short and curly hair and good
^ til
personality. Sun in Scorpio ascendant being lord of 10 may
enable the person to achieve success in his professional pursuits
especially as a doctor, a defense personal or a builder.
Moon in Scorpio ascendant may create insatiable sexual passion
and the native often indulges in extra marital relationships.
Mercury being lord of 8th and 1 1th may in ascendant provide him
sharp intellect, which may be used to gain from unlawful activities.
Venus may provide gains from overseas. Mars occupying its own
house may cause health hazards but provide him enough stamina
to overcome adversaries. Jupiter in Scorpio ascendant being lord
of 2 and 5 make the native religious, wealthy and healthy. Saturn

Chapter 12: Analysing the Ascendant
in Scoipio ascendant may give rise to throat problems and cause
for disturbance in married life.
Characteristics of Sagittarius Ascendant:
Sagittarius the sign of cosmic progress ruled by Jupiter, where it
rises at the ascendant it provides the native enthusism, initiativeness,
enbiprise, adaptability, unquenchable desire for freedom and
profound love for knowledge and learning. The native possesses
open-minded, honest, sympathetic and generous disposition. Mars
rating the 5th and 12th house is symbolic of his often reckless,
extravagant and careless nature. With the negative potential he is
thoughtless, erratic, rebellious but with the positive potential he is
philosophical, a lover of law and order, peaceful and more intutive
than initiative. Due to Sagittarius correspondence of fiery element
and positivity principle with the ascendant the native may possess
impulsive and headstrong tendencies and brain & nervous
disorders.
Sagittarius rising gives a well -composed body, rather long nose,
tall stature, bright eyes and charming appearance.
Sun in ascendant enhances the native's egoistic, tendencies makes
him foresight and courageous but also arrogant. Moon, though
lord of 8, in ascendant adds charm to his personality, but make
him indecisive. He may suffer from phelgm, high cholesterol and
eruption of boils. Venus in ascendant makes the native to earn
respect in society. Mars in ascendant develops love for sports,
arts & culture and overseas travel. Saturn in ascendant being lord
J J
of 2 and 3 enables the native to earn wealth but may detach
himself from family. Jupiter being the lord of ascendant and 4
house in ascendant makes the native learned. His soul is highly
developed, his actions are righteous, may be a saint among the
people.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Characteristics of Capricorn Ascendant:
Capricorn is negative and earthy. Saturn rales over it and Mars
exalts here. It shows a unique combination of courage, boldness,
and pragmatic approach. It is the sign which when rises in ascendant
indicates that the native's outward expression will bring name and
fame but with bold and laborious means. The native is enthusiastic,
cautious, persevering but prone to melancholia. He is outspoken,
suspicious, and egoistical. He is revengeful and hard-headed in
his social relationships. His approach is pragmatic and outlook
totally materialistic. His yardstick of success is wealth, popularity
and social status. Mercury being the ruler of 9 house may make
the native look for spiritual attainment. Moon ruling the 7th house
further intensifies materialistic tendencies. Venus being the ruler of
5th and 10th house indicates that the native will possess artistic
talents and enjoy the company of dignified people especially if
Venus is in Ascendant. Saturn rising in the ascendant gives natural
disposition leading to enlightenment. The native becomes totally
concerned about the quality of his thinking and how it affects others.
Characteristics of Aquarius Ascendant:
Aquarius, a positive, airy and fixed sign rising on the ascendant
denotes a refined, sympathetic, sincere, aesthetic, persistent,
reliable but stubborn disposition. He has an imposing personality,
though he may lack in physical beauty. Turmoil in one's life is
immensely increased (Saturn rules 12th house also) and the native
becomes ruthless in achieving his task. He has no love for traditional
values.
Aquarius gives tall, full figure, oval face and often defects in teeth.
Sun ruling the 7th house in ascendant cause for loss of self-respect
and the native may engage in mean and ignoble profession. He
behaves in the most atrocious manner. Venus on the other hand

Chapter 1 2: Analysing the Ascendant
makes the native attractive but licentious in relationships. Jupiter
makes the native earn wealth and live a religious life. Saturn in
Ascendant makes the native powerful and a leader. Mercury
provides sharp intellect, which the native may use for unsocial
acts (Mercury lord of 5 and 8). Moon's placement in Ascendant
being lord of 6 may cause health hazards. Mars in ascendant
being mler of 10th and 3rd house provides the native with boldness
and courage to achieve status through writing, journalism, and
military powers but being a natural antagonistic to Saturn may
cause for mental turmoil and psychological tension.
Characteristics of Pisces Ascendant:
Pisces being negative, watery and mutable when it rises in the
Ascendant only inculcates the characteristics of sociability,
sentimentality, sympathy, perception, intuition and adaptability. The
native is restless, anxious and impressionable. He is always tom
between two different emotions. He is kind and jist, but tends to
encourage the romantic and sentimental side of nature. He is inclined
to be secretive and is very receptive.
Pisces is of short stature, plumpy, muscular and spherical shoulders,
big and protmding eyes.
Sun being lord of 6 in Ascendant may make the native suffer
through his own relations. Moon in Ascendant provides an
auspicious influence. Mercury in Ascendant gives skills in crafts.
Venus in Ascendant gets its exaltation and thus provides the Native
with inner glow, Vitality and maturity and love for opposite sex.
Mars in Ascendant being lord of 2 and 9 enables the native to
earn from exports, but may develop extra marital relations. Jupiter
in Ascendant provides the native regality in appearance; makes
him exceptionally learned and wise. Saturn in Ascendant introduces
an element of fmstration. He may show tendencies for spiritual
attainments but for personal gain only.

Chapter 13:
Analysing Sixth House -Diseases
The main significations of the sixth house are:
Difficulties, enemies, employment and service, separation from
partner, pet animals, maternal relatives, loans, debts and sickness.
We will limit our analysis of the sixth house to the aspect of
Sickness.
Theories of Diseases and Astrology
1. Theory of Elements:
Our body is composed of five elements viz. Fire, Earth,
Air, Water and Ether (sometimes called Akash). For nonnal
health, these elements are in defined proportion called
equilibrium. Whenever this equilibrium is disturbed due to
excess or deficiency of an element, the health of a person
suffers. In other words, we can say the person is subjected
to disease, the nature of which will be corresponding to the
nature of element responsible for disturbing the equilibrium.
When the element earth is disturbed it results in causing
disease of flesh, skin, joints, and hairs.
The excited element water brings about disorders in blood,
urine, perspiration, semen and saliva.
Disturbance to the element fire upsets lungs, thirst, sleep
and the general constitution of the body.

Chapter 1 3: Analysing Sixth House - Diseases
Disturbance of Air element brings about difficulties in the
movements of the limbs.
Loss of equilibrium due to ether causes anger, sexuality,
fear, and signs of old age.
In Astrology, each sign, each house and each planet
corresponds to a particular element. The placement of a
planet in a sign and in a house in the horoscope indicates
whether the planet has acquired excess or deficiency in the
element that it represents. The planets, the signs and the
house and the element they represent are indicated below:
Nature of diseases will thus be determined by the planet or planets
causing disturbance in the equilibrium of a particular element. And
the part of the body where the disease will appear will correspond
to the house which receives the reaction of the planet or planets
causing the disturbance in the equilibrium.
2. The Three Humour Theory:
Our body is composed of three humours called vata (Wind),
Pita (Bile) and Kapha (Phlegm). For normal health, these
humours have to be in a particular state of equilibrium. Any
Excess or deficiency of a humour causes disease
corresponding to the nature of the humour disturbing the
equilibrium. These humours are spread out in the entire body,
however they have specific region where the influence is
more prominent.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Vata has a role below naval.
Pita rules the portion between the heart and the naval.
Kapha reigns the breasts and the lungs.
Corresponding to this theory of Three Humours, we know in
astrology that planets, signs and houses are divided under the law
of mode of action or gunas as Rajasic, Tamasic, and Sattwic. The
planets and the nature of humour they control are indicated below:
Humour
Vata (Wind)
Pita (Bile)
Kapha (phelgm)
Controlling Planets
Moon, Mercury, Venus, Saturn
Sun, Mars, (Sat, Jupiter, Mercury)
Jupiter, (Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun)
Nature of the disease and the parts of the body affected will be
indicated by the planets and the houses they affect while causing
disturbance in any humour. Planets shown in brackets are
secondary planets to cause diseases.
Traditional Concept of Analysing Disease
In T raditional Astrology the nature of the disease and the part of
the body affected is analysed as follows:
1. The Sign and the Asterism (Nakshatra) rising on the
Ascendant; the strength of Moon and Sun.
2. Planets deposited in the 6th house.
3. Afflictions or we may say the strength of the lord of 6
house.
4. Afflictions or the strength of the Ascendant.
5. Planets aspecting the planets posited in the 6 house.

Chapter 13: Analysing Sixth House - Diseases
6. Planets and Houses aspected by the lord of 6 house.
7. House or Houses afflicted by malefics (Mars, Sat, Rahu,
Ketu or functional malefic).
Some Astrologers emphasise that the nature of the disease
and the part of the body is also indicated by the affliction of
the sign by natural or functional malefic. Functional malefics
are the lords of 6th , 8th and 12th houses in the chart.I think
it is not rational. The zodiacal degrees only modify the
behaviour of the planets according to their nature. The effect
of the sign is, therefore, reflected through planets and the
houses which are concrete expressions of the mundane or
the physical body. A malefic like Rahu or Saturn will remain
in a sign for a pretty long period. It will mean that all the
persons born when these planets occupy a particular sign
to suffer the same disease. It is far from truth.
We will explain the use of the above method to analyse a few
charts for specific diseases.
Example 1: Heart disease or T.B of lungs. Refer the chart of
Fig. 13

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Step I:
The state of health of the native is studied from
a) The strength of the Ascendant, the planets Sun and Moon.
b) The strength of the lord of the Ascendant.
Here Virgo rises in the Ascendant and Mercury is its lord.
The Strength of the Ascendant:
No planet is placed in the Ascendant and no planet is aspecting
the Ascendant. Thus the Ascendant itself is free from any affliction.
The Strength of Sun:
Sun in this chart has acquired the lordship of the 12thhousc-the
house of self-undoing, hospitalization. It is no doubt placed in the
Trikona house 5 but in conjunction with the planet Ketu and
thus in opposition to Rahu. These nodes are known to cause serious
health hazards. Sun is, therefore, said to be afflicted and the native
will have constitutional health problems.
The Strength of Moon:
Moon in this chart is lord of 11th house which, in fact, is the house
we take to indicate recovery from sickness being 12th to 12th
house. But see the group Moon has joined and the alliances it has
formed. Moon is in 8 house (the house of serious sickness,
danger, death) and that too along with the lord of the 8 Mars. T o
add fuel to the fire. Moon gets the malefic influence of its alliance
with Saturn and Rahu. Saturn by its aspect and Rahu by occupying
Moon's house have severely afflicted Moon. The native's health
has therefore to suffer due to the weakness of the functional parts
of the body.

Chapter 13: Analysing Sixth House - Diseases
Step II:
Lord of the Ascendant Mercury is placed in a Kendra house
conjoined with the benefic Jupiter, but Venus is afflicting it because
it has acquired the maleficience of Saturn who has occupied
Venus's house. Moreover, Mercury is being aspected by Saturn,
whose maleficience nature has been enhanced by the aspect of
8 lord Mars and its own house being occupied by Sun- the lord
of 12th and Ketu.
Lord of the Ascendant Mercury has acquired enough malificience
to disturb the health of the native. Mercury, we know rales the
Earth element and all the three humours.
Step III:
The houses to be taken for heart disease are 4 & 5. Sun is the
Karka for heart disease.
til
Here the 4 house is severely afflicted by
i) The aspect of Saturn.
ii) By the placement of Venus whose house is occupied by
Saturn and aspected by Mars.
Fifth House and Sun, the karka for heart disease is under the
influence of Rahu and Ketu. Ra'mi's malificience gets enhanced
due to its depositor Moon occupying 8 house along with Mars.
Step IV:
Lord of 4 house is afflicted by Saturn's aspect and lord of 5
house Saturn is afflicted by aspect of Mars.
Above analysis clearly justifies that the patient may have Heart
Problem orT.B. of lungs.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Example 2: Analysis of the chart of a diabetic patient.
The main symptoms of diabetes are Polyurea i.e. excess of thirst
and polyphagia i.e. excess of appetite.
This disease is caused due to the malfunctioning of the endocrine
gland called pancreas. In astrology, the affliction of Jupiter, Venus
and Moon, along with the affliction of 6* house and its lord causes
this disease. Let us analyse the chart of Fig. 14.
Step I:
Ascendant is afflicted due to Rahu and Ketu.
Sun has acquired the malificience of Mars who occupies its house.
Mar's malificience stands enhanced due to the aspect of Saturn
who is lord of 8th also.
Moon is afflicted by both Mars and Saturn.
All this indicates the state of poor health of the native who is
expected to suffer diseases related to constitution as well as
functional parts.
Step II:
Lord of the ascendant Mercury is afflicted by Sun whose own
fh
house is occupied by Mars the lord of the 6 house. Ascendant it
self is under the influence of Ketu and Rahu.

Chapter 13: Analysing Sixth House - Diseases
Step III:
Jupiter occupies the 6th house. Jupiter is receiving the enhanced
malefic influence being aspected by Mars and Saturn and its own
house is occupied by Rahu.
Step IV:
Venus has acquired the lordship of 12 house - the house of
hospitalization and self-undoing. The 12th house i.e. the house of
Venus is aspected by afflicted Jupiter.
Step V:
6* house itself is afflicted by the aspects of Mars and Saturn.
tVi
Lord of 6 house Mars is severely afflicted by Saturn, the lord of
8th house (the house of serious sickness)
We may therefore, safely justify the native's sufferings through
diabetes.
Example 3: Analysing a chart for Impotence:
Male Impotence is a consistent inability to sustain an erection
sufficient for sexual intercourse with his partner. It is also called
erectile dysfunction (ED).
Sexual dysfunction is often associated with disorders such as
diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, nervous system
disorders, and depression. Erectile dysfunction may also be an
unwanted side effect from medication. In some men, sexual
dysfunction may be the symptom of such disorders that brings
them to the doctor's clinic.
Premature ejaculation is often confused with erectile dysfunction.
Premature ejaculation is a condition in which the entire process of
arousal, erection, ejaculation, and climax occur very rapidly, often

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
in just a few minutes or even seconds, leaving the partner
unsatisfied. Premature ejaculation may accompany an erection
problem such as ED but is generally treated differently.
For a man to have an erection, a complex process takes place
within the body.
Erection involves the central nervous system, peripheral nervous
system, psychological and stress-related factors, local problems
with the erection bodies or penis itself as well as hormonal and
vascular (blood flow or circulation) factors. The penile portion of
the process leading to erections represents only a single component
of a very complicated and complex process.
Sexual stimulation causes the release of chemicals from the nerve
endings in the penis that trigger a series of events that ultimately
cause muscle relaxation in the erection bodies of the penis. The
smooth muscle in the erection bodies controls the flow of blood
into the penis. When the smooth muscle relaxes, the blood flow
dramatically increases, and the erection bodies become full and
rigid, resulting in an erection. Venous drainage channels are
compressed and close off as the erection bodies enlarge.
Detumescence (when the penis is no longer in a state of erection)
results when muscle-relaxing chemicals are no longer released.
Ejaculation causes the smooth muscle tissue of the erection bodies
in the penis to regain muscle tone, which allows the venous drainage
channels to open and the blood drains from the penis.
In Astrology the disease of impotency is caused by an exclusive
influence of important planets on three factors denoting the semen
tVi fU
viz. the 7 house, the lord of the 7 house and the karaka planet
Venus. Mercury which rules the nervous system and Mars which
rules over blood also play significant role.

Chapter 13: Analysing Sixth House - Diseases
Impotence means the inability to perform sex act, while sterility is
inability to produce. Venus and Mars rale the sex life. 7th house is
the house of sexual relationships. Mercury and Saturn are the
planets that cause impotence if they afflict Venus, Mars and the
7 house. Let us examine the chart of Fiu. 15.
Fig 15
Step I:
Ascendant is Sagittarius and its lord is Jupiter. The Ascendant is
free from any serious affliction except that Saturn aspects it.
Moon has acquired the lordship of the 8 house and is afflicted
by Rahu and Ketu. Moreover its depositor has gone to 12th house
where he is joined by the lord of 6 house Venus.
Sun: There is no apparent affliction to Sun, except for the fact
that it is in the sign whose lord is Saturn. Sun's own house is
aspected by Jupiter, whose house is occupied by Saturn.
This reflects that the native is likely to suffer health hazards relating
to functional parts.
Step II:
Lord of the Ascendant Jupiter is in the 3ld house and is afflicted
due to the enhanced malefic aspect of Mars conjunct lord of 6th
house Venus, and its own house being occupied by Saturn.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Step III:
tTi
Mercury lord of the 7 house is conjoined with Sun in Capricorn.
Venus, the lord of the 6th house, and karaka for the sex life is
placed in the 12th house and has also acquired the malificience of
Rahu who has occupied his house.
Step IV:
7th house is afflicted due to the aspect of Mars, which translates
malefic influence of Venus also.
All this justify native's impotence.
Let us examine the case of Fig 15 A of a person who suffered
from this disease.
Fig 15
Here we notice that Venus is the lord of the Ascendant whose
house is occupied by Rahu. Venus it self is afflicted by Saturn and
by Ketu.
Seventh house is afflicted by Saturn and Ketu. Mars is lord of the
7 house. Mars own house is occupied by lord of the 8 house.
The Planet Mercury is also afflicted by the aspect of Mars. Mars
also occupies mercury's sign Gemini.

Chapter 13: Analysing Sixth House - Diseases
The Planet Sun which represents vitality is also debilitated.
Thus we find that all the three factors are severely afflicted and
justify the disease of the native.
Example 4: Analysing skin disease-leucoderma:
This disease is basically due to loss of pigmentation cells of the
skin. There are numerous theories as to what could cause this
disease, of which three have been widely accepted.
The first theory is one of mistaken identity. The immune system
mistakes the pigment cells for foreign bodies and destroys them.
The second theory states that certain chemical agents destroy the
pigment generating cells, while the third theory states that the cells
are destroyed due to chemical exposure.
Some believe that it is a hereditary disease but the question has
not been answered yet.
In Astrology Planets Venus, Saturn and Mercury and the houses
6th, 4th, 8th, and 12th play significant role in causing this disease
under severe afflictions. Let us analyse the chart of a native who is
suffering from this disease. Refer fig 16
Fig. 16

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Step Is
Ascendant is afflicted due its occupation by Sun the lord of 6
and whose own house is occupied by Mars and Ketu. Sun's house
is also aspected by Venus, the lord of 8 and conjoined with
Rahu. Therefore, Sun has acquired an enhanced malificience power.
J
Ascendant is also afflicted due to Saturn 3 aspect, whose own
malificience is enhanced because it is lord of 12th and its house is
occupied by Venus, lord of 8th and also the malefic Rahu.
Sun: It has acquired the lordship of the 6 house. It is severely
afflicted as stated above.
Moon: It is placed in the 9 house but is debilitated. It is also
aspected by Mars from the 6th house. Mars itself is afflicted due
it
to the aspect of Venus from the 12 house.
The native, therefore, has to suffer health hazards of constitution
and functional parts.
Step II:
Ascendant lord Jupiter is afflicted due to its placement in the house
of sickness along with Mars & Ketu. It is also under severe
affliction from Venus.
Step III:
Both Venus and Mercury are under severe affliction as stated
above.
Step IV:
Both the 8 house (due to aspect of Saturn) and 12 house are
severely afflicted.

Chapter 13: Analysing Sixth House - Diseases
The above analysis, therefore, justify the native's suffering from
leucoderma.
Example 5: Analysis of Rheumatic diseases:
Rheumatic diseases refer to the conditions affecting the joints,
bones, muscles and skin that cause one or more of the following
symptoms: inflammation, stiffness, weakness, loss of mobility and
defonnity.
These diseases are caused by the deficiency of the humour vata
(wind) in the body. This humour is controlled by the planets Moon,
Mercury, Venus, and Saturn. The affliction caused to these planets
and their association with lagna, lagna lord, 6th house and 6
lord.
Fig- 17
Step I:
Ascendant is afflicted due to the aspect of Mars who is conjoined
with Venus lord of the 8 . Mars own house 9 is also under the
influence of Rahu and Ketu. Mars is also aspected by Saturn lord
of 12th, Saturn's own malefic influence is further enhanced.
Jupiter's aspect over lagna is also not providing much assistance
til
by Jup's conjunction with Venus who is lord of 8 .
Sun: It has acquired the lordship of the house of sickness. It is
afflictedby Saturn, the lord of the 12*. Even Mercury has acquired

True Astrology • "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
the malefic nature because its house is occupied by Mars.
Moon: Though placed in the 11th house, is severely afflicted by
the aspect of Mercury, Saturn, and Sun.
The native, therefore, has to face health hazards.
Step II:
Ascendant lord Jupiter is afflicted by Mars and Venus.
Step III:
The planet Moon, Venus, Mercury and Saturn all are afflicted and
thus will cause forthe deficiency of the humour vata (wind)
Step IV:
J X.U
The airy houses, viz 3 are afflicted by Rahu, 7 by Mars and
Venus, and the 1 1th by Saturn and Sun.
All this indicates that the native has to suffer diseases due to the
deficiency of the element air and the humour Vata (wind). The
native thus had severe Rheumatic attack.
Example 6: Cancer Cases:
Cancer is a class of diseases characterized by out-of-controlcell
growth. There are over 100 different types of cancer, and each is
classified by the type of cell that is initially affected.
Cancer harms the body when damaged cells divide uncontrollably
to form lumps or masses of tissue called tumors (except in the
case of leukemia where cancer prohibits normal blood function
by abnormal cell division in the blood stream). Tumors can grow
and interfere with the digestive, nervous, and circulatory systems
and they can release hormones that alter body function. T umors

Chapter 13: Analysing Sixth House - Diseases
that stay in one spot and demonstrate limited growth are generally
considered to be benign.
More dangerous, or malignant, tumors fonn when two things occur
A cancerous cell manages to move throughout the body using the
blood or lymph systems, destroying healthy tissue in a process
called invasion that cell manages to divide and grow, making new
blood vessels to feed itself in a process called angiogenesis.
When a tumor successfully spreads to other parts of the body and
grows, invading and destroying other healthy tissues, it is said to
have metastasized. This process itself is called metastasis, and the
result is a serious condition that is very difficult to treat.
Symptoms of cancer:
Cancer symptoms are quite varied and depend on where the
cancer is located, where it has spread, and how big the tumor is.
Some cancers can be felt or seen through the skin - a lump on the
breast or testicle can be an indicator of cancer in those locations.
Skin cancer (melanoma) is often noted by a change in a wart or
mole on the skin. Some oral cancers present white patches inside
the mouth or white spots on the tongue.
Other cancers have symptoms that are less physically apparent.
Some brain tumors tend to present symptoms early in the disease
as they affect important cognitive functions. Pancreas cancers are
usually too small to cause symptoms until they cause pain by
pushing against nearby nerves or interfere with liver function to
cause a yellowing of the skin and eyes called jaundice. Symptoms
also can be created as a tumor grows and pushes against organs
and blood vessels. For example, colon cancers lead to symptoms
such as constipation, diarrhea, and changes in stool size. Bladder
or prostate cancers cause changes in bladder function such as
more frequent or infrequent urination.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Classification of Cancer
There are five broad groups that are used to classify cancer.
Carcinomas are characterized by cells that cover internal and
external parts of the body such as lung, breast, and colon cancer.
Sarcomas are characterized by cells that are located in bone,
cartilage, fat, connective tissue, muscle, and other supportive
tissues.
Lymphomas are cancers that begin in the lymph nodes and immune
system tissues.
Leukemias are cancers that begin in the bone marrow and often
accumulate in the bloodstream.
Adenomas are cancel's that arise in the thyroid, the pituitary gland,
the adrenal gland, and other glandular tissues.
Cancers are often referred to by terms that contain a prefix related
to the cell type in which the cancer originated and a suffix such as
-sarcoma, -carcinoma, or just -oma. Common prefixes include:
AdenoChondroErythroHemangioHepatoLipoLymphoMelanoMyeloMyoOsteo-
= gland
= cartilage
= red blood cell
= blood vessels
= liver
= fat
= white blood cell
= pigment cell
= bone marrow
= muscle
= bone

Chapter 13: Analysing Sixth House - Diseases
Uro- = bladder
Retino- = eye
Neuro- = brain
In Astrology cancer is generated in the body when 1st /6th /8 th
lords makes any relationship with Mars, Rahu and Saturn. The
role of various planets in producing cancer in the body is as follows:
Sun Head (brain), bone, stomach, eyes
Moon Blood, breast, lungs, and heart
Mars Blood, sex organs, uterus, waist, muscles
Mercury Mouth, naval region
Jupiter liver, tongue, spleen, thigh
Venus Sex organs, prostrate glands, kidney, throat
Saturn Teeth, legs, hands.
Let us discuss the chart of a person who suffered from Brain
Cancer. Refer Fig 18
Fig 18
Here the Ascendant is occupied by Ketu who is aspected by
Saturn and Mars. Mars is also in association with Rahu and thus
transales its influence also on the Ascendant. Ketu is known to
generate mysterious diseases in the body. Ascendant lord Venus

True Astrology - " Basic and Traditional Concepts"
is aspected by the lord of the 8 house Jupiter and Asc is being
aspected by Saturn. Thus we notice that the Ascendant and its
lord is severely afflicted which account for the disease of brain
cancer.
Let us discuss the case of a lady who had to undergo right Radical
Mastectomy (surgery) for breast cancer. Refer Fi 2 1 9.
Overview of Breast Cancer
Breast cancer is also known as 'Carcinoma of the breast'. It
indicates a malignant growth starting in the breast tissue that can
spread to lymph nodes, bones and other parts of the body. There
are many types of breast cancers, those that form in the milk glands,
in the ducts that carry milk, in the fatty area or in the connective
tissue of the breast.
Symptoms of Breast Cancer
Knowing the signs of the cancer can help in early detection and
treatment to save life. Some of the potential breast cancer
symptoms include:
Lump or thickening in the breast or armpit - usually painless, firm
to hard and usually with irregular borders

Chapter 13: Analysing Sixth House - Diseases
A change in the size or shape of the breast abnormal nipple
discharge, usually bloody or clear-to-yellow or green fluid which
may look like pus (purulent)
Any flattening or indentation of the skin over your breast
Retraction, enlargement, or itching of nipple
Breast pain, enlargement, or discomfort on one side only
Symptoms of advanced disease are bone pain, weight loss, swelling
of one arm, and skin ulceration.
In Astrology we say that Lords of Lagna and 6 in the 10
house aspected by Mars or Saturn predispose one to cancer
of the breast. Moon's affliction in the sign Cancer is another
factor which may cause the disease of breast cancer.If Moon
til
is lord of the 6 house and is afflicted by planets like Saturn,
J
Mars, Rahu and Ketu and also connects the houses 3 and
til
4 , the disease of breast cancer is indicated.
Ketu rules over the cells and tissues and give rise to the
disease of cancer. Rahu is known to cause morbid and erratic
til
growth and if it afflicts Moon, the 4 house or its lord it can
cause the breast cancer.
In Fig 19 Moon is the lord of the 8 house and is afflicted by
Rahu. Venus lord of the 6th house also aspects Moon.
12th lord Mars occupies the 4th house and afflicts the lord of the
fh
Ascendant who is placed in the 10 house. Mars own house is
also occupied by lord of the 6th house Venus and Ketu. Ascendant
it self is occupied by Saturn.
Thus we notice that Moon the karaka for breasts, 4 house and
its lord are severely afflicted. This caused the native to suffer this
disease.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Example 7: Liver, Pancreas and Gallbladder Diseases:
The liver is the largest glandular organ of the body. It weighs about
3 lb (1.36 kg). It is reddish brown in color and is divided into four
lobes of unequal size and shape. The liver lies on the right side of
the abdominal cavity beneath the diaphragm. Blood is carried to
the liver via two large vessels called the hepatic artery and the
portal vein. The heptic artery carries oxygen-rich blood from the
aorta (a major vessel in the heart). The portal vein carries blood
containing digested food from the small intestine. These blood
vessels subdivide in the liver repeatedly, terminating in very small
capillaries. Each capillary leads to a lobule. Liver tissue is
composed of thousands of lobules, and each lobule is made up of
hepatic cells, the basic metabolic cells of the liver.
Function of Liver:
The liver has many functions. Some of the functions are: to produce
substances that break down fats, convert glucose to glycogen,
produce urea (the main substance of urine), make certain amino
acids (the building blocks of proteins), filter harmful substances
from the blood (such as alcohol), storage of vitamins and minerals
(vitamins A, D, K and B 12) and maintain a proper level or glucose
in the blood. The liver is also responsible for producing cholesterol.
It produces about 80% of the cholesterol in your body.
Diseases of Liver:
Several diseases states can affect the liver. Some of the diseases
are Wilson's disease, hepatitis (an inflammation of the liver), liver
cancer, and cirrhosis (a chronic inflammation that progresses
ultimately to organ failure). Alcohol alters the metabolism of the
liver, which can have overall detrimental effects if alcohol is taken
over long periods of time.

Chapter 13: Analysing Sixth House - Diseases
Hemochromatosis can cause liver problems.
The Pancreas: Anatomy and Functions
Anatomy of the pancreas:
The pancreas is an elongated, tapered organ located across the
back of the abdomen, behind the stomach. The right side of the
organ (called the head) is the widest part of the organ and lies in
the curve of the duodenum (the first section of the small intestine).
The tapered left side extends slightly upward (called the body of
the pancreas) and ends near the spleen (called the tail).
The pancreas is made up of two types of tissue:
• Exocrine tissue:
The exocrine tissue secretes digestive enzymes. These
enzymes are secreted into a network of ducts that join the
main pancreatic duct, which runs the length of the pancreas.
• Endocrine tissue:
The endocrine tissue, which consists of the islets of
Langerhans, secretes honnones into the bloodstream.
Functions of the pancreas:
The pancreas has digestive and honnonal functions:
• The enzymes secreted by the exocrine tissue in the pancreas
help break down carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and acids
in the duodenum. These enzymes travel down the pancreatic
duct into the bile duct in an inactive form. When they enter
the duodenum, they are activated. The exocrine tissue also
secretes bicarbonate to neutralize stomach acid in the
duodenum.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
The hormones secreted by the endocrine tissue in the
pancreas are insulin and glucagon (which regulate the level
of glucose in the blood), and somatostatin (which prevents
the release of the other two hormones).
Gallbladder:
The gallbladder is located in the abdomen, on the right side,
underneath the liver. The gallbladder stores bile produced by the
liver and delivers it to the first part of the small intestine (duodenum),
where it aids in the digestion of fat.
Astrological Factors for Liver, Pancreas and Gallbladder Diseases:
Cirrosis of Liver:
Jupiter is considered to be karaka for liver. When there is a weak
Lagna or badly aspected Lagna with severe affliction of Jupiter
anywhere in the horoscope, the person is likely to suffer from liver
disease. In addition if the 5th house or its lord is also afflicted it
may cause Liver disease. Influence of Saturn on Jupiter causes
the hypo function of the liver. If Jupiter and Saturn are in the 5
house in a horoscope and if they are afflicted by malefic planets
then it causes severe damage to liver. If Jupiter and Saturn are in
association anywhere in the horoscope there will be improper
functioning of the liver throughout life. But in case Jupiter and
Saturn are associated in the 5th house, there will be slow growing
severe chronic liver disease leading to hepatic coma and death of
the person.
Let us consider the horoscope of a person who suffered from
Cirrosis of Liver which proved fatal. Refer Fig 20.

Chapter 1 3: Analysing Sixth House - Diseases
Fig 20
We may note that the Ascendant is afflicted by the occupation of
Saturn and Rahu. Moon the karaka for functional diseases is
aspected by Venus who is the lord of the 12th house and occupies
til til
8 house. Venus is also receiving the aspect of Mars (lord of 6 ).
Jupiter the karaka for liver is afflicted by Mercury who is the lord
til
of the 8 house. Mercury's own house is occupied by the lord of
the 12th house.Jupiter is also the lord of the 5th house who is
occupied by Mars.
All these factors justify the nature of the disease which the native
suffered from.
Diseases of Pancreas: Malfunctioning of Pancreas result in
diabetes or hypoglycemia. Some general diseases of the Pancreas
may include benign tumours, cancer, cystic fibrosis and pancreatitis.
Jupiter and Virgo rales the Pancreas. Virgo rales the breaking
down, organizing and analyzing processes that take place in the
body. In the Pancreas there is breaking down regarding the
carbohydrate metabolism. Pancreas is concerned, with the release
of pancreatic juices that will digest all kinds of food. Internal
secretions from Pancreas also include the hormones insulin and
gycogon, both of which play a vital role in carbohydrate
metabolism.

True Astrology- "Basicand Traditional Concepts"
Thus, if, in a horoscope the Ascendant is afflicted along with the
affliction of Jupiter^* house or Virgo especially by Saturn which
causes hypo function then the native is likely to suffer from the
diseases of the Pancreas. We have already discussed in example!
the case of a person who suffered from diabetes.
Gallbladder Disease: The main diseases that arise due to the
malfunctioning of the gallbladder are gall stones, blockage of bile
ducts leading to jaundiced etc. Gallstones fonn when the liquid
bile hardens and changes to hard pieces of stone-like material
which then can block the common bile duct causing symptoms
such as nausea and vomiting, or what is often called a gallbladder
attack. Saturn rules crystallization and constriction. When
Saturn is in Cancer or Capricorn one has a sluggish gallbladder
function with poor bile consistency. Some say that if the Lagna
Lord and Mars are posited together in 6th /8th /1 2th houses, one
may suffer from rheumatism and gall bladder stones.
Example: Paralysis Diseases:
Paralysis is the complete failure of muscle function for one or more
muscle groups. Paralysis can cause loss of emotion or loss of
mobility in the affected area.
Paralysis is most often caused by injury to the nervous system or
brain, especially the spinal cord. Most important causes are stroke,
trauma, poliomyelitis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS),
botulism, spina bifida, multiple sclerosis, and Guillain-Barre
syndrome. Poisons that get in the way with nerve function, such
as curare, can also cause paralysis. Many causes of this are varied,
and could also be unidentified.
Paralysis may be localized, or generalized, or it may follow a certain
instance. For instance, localized paralysis occurs in Bell's palsy
where one side of the face may be paralyzed due to inflammation

Chapter 13: Analysing Sixth House - Diseases
of the facial nerve on that side. Patients with stroke may be weak
all over their body (global paralysis) or have hemiplegia (weakness
on one side of the body) or other patterns of paralysis depending
on the area of injury in the brain.
Astrological Factors:
Paralysis is basically is caused by the obstruction of blood
circulation in the affected area. The obstruction of arteries or blood
vessels is caused by their constriction which may be due to
inflammation or crystallization of the flowing material or formation
of clots.
Saturn rules over crstallisation and shrinkage. Sun and Mars rules
over inflammation.Mercury rules the nervous system. Thus if the
Ascendant or its lord is afflicted by Saturn, Mercury or Mars
especially f rom the 6 or the 8 house then the native may suffer
from paralysis.
Fig 21 is the chart of a person who suffered from paralysis of right
side after meeting with an accident. Here we find that the Karaka
Planet Mercury is associated with the lord of the 6th house who is
Sun and is known to cause inflammation. Since both Mercury and
Sun are placed in the 9th house they will affect the hips and legs.
tV\
Mars the lord of the 9 house is placed in its sign of debilitation

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts”
and as such renders the 9 house weak. Mars is heavily afflicted
by Saturn and Rahu. It is said that Saturn and Ketu association
causes seious windy imbalance. The Planet Saturn cause the hypo
function of the parts or organs represented by the sign in which it
is placed.Ketu rales the tissues and cells.Thus we find that the
parts represented by Capricorn are also affected. 10 lord Jupiter
is placed in the 12th house and is aspected by debilitated Mars.
All these clearly point out the reasons for the disease of paralysis.

Chapter 14
Analysing the Seventh House
Marriage
Seventh house stands for partners and associates whose interests
are blended with those oTthe native whether in love or hate. It is
known as “Kalatra Sathanam” -the place of spouse, sexual union,
semen, genitals and secret pleasures arising from sexual union. It
also signifies, trade, private business, social relationships,
international relationships, break in journey, marriage, divorce.
We will limit our discussion to the analysis of the 7 house to the
delineation of the nativity with respect to his marriage and married
life.
Indians regarded marriage in the ancient past as a sacred institution,
which provides legal, moral and social sanctity to the native to
enjoy sexual pleasures. The purpose, of course, was procreation.
With the crumbling of the moral values, marriage today is regarded
by many as if it is nothing more than legalized prostitution.
Marriage, in fact, has different connotations in different societies
in the world. People enjoy sexual pleasures living under the same
roof with mutual consent and even produce a child, yet they are
not ready to use the word marriage to describe their relationship.
Such questions pose serious problems to the Astrologer when he
is asked upon to analyse the horoscope to answer a volley of
questions by the native or his/her parents.
The Astrologer analyses the horoscope for the aspect of marriage
to look for answers for the two most important questions.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
1 . Is the native promised marriage?
2. When the marriage will take place, if it is promised.
There is, of course, along list of supplementary questions relating
to marriage viz.
A . Will it be love or arranged marriage?
B. Will there be delay and impediments in marriage?
C . What will be the physical and mental characteristics of the
partner?
D. What will be the financial status and career profile of the
partner?
E. Will the partner enjoy long and healthy life?
F. From which direction and locality the partner will come?
G What will be the quality and longevity of Married Life?
H. Is there any chance of separation or second marriage?
I. Is the partner capable to perform sexual act?
J. Is the partner capable to procreate?
Method of Analysis of Horoscope for Marriage
The following procedure should be followed in analyzing the
horoscope f or any aspect or ev ent. /
1 . Decide the houses that will take part in the happening of the
event.
2. Analyse the strength of these houses especially the primary
house, (say 7 for marriage) as follows:
L The signs/stars rising on the houses.
iL Planets placed in the houses.

Chapter 14: Analysing the Seventh House - Marriage 233
iii, Planets aspecting the houses.
3. Analyse the strength of the lord of the primary house and
the other relevant houses.
4. Analyse the strength of the Karka planets for the event.
5. Analyse the strength of Dasa periods .
Houses that need to be analysed For Marriage:
til
Generally the Vedic Astrologers consider the 7 house as the
primary house for marriage. The other relevant houses are taken
as:
Second House: It is the house of family. Marriage is taken as an
addition in the family. Here I would like to suggest the readers to
ponder a hole bit. The marriage may be an addition in the family if
the marriage partner joins the family. Moreover, the 2nd house is,
til
infact, a house of danger, death to the 7 house.
Fifth House: It is the house of magnetic attractions, socially
accepted forms of courtship, Romantic affairs and Progeny.
Eleventh House: It is the house of fulfillment of one's desires
til
and personal needs. It is also the fifth house from the 7 House.
Twelth House: It is considered as the house of pleasures of bed.
How far we need to take 12th house to analyse marriage is a
question for debate. One can enjoy bed comforts outside wedlock.
This house is the house of self-undoing and is generally regarded
as a house of loss.
Fourth House: No doubt it is considered as the house of domestic
happiness but why should it need to take part in enacting marriage
is questionable. This house being 12*10 the 5th house can detail
for disturbed married life.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Promise or Denial of Marriage
Books on Astrology are rampant with specific yogas or
combinations of planets that if present in a horoscope promise or
denies marriage. Applications of yogas are more often than not
misleading. You may find horoscopes where these combinations
are present and the experience show contrary results. Some
Astrologers, however, boastfully claim to hit lucky shots. The
til
promise or denial should be judged from the strength of the 7
house and its lord. One may use the strength of the Karka planets
as a supporting factor.
Marriage is said to be promised if
a. The Ascendent or its lord establishes a relationship with
houses 2 or 5 or 7 or 11 or their lords.
til
b. The 7 house or its lord establishes a relationship with
houses 2 or 5 or 7 or 11 or their lords.
c. Jupiter, Venus or Moon establishes a relationship with
houses 2 or 5 or 7 or 11 or their lords.
Relationship is said to be established either through placement of
lords of the houses or by their aspects on relevant houses. For
example, if the Ascendant or the 7 lord is placed in 2 or 5 or 7
or 1 1 or in Kendra or Trikona from these houses, or these lords
aspects the houses 2 or 5 or 7 or 1 1 , we will say that these lords
have established relationship with the concerned house.
Marriage Promised but Delayed: Marriage comes off late due
to the following reasons:
1 . Lord of 7th house is weak or placed in the house 4, or 6, or
th
10 (i.e. in the 12 house to the relevant house) or 12 or
conjunct with these lords.
2. 7th house itself is afflicted by lords of 6 or 12, or malefics.

Chapter 1 4: Analysing the Seventh House - Marriage
3. Lord of the 7th house is aspected by lord of 6 or 12.
4. If Saturn is placed in 1, 3, 5, 7 or 10 counted from
Ascendent or Moon.
5. If Moon and Saturn conjoin especially in 1, 2or 11.
6. If Venus is afflicted especially by Mars in 5, 7 or 9.
7. If Venus and Lord of 7 are aspected by Saturn.
8. If Jupiter is placed in a Kendra or square to Moon and
Venus.
Note: Absence of above indicates Marriage at Normal age.
Let us analyse the following charts to find out
1) whether marriage is promised or not;
2) if marriage is promised, will it come off early or late?
Example: Fig 14.1
This is the chart of a native who married at the age of 25 years.
Let us see the Promise of Marriage.
1. Ascendant Lord Mars is placed in the 5th house along with
Moon.
2. Mars aspects the 11 111 house.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
3 . Mars is receiving the aspect of Jupiter.
4. Venus, the lord of 7th house is placed in a Kendra from 7th
house.
This clearly indicates that marriage is promised.
Reason for marriage at normal age can be listed below:
1. Ascendant lord is placed in 5 house in conjunction with
til
lord of 6 house Mercury & Jupiter aspects it.
2. Saturn lord of 1 1 aspects V enus.
The effect of Mercury lord of 6 and Saturn could cause only delay
to the extent that marriage has not taken place in the teen age.
Example 2: Fig. 14.2
The native of this chart married at the age 29 years.
Promise of marriage: Lord of Ascendant is placed in Kendra to
Lord of 7 Venus, and Jupiter lord of 2 & 5.1t is also in Kendra
with lord of 1 1 Mercury.
Lord of 7 Venus is in conjunction with Jupiter the lord of 2 and 5,
and also with lord of 1 1 Mercury
This clearly indicates marriage is promised.

Chapter 14: Analysing the Seventh House - Marriage 237
Reasons for delayed marriage can be listed below:
1 . Lord of 7 Venus is conjunct with Mercury who is also lord
ih
of 8 house, which is occupied by Saturn.
2. Moon is afflicted due to Saturn's aspect.
3 . Jupiter is placed in a Kendra to Venus.
4. Venus and Jupiter are both conjunct with Sun, lord of 10
i.e. lord of 12th house to the 1 1th house.
tV\
5. Moon is under the aspect of lord of 4 Saturn from the 8
house.
Happy or Unhappy married life:
It is analysed by studying the influences to which the 7th house
and its lord are subjected to in a horoscope. In addition to this,
the influences on Moon, Venus and Mars need special attention.
Moon is the seat of desire, panting, longing, craving and lust; it is
flirtation. Venus is a selfless lover and on the negative side, it is in
its nature to undergo prostitution, incest, and homosexuality. Mars
is the seat of burning desires and of strong sexual feelings and
rules over the instincts. When these planets form relationships in
signs or houses, which heighten these desires, the native will involve
in sexual intrigues.
Married life will be happy if:
1 . 7th house is free from the influence of lords of 4, 6, 10, 12
tYi
that is none of these lords is placed in the 7 house or none
til
of these lords aspect the 7 house.
til
2. Lord of 7 is free from the influence of the lords of 4, 6,
10,1 2* houses

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
3. Lord of 7th house is not placed in 4 or 6 or 10 or 12 houses.
4. 7th house and its lord are free from Saturn's influence. It is
said; Saturn remains a sinister & monster at heart. Its lechery
and lust are completely sickening.
5 . There should be mutually good relationship between Moon,
Venus, Mars, and Saturn.
6 . Lagana and its lord should be free from the negatively excited
Mars or Saturn or any planet for which the first house is the
house of debilitation or detriment. All planets are said to
aspect the diametrically opposite house i.e. 7th house from
the house they occupy. Being debilitated or in detriment
they cause perversion in the native and disturbs the 7 house
significations.
Marriage life will be unhappy if:
1 . 7 house is under the malefic influence of lords of 4, 6, 10,
2. Lord of 7 house is under the malefic influence of lords of
3. Lord of 7th house is placed in 2, 4, 6, 10, 12.
4. Saturn or Mars afflicts Lord of 7 house.
5. Moon, Venus, Mars and Saturn form unhealthy or malefic
relationship amongst themselves or with respect to 7th house
and its lord. It is believed that the conjunction of Moon and
Venus is not conducive to happy married life. This is
probably due to the fact that Moon is lord of the 4 house
in the natural zodiac and its conjunction with Venus being
the lord of 2 and 7 in the natural zodiac is equivalent to the
influence of the 4th house ( 12th to the 5th house) on lord of

Chapter 14: Analysing the Seventh House - Marriage 239
7th as well as the chief governor of sexual life. It is, however,
suggested that we should not jump to the conclusion that
this combination if present in the horoscope will cause for
disturbed marriage. If this combination is present in
4,6,10,12 house, there can be some reason to believe that
this may amount to disturbance in married life. We should
be sure that Moon or Venus has acquired enough
maleficience in the horoscope to provide their negative
characteristics.
6. Ascendant lord should not fonn very strong relationship
with 4th,6th, 10th, 12th house.
Extra-marital relationships or plurality of sexual
relationship
Will a person involve in sexual intrigues or sexual relationships
with persons other than his or her legally or socially accepted
partner can be judged from the analysis of the Ascendant and the
7* house as follows:
1 . Ascendant indicates the mental set-up of the native. If planets
that are negatively excited influence Ascendant, they will
force the native to involve in unsocial acts. If these planets
simultaneously form relationship with the 7* house or the
9* house ( 9th being the 3 rd from 7* house is the house of
multiplications of 7* house signification) the person will
involve in sexual intrigues.In general, when planets in
Ascendant are not finding the sign rising on the Ascendant
to be in accordance with their positive attributes, they will
by their aspect on the 7* house cause for disturbed married
life. Sun and Mars in Aries cause for sexual intrigues because
of their acquiring mone'man normal passion or sexual instincts.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Similarly, if the Ascendant lord is under the influence of Mars,
Saturn or negatively excited Moon or Venus, and it
establishes a link with 7th or 9* house the native may involve
in extra- marital relationships. The influence is more
pronounced if the Ascendant lord is placed in Ist or 5* or
7* house.
2. 7* house is the house of sexual relationships. If this house
or its lord is afflicted and establishes relationship with 9*
house, it indicates plurality of sexual relationship.
Physical and Mental characteristics of the
Partner
Taking the 7* house as the Ascendant of the partner will indicate
these. The characteristics will depend upon the following:
1 . The sign/star rising on the 7* house.
2. Planets placed in the seventh house.
3. Planets Aspecting the seventh house.
4. Seventh lord and its strength.
Profession and Financial Status of the Partner
Profession is indicated by the 10th house, and the financial status
by the 2 house. However the potential of any house is limited by
the potential of the Ascendant. Therefore, to assess profession of
the partner we have to analyse 4* house (10* from 7*) and 8*
house (2nd to 7*) in consonance with the 7* house.

Chapter 14: Analysing the Seventh House - Marriage 241
Age difference between the Partners
This is studied through the influence of planets on 7* house and
its lord. Saturn's influence is indicative of elderly partner, or a
partner who looks elder than his/her age. Jupiter, Sun, Venus,
denote proper age difference. Moon, Mars, and Mercury indicate
young partners i.e. age difference may be small. However, it should
be remembered that the planet's own nature is itself conditioned
by the sign in which it is placed. Mars, for example, in Saturn's
sign may cause for more age difference.
Direction and locality of the Partner
Each planet, each house and each sign has been assigned the ruler
ship over a direction. To determine the direction of the partner
means the direction of the birthplace of the partner with respect to
the place of birth of the native. Locality means the living place of
the partner with respect to the living place of the native. Direction
is determined by the placement and influence of the lord of the 7*
house on other houses and their lords. For example if the lord of
the 7* house establishes linkage with 10th house the partner may
be from South direction; with Ascendant East; with 3 may be
North-East; with 5* may be North-West etc. Locality of the
partner should strictly be judged from the placement of 10th lord
because 10th is fourth from the 7th. If the 10th lord is placed in 4*
or establishes a strong relationship with the 4* lord, the partner
may be from the same locality or town; with 9* house, the partner
may be firoma far-offplace; 12th house, the partner may be f rom
overseas, 2nd house, the partner may be from the family.

242 True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Nature of Marriage
How the marriage will take place is indicated by the planet and its
houses of lordship that maintains a strong connection with 7*
house. It is indicated below:
Lord of Nature of Marriage
House
Ist By self-efforts or with an associate.
1 IInd With the efforts of the family members or with a family
member.

Chapter 14: Analysing the Seventh House - Marriage 243
General influence of planets in seventh house on Marriage
The following paragraphs describe the influence of planets on
marriage and married life when placed in 7* house. It may
however be kept in mind that each planet's influence stands to
modification as per the sign/star rising on the 7* house and also
by aspects of other planets.
Sun:
It indicates that the partner will be of independent, proud,
ambitious; generous and honorable disposition, if Sun is not afflicted.
Afflicted Sun on the other hand may find the partner arrogant,
dominating, selfish and extravagant.
Moon:
Moon's placement in the 7* house represents the inconsistent,
sensitive, impressionable nature of the partner. It is difficult to trust
the partner. Moon is flirtation, eroticism and if afflicted may indicate
immoral partner.
Mars:
It is considered to be a very inharmonious position. It not only
spoils the signification of the 7* house by its placement but also
the Ascendant and second house through its aspect. 2 house
and Ascendant are the 7* and 8* house for the 7* house. The
partner, therefore gets boldness and courage to involve in sexual
intrigues or unsocial acts. It is also not good for the health and
longevity of the partner.
Mercury:
It indicates a partner with sharp intellect but Mercury being bipolar in nature it poses problems of understanding. Afflicted
Mercury often results in verbal quarrels.

True Astrology- "Basicand Traditional Concepts"
Jupiter:
It is a planet of plurality. From 7* house it aspects the Ascendant
& the 11th house and thus causes for plurality of sexual
relationships. Jupiter in 7* house is symbolic of a generous,
optimistic, healthy partner.
Saturn:
Like Mars, Saturn's position in the 7* house is seen as a signal of
danger, divorce, separation, impotence, sexual perversions, etc.
It gives rise to misconceptions in relations.
Venus:
It is symbolic of too much passion and its affliction can cause for
immorality of the partner. Venus, however, indicates that the partner
will be beautiful, a lover of peace and of artistic talents.
Rahu:
Its behaviour is, in general, like that of Saturn. It may cause for
plurality of sexual relationships, separation or divorce, out of caste
marriage, with low caste people. The actual behaviour of Rahu
should however be analysed as per the planet it represents in the
horoscope.
Ketu:
Its behaviour is, in general, like that of Mars. It, therefore,
symbolizes sexual intrigues an unconventional marriage. However,
its true influence should be judged as per the nature of the planet
it represents in the horoscope.

Chapter 14: Analysing the Seventh House - Marriage 245
General Influence of Lord of Seventh in Other
Houses
The following paragraphs describe the general influence of the
placement of lord of 7* house in other houses. The true influence
will however depend on the sign/star rising on that house and also
other planets influence on lord of 7* house.
1st House: It indicates the partner will dominate the native because
from here the 7* lord aspects its own house and thus the 7*
house gains in strength. Depending upon the nature of the lord of
7* and the sign rising on the Ascendant it may cause for plurality
of sexual relationships.
J
2 House: Not good for the health of the partner but may provide
financial success after marriage.
3rd House: Gains strength and confidence after marriage.
Marriage may happen early.
4th House: Wife may get a dignified status in profession but this
placement is not good for happy married life. The partner will feel
dissatisfied.
5th House: It is symbolic of love marriage i.e. marriage due to
magnetic attractions (5* house) between the native (Ascendant)
and the partner (7* house). However, if Saturn is Lord of the 7*,
its placement in 5* house calls for delay and impediments in
mairiage.
6* House: It is indicative of marital problems, separation, divorce.
However, the native may gain after marriage because 6* lord is
12* to 7* house and thus loss to his opponents.
7th House: In general it indicates successful marriage. However,
it depends upon the nature of the planet and the sign/star rising on
the 7* house.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts”
8 House: Late or delayed marriage. Partner may die before the
death of the native. Self arranged marriage out of foolish passions.
Malefic lord of 7* in 8* may cause widowhood.
9* House: Support to religious activities or may cause for extramarital relations. Business activities may flourish in far off places
after marriage.
til
10 House: Status through wife.
1 1th House: Gain from wife, development of sexual relations with
friends alter marriage.
1 2 House: Cause for ill health of the partner, expenditure through
partner, secret or unconventional marriage.
Timing Marriage:
Timing an event as per the analysis of the Rashi chart is awfully
difficult and more often than not appears to be an exercise in vain.
Rashi chart and the Navamsha chart (calculated by dividing the
longitudes of the Ascendant and planets to determine the
Navamsha signs) do not have the potential to specifically identify
the particular nativity. The chart will appear to be identical for all
those bom on that date within a particular span of time. Applications
of yogas to declare results will also be equally misleading. To be
honest, the analysis of these charts at best provides a very general
assessment of the Nativity. However, the procedure to time the
marriage is indicated below:
1st Step: If marriage is promised, assess whether the marriage
will take place early or late. It should be ascertained by
noting the association of the 7* lord with other houses.
Association with 5, 7 and 1 1 indicates marriage at normal
age. Association with 6 and 12 indicates abnormal delay

Chapter 14: Analysing the Seventh House - Marriage 247
(after 35 yrs). Association with 3rd and 7* indicates early
marriage. Association with 1,4, 6, 8, 9,and 10 indicates
marriage between 28 and 35 yrs. The rules prescribed
by some traditional Astrologers are as follows:
a. When Venus is in Kendra (1,4,7,10) and 7* lord
is posited in any house owned by Saturn, aspected
by a benefic, marriage age is 23 to 28.
b. If2“dlordis in ligand 11th lord in 2nd, marriage
will be between 16 and 25 years.
c. When the 2nd house is occupied by Venus and
7* lord is in 1 1th house, marriage is between 23
and 28 years.
d. When 7* house is occupied by Venus, Moon and
Saturn, the marriage will not be possible before
30 years of age.
e. If the 7* lord or Venus is afflicted in birth chart or
navamsa chart, marriage may be between 30 and
33 years.
2nd Step: Look for Dasa period lords which can cause for the
results of 2, 5, 7 and 1 1 houses. The Bhukti lord should
be connected with 7* house i.e. marriage will and should
come off in the Bhukti period of that planet which is
either placed in the 7* house, or aspects the 7* house
or it can be lord of 7* placed in 2, 5, 7 or 1 1 . 1* house
for timing is also considered with respect to Moon's or
Venus position.
3rd Step: Having decided the Dasa period check the transit of the
Dasa period lords and also of Sun and Moon. No event
fructifies unless transit is favourable.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Troubled Married Life - Analysis of Charts:
Example 1: This is the chart of a native who suffered great
humiliation after marriage.
Step 1 : Analysis of 7 house: No planet is posited in 7* house
and no planet is aspecting 7* house. Pisces rising on the 7* house
produces a frustration with opposite sex. It is a sign of detachment
and sorrow.
Step 2: Analysis of the 7 lord: Jupiter lord of the 7* house is
in 11th house in its sign of exaltation. This promises marriage.
Step 3: Analyse the influence of planets on the lord of 7th
especially of the lords of 4*, 6*, 10* and 12* houses. Here,
Saturn lord of 6 aspects lord of 7 from 2nd house. Sun lord of
12th is in conjunction with lord of 7 in 11th house. This causes for
disturbed married life.
Step 4: Analyse Venus, the chief Karka of Marriage and Moon.
Venus is placed in 10* house along with lord of 10. Moon is in
1 1 * house but under the malefic influence of lord of 6 Saturn and
lord of 1 2 Sun and also Mars lord of 8 and in debilitation.
Step 5: Analyse Ascendant and Ascendant Lord: Here
Ascendant is free from any malefic influence. But Ascendant lord
in 10 along with Venus and Ketu is under the malefic influence of

Chapter 14: Analysing the Seventh House - Marriage
Saturn who occupies Venus house.
All this indicates the Native is destined to have troubles in his
married life.
Example 2:
Step 1: Analyse the 7 house: Saturn occupies 7* house and
Mars lord of 4 and Mercury lord of 6 and Sun lord of 8 in Saturn's
sign aspect 7* house.
Step 2: Lord of 7* Moon is in 10* house in Venus sign and also
in Kendra to Mars. Moon's own house is occupied by Saturn
and aspected by Mars and Mercury.
Thus both 7* house and its lord are under the influence of lord of
6, 4 and Saturn. This calls for disturbed married life.
Step 3: No planet aspects or conjuncts 7* lord.
Step 4: Venus, the chief Karka of Marriage is in the 1 1th house.
Lord of 12 Jupiter afflicts it. Venus's own house is occupied by
Rahu.
Step 5: Analyse the Ascendant and its lord: Ascendant is
afflicted by lord of 6,8 and 4 viz. Mercury, Sun and Mars.
Ascendant lord in the sign Cancer is also under the influence of
Sun, Mercury and Mars.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
All these cause for disturbed married life that has to end in divorce
due to influence of lords of 4, 6, 10, 12 on Ascendant and its lord;
7* house and its lord, and Venus and Moon.
Second Marriage: Let us see if it is promised or not. This is seen
again from the relationship of 7 house and its lord; and Ascendant
and its lord with 9* house. We also need to know the potential of
the 9* house; and the potential of the lord of the 9* house.
Here the 7* house and Ascendant maintain relationship with 9*
house lord Mercury. The Ascendant lord aspects the 9* house.
But the 7* house lord has no relation with 9* house or its lord.
Moreover, the potential of the 9* house is weak due to its lord
being conjunct with Mars and Sun being the lord of 4* (8* to 9*
house) and 8* house(12th to 9* house) respectively.
Thus there is only a remote chance for second marriage.
Matching the Horoscope:
Often an Astrologer is asked to match the horoscopes of a male
and a female who want to marry and thus become life partners.
The psychology behind this request from the clients is the belief
that the destiny of an individual undergoes a transformation due to
this alliance. This belief has gained strength because of the statistical
analysis of the married life of couples that face health, financial,
status and life hazards or who have gained in social & financial
status and general level of prosperity. But this belief is basically in
contradiction to the philosophy of Astrology. A native is destined
to bear the fruits of his own Karma. His longevity, health,
prosperity, and social status are governed by his own nativity. If
the native is destined to have setbacks only after marriage, no
amount of matching the horoscopes is going to prevent it. If he is
destined to get promotion in his professional career after marriage,

Chapter 14: Analysing the Seventh House - Marriage 251
he will get it irrespective of the quality of matching of horoscopes
arrived by Astrologers. Therefore, the matching of the horoscope
should be resorted to detailed analysis of each individual's chart
for health, longevity, potency, professional and financial status etc.
The two natives will marry only if the Dasa periods of one at the
time of marriage are the ruling planets (Ascendant lord, rising star
lord. Moon sign lord. Moon's star lord) of the partner at the time
of birth and vice-versa. Invariably the sign and the rising star lord
of the 7* cusp will indicate the ruling planets of the partner in each
horoscope.
Many Vedic astrologers rely on a very simplistic system for
matching horoscopes which is called the Koot method.In the Koot
method the positions of Moons in both charts are compared by a
set of eight/twelve criteria based on the position of Moons in
particular Rashi and Nakshatra. This practice is highly defective.
The charts of the natives approved on the basis of this method
have shown very poor results.Married life of people were far from
satisfactory. It is, therefore, emphasized that before approving the
compatibility between two horoscopes it should be ensured that
both charts are individually studied for heath status, longevity,
financial status, procreative power and above all for the mental
and physical compatibility between the two persons who intend
to marry.
Detailed procedure of matching the horoscope is dealt in
the revised edition of my book “Kalamsa and Cuspal
Interlinks" published by Sagar Publications, New Delhi,
India

Chapter 15
Analysing the Fifth House
The fifth house operates under the fixed- fire combination and it
represents an individual's reaction to his past Our ancients related
this house to wisdom, religion, and traditional laws, intelligence,
and intuitive perception of the future, socially accepted forms of
courtship i.e. romantic affairs, progeny, sports and cultural activities,
artistic and creative pursuits, speculation.
The main aspects, which an astrologer is called upon to analyse in
respect of the 5* house significations, can be listed as follows:
1 . Potency and procreation power of the native and aspects
relating progeny.
2. Intellectual capability and the attitude of the native.
3. Success in sports and cultural activities.
4. Gain or loss in speculation, gambling, races etc.
5 . Success or failure in romantic af fairs.
The promise in respect of the above aspects has to be seen from
the 5* house, its lord ,9* house (fifth from Fifth), its lord and the
Karaka planet Jupiter for children, Karaka Mars for sports,
Karaka Venus for romance and Mercury for intellectual capability.

Chapter 15: Analysing the Fifth House
tii
What the 5 cusp promises for progeny:
To produce a child the native has to have not only the required
potency but also the procreative power. This is determined as
follows:
Step 1: If the lord of the 5* house and the 5* house is free from
any affliction.
Step 2: The native will be able to produce a child if the lord of
the 5* house is strong and is aspected by Jupiter and
benefics.
If the lord of the 5* house is related simultaneously to 4* and
12* houses, it indicates loss of first conception. It is termed as
abortion in case of female nativity.
According to some Astrologers the man's strength for impregnation
depends on the strength of Sun and the strength of semen on
Venus.
Timing Child birth: If the native is promised progeny, he/she will
get the child during the joint period of the planets that are linked
with houses 2, 5 and 1 1 .
Sex of the Child: To be honest, this area needs still much research
to provide a foolproof prediction. However, the various methods
that are used are listed below:
1 . Analyse the planets that influence the 5* house and its lord.
Influence of male Planets cause the birth of male children
and the influence of female Planets may give rise to the birth
of daughters.
2. If lord of the 5* house is in male sign, and its depositor is
also placed in male sign one gets a male child.

True Astrology- "Basicand Traditional Concepts"
3. Another method, which is used by some Astrologers, is
that if the lord of the 5* house or the Nakshtara rising on
fifth house is in Sun hora, one will get a male child.
4. If Jupiter and its depositor is placed in male sign and it aspects
the fifth house or its lord one gets male children. If Jupiter
or its depositor is placed in female sign one gets daughters.
Putra Dosha: The term means that the planetary positions in the
horoscope are such that the native may not get a male child.
According to some authorities the main reasons of Putra Dosha in
a horoscope are:
1 . If Sun is positioned in the fifth house of the natal chart or in
a debilitated position or positioned in the sixth, eighth and
twelfth house from lagna it causes Putra dosha.
2. If Moon is positioned in the fifth house, or debilitated or
Rahu/Ketu in the twelfth house, the dosha happens.
3 . If Mars is positioned in the fifth house from lagna it may
cause Putra dosha.
4. If Mercury is positioned in the fifth house from lagna it may
also cause Putra dosha.
5 . If Jupiter is positioned in the fifth house, the house of progeny
or in sixth, eighth or twelfth house from lagna it causes Putra
dosha.
6. If Rahu and Ketu is positioned in fifth house, the Putra dosha
happens.
7 . If the fifth house or its lord or the Karaka for progeny Jupiter
are weak then also one may not get a male child.
Promise for Twins: It is an important area that needs serious
attention of the scholars doing research in the field of astrology.

Chapter 15: Analysing the Fifth House
The existing rules or guidelines do not promise much assistance to
a genuine astrologer to declare the possibility of twins. Some of
these rules are listed below:
rrl
1 . When there is intimate link between the lagna and the 3
house, and its significatorMars and Mercury too is involved
in the yoga, the birth of twins takes place.
2. Some astrologers say that if the lord of the 5* house is
Mercury or a planet that is placed in dual sign or in the
constellation of a planet in dual sign, birth of twins take
place.
The use of such dictums is beset with more failures than with
success.
What the fifth cusp Promises for Love Affairs:
1 . If the lord of the 5* house is related to houses 5,7, and 1 1
and lord of the fifth house or the fifth house is not influenced
by the lords of 4 or 6 or 10, the love affair may result in
marriage.
2. If the lord of the 5* house is related to 1 1th house or its
lord but not related to 7* house or its lord then the person
can only maintain relationship but it will not end in marriage
3. If the fifth house or its lord is afflicted one cannot enjoy
romantic af fairs or we may say that the person will meet
failures in romantic affairs.
What the 5 cusp Promises For Sports and Arts:
To determine whether a native will achieve any success in sports
and arts, we need to analyse the following cusps:

True Astrology- "Basicand Traditional Concepts"
1 . Ascendant: If the lord of the Ascendant is related to the
5* house and its lord one will have the desire to make use
of the significations of the 5* house. This will be qualified
or specified by the strength of the lord of the Ascendant,
lord of the fifth house and also the strength of the fifth house.
The absence of the relationship of the Ascendant with the
5* house or its lord does not promise success in sports
and arts.
2. Eleventh Cusp: If the lord of the 1 1 * house maintains a
relationship with the 5* house it will promise success to the
native in the field of sports and arts subject to the condition
that the lord of the 1 1 * house, lord of fifth house and the
fifth house itself should not be afflicted.
3. Sixth House: It is the house of competitions and victory
over others. If the lord of the 6* house and the 6* house
itself is strong, it promises the native success over others.
4. Fifth Cusp: The fifth cusp has to be fortified. That is the
lord of the 5* house should be connected to 1, 3, 5, 6 and
1 1 houses to indicate success in the field of sports and arts.
Gain or Loss in Speculation etc:
1 . If the lord of the 5* house is related to 2nd house, and the
lord of fifth house and the second house are not afflicted
the person will gain in speculation etc.
2. If the lord of the 5* house is related to 1 1th house or its
lord and also to the 2nd and 6* house or their lords, the
person will gain in speculation etc.
3. If the lord of the 5* house is related to 2nd or 1 1 * house
and also to houses 8 or 12 or their lords, the native will lose
in speculation etc.

Chapter 15: Analysing the Fifth House
Let us try to see the application of what we have discussed in this
chapter through an example.
Example 1: Refer chart. Fig. 15.1
It is the chart of a person who could never get a male child in his
life.
Here we notice that the 5* house is occupied by female planets
Venus, Mercury and Rahu. Mercury is doubly female because its
own house is occupied by Moon. Lord of the 5* house is Sun
who is placed in female sign Cancer and is afflicted by debilitated
Mars. More over Sun is aspected by malefic Saturn from a female
sign Capricorn.
Jupiter the Karaka planet is placed in male sign Aries but its
depositor Mars is debilitated in Cancer. More over Saturn from a
female sign Capricorn aspects it.
Example 2: Refer Fig 15.2
This is the chart of a young man who got two sons. His first son
was bom when he was running the period of Mars-Jupiter-MoonMercury-Satum.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
In this chart we find that the fifth lord Sun occupies its own sign
Leo and is also associated with a male planet Mars. No doubt
Moon and Mercury are also placed in the 5* house and this
accounts for some delay in getting the child.
The Karaka planet Jupiter is placed in its own sign Sagittarius. It
casts its aspect on the 5* house. The 5* house is also free from
the influence of Rahu and Ketu. Thus the chart promises the birth
of sons. Dasa period lords are significator of 2, 5 and 1 1 .
This gentleman is said to have a love affair that ended in marriage.
We may notice that the lord of the fifth house Sun is placed in fifth
house. Sun maintains relationship with the 7* house because it is
associated with Moon who is the depositor of Venus the lord of
the 7* house. Sun also aspects 1 1 * house and thus establish
relationship with 11th house.
Example 3: Refer Fig 15.3
This is claimed to be the chart of legendry cricketer Sunil Gavaskar.
He took birth in Mumbai on July 10, 1949at 20.42 hrs.

Chapter 15: Analysing the Fifth House
Here we notice that fifth house, the house of sports, is fortified by
exalted Moon. Jupiter, from the Ascendant, aspects the fifth house.
Saturn, the lord of the Ascendant also aspects the fifth house.
Sixth house is fortified because Mercury the lord of the house
occupies the house itself. Lord of the 1 1th house mars is placed in
the sixth house, the house of completions. Mars provides the
necessary courage and ensures victory over rivals.

Chapter 16
Analysing Horoscope for
Educational Prospects
Education, in the real sense, means a process of developing an
integrated personality to enable the native to live in the society
with respect However, today, education has become synonymous
with qualification, the possession of a certificate or a degree. By
this, we may not be able to call the great intellectual giants like
Shakespeare, the educated persons. On the other hand, we call
those who study the Shakespearean literature and obtain degrees
as educated persons. A gardner who might not have even entered
the gate of a school might know the secrets of Botany, which even
the graduate of Botany, may not know. A village housewife may
be able to cook delicious food, a rare variety of pickles and yet
be a totally illiterate. Her expertise in cookery may even challenge
the great expert writers of cookery books. Therefore, the study
of the topic of Education from the natal horoscope of a person is
an enigma in itself. The word education is derived from the Latin
word e-duco meaning literally a leading out of something, which is
already there deep within the student
In astrology, to analyse the Educational Prospects, we study the
houses 1, 3, 4, 5, 9, 11. However, the primary house for basic
education is fourth and for higher education, it is 9* house. The
detailed procedure of analysis is given below:

Chapter 16: Analysing Horoscope for Educational Prospects 261
Step 1: Study of the Ascendant: Aperson is destined to receive
reactions from those houses with which the Ascendant
maintains a connection. Thus for achieving qualification
or the attendance of a school/college or an institution of
learning, the Ascendant or its lord should establish a
connection with 4* or 9* house. The potential of the
Ascendant decides the ultimate potential of any other
house. Thus the Ascendant and its lord should be strong
enough to motivate the native to undergo the process of
learning.
Step 2: Study of the Third House: This house denotes one's
mental inclination, performance specification, writing
capability, communication skills, mental concentration and
memory. Its study indicates the native's inclination for
rrl
the subjects of study. The disposition of the lord of 3
house, strength of the third house and the influence of
planets on third house and its lord would indicate the
subjects in which the native would specialize. It is also
the house of courage and confidence. As such sign/star
rising on the house, its lord and the planets positioned or
aspecting the 3rd house or its lord will help us to determine
whether the native is capable to compete or face
examinations. The influence of planets on third house
can be specified as follows:
Moon: The native lacks boldness to take
decisions.
The native is calculative, cautious,
industrious, but lacks confidence, and
develops the fault of forgetfulness.
Saturn:

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Mercury: Dual mind (To be or not to be), but good
memory.
Sun, Mars: Gives courage and confidence. Jupiter
in addition
Jup, Venus: gives the power of concentration.
Detailed significations of signs and
planets have been given in respective
chapters.
Step 3: Study of Fourth House: This is the primary house for
basic education. Analysis of this house will indicate:
A. Whether the native will have formal education or
not.
B. The quality or excellence level likely to be achieved
by the native.
Analysis of the fourth house is carried out as follows:
1 . The sign/ star ri sing on the 4th house.
2. The planets placed in or aspecting fourth house.
3 . Strength of the lord of 4* house and the planets aspecting
it
4. If the lord of the 4* house is free from affliction from the
lords of 8th house (12* to 9*) and 3rd house and 12*
house, or if the lord of 4* house is not placed in these
houses, then it indicates that the native has the potential for
basic education. If the lord of the 4* house establishes a
relationship with the 9* house, it indicates native's capacity
to go in for higher studies.

Chapter 16: Analysing Horoscope for Educational Prospects 263
Step 4: Study of Fifth House: This house shows the native's
intellectual capacity, his power of comprehension or
understanding. A strong 5* house and its lord is a must
for achieving success and excellence in higher education.
Step 5: Study of Ninth House: This is the house for higher
educational pursuits. The essential conditions for higher
education are:
a. Fourth lord should maintain a connection with 9*
house.
b. Ninth house and its lord should be strong.
c. Ninth lord should maintain connection with 1 1 *
house, 5* house and 7* house (9*, 3rd, and 11th
from 9* (the houses which cause multiplications
of the significations of the house)
d. Ninth lord should not be posited in 4, 8, or 12,
houses (4 is 8* to 9*, 8 1S 12th to 9*, andl2* is
bad for the Ascendant)
e. 8* or 12th house lords should not afflict Ninth
house.
Step 6: Study of Eleventh House: This is the house of fulfillment
of our desires. If this house or its lord establishes a relation
with 4* or 9* house, this will indicate the native's
success in basic or higher education.
Step7: Analyse the potential of the planets Jupiter and Mercury,
which are considered to be the karakas (significators)
of education. They should be strong by house
connections. Moon being the ruler of the 4* house in
the natural zodiac and also represents Mind of the native

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
calls for special attention. Connection of these Planets
with 4* house or its lord, or with Ascendant or its lord
cause for success in education.
Subjects of Study: In the modem India, a child who seeks
admission in a school has no choice for subjects up to a certain
standard. He has to study the subjects that are offered by the
school. Thus sometimes we find that in spite of a strong 4* house
and its lord, the performance of the child is not up to his level of
expectation. If the choice is given to the child, what subjects he
will study is indicated below:
A. The planets and the houses they rale that establish a
relation with the fourth house and its lord will indicate
subjects of study. Sign appearing on the house where
the planet is placed should also be taken into
consideration.
B. The same procedure is to be followed for selecting the
subjects for higher study taking the 9* house in place of
4* house. This is detailed below:

Chapter 16: Analysing Horoscope for Educational Prospects 265

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Let us explain the use of the above method to analyse the
Educational Prospects through the example.
Example: Ref the fig. 16. 1 . Chart of a person with the qualification
B.Sc, BE, andMA (English).

Chapter 16: Analysing Horoscope for Educational Prospects
Step 1: Analyse the Ascendant for its connection with 4* or 9*
house.
Here the lord of the Ascendant Mars is in conjunction
with the lord of the nineth house Moon in second house
in the sign of Jupiter. Mars also aspects the 9* house.
Mars itself is under the aspect of Jupiter who is conjunct
with lord of 4 Saturn. It promises high education.
Step 2: Study of the 3rd House: Third House itself is free from
any malefic influence and gets strength from its lord who
aspects this house while in conjunction with Jupiter and
getting trine aspect of Mars conjunct Moon. This indicates
that the native is diligent and would like to perform as
per the significations of Capricorn, which rises on the
third house and also of Saturn and Jupiter.
Step 3: Analysis of the 4th House: Aquarius rises on the Fourth
House. Mercury the lord of 8 and 1 1 occupies it. No
other planet has direct influence on this house. Presence
of 8* house lord in 4* house is indicative of upsets in
Basic Education but Mercury also having the lordship
of 1 1th house would enable the native to achieve success
in his educational pursuits in the end.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Lord of 4* House Saturn is in debilitation in the 6*
house but placed with Jupiter the lord of 2 and 5 and
also receiving the trine aspect of the lagan lord Mars
conjunct with the 9th lord Moon. Native has, therefore,
to put in hard labour under the stamina, courage and
confidence provided by Jupiter and Mars to achieve
success in education.
Step 4: Study of 5 House: Pisces, the sign ruled by Jupiter
rises on the fifth house. Sun lord of 10, Venus lord of 7
and 12 and Ketu occupies this house. This house and
the planets there in are in Kendra from lagan lord Mars
and 9* lord Moon. Venus is said to be in its sign of
exaltation. All this indicates that the native possesses the
intellectual capability to undergo the process of higher
learning in the fields controlled by the planets Sun, Venus,
Jupiter and Ketu. Jupiter is conjoined with Saturn the
lord of 4* house and is receiving the trine aspect of
lagan lord Mars conjunct with ninth lord Moon.
Step 5: Study of 9* House: This house is ruled by Moon who
is placed in 2nd house conjunct with lagan lord Mars
and aspected by Jupiter lord of 2 and 5. Mars, the lagna
lord, aspects the 9* house. This promises that native
will succeed in his higher educational pursuits though with
hard labour.
Step 6: Study of 11th House: Virgo rises in the 11th house and
Rahu occupies it. Sun lord of 10 and Venus lord of 7
and 12 aspects it. Its lord Mercury is placed in the 4*
house, the house of education.
Rahu is placed here and Venus the lord of 12* house
aspects this house. This does indicate problem in

Chapter 16: Analysing Horoscope for Educational Prospects 269
educational pursuits. But its lord's placement in 4* house
ensure achievement of native's desire in the fields of
education especially in the fields controlled by Mercury
(lord of 8 and 1 1), Sun (lord of 10 in 5) and Venus (lord
Step 7: Moon has acquired the lordship of 9* house and is
placed in 2nd house where Sagittarius rises. It is also
conjunct with lagna lord and is aspected by Jupiter, the
lord of 2nd house.
Mercury has acquired the lord ship of 8* & 1 1th houses.
It is placed in the 4* house where Aquarius rises.
Mercury thus indicates the success in education through
straggles.
Jupiter is placed in the 6* house along with the lord of
the 4* house and in trine to lagna lord.
All this indicates that the native is capable to undergo the process
of learning but he will have to put in hard labour. His educational
prospects also indicate that his education may be with breaks.
Let us now analyse why the native studied science subjects up to
graduation, then telecommunication engineering and post
graduation in foreign language English.
Subjects for Basic Education: Science Graduation andB.E.
(communication).
Mercury occupies 4* house. Saturn, lord of 4* house occupies
6* house and conjuncts Jupiter lord of 2 and 5* in 6* house.
Mercury: Mathematics, Communication Engineering.
Saturn: Chemistry (6* house). Physics and Communication (lord
of 3 rd house). Electronics.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Jupiter: Chemistry (6* house). Mathematics (2nd house). Jupiter's
own house is occupied by Sun and Venus. They transfer their
influence (chemistry, electronics) to Jupiter.
This justifies the native's educational prospects at basic level.
Let us see why the native, being a science and telecommunicationengineering graduate should go for post graduation in English
language.
Ninth house lord is conjoined with lagna lord in 2nd house ruled
by Jupiter who aspects its own house Sagittarius. Jupiter is lord of
9* and 12th house in the natural zodiac. Jupiter's own house is
occupied by exalted Venus lord of 7 and 12. Thus the lord of the
9* house Moon is under the influence of planets Jupiter, Venus
and the sign Sagittarius. This justifies his studying foreign language.

Chapter 17
Analysing the
Tenth House- Profession
The Tenth House represents profession, honour, rewards, and
the quality of leadership, karma of the soul, government service,
administrative jobs, and achievement in the material world. In this
chapter we will discuss how to analyse the 10* house to determine
the native's profession.
When we analyse the horoscope to study the profession of a
person, we need to answer the following two sets of questions.
Set 1. Here the main questions are:
a. Will the person do a paid job or carry out bis
independent or partnership business or live without
a professional status?
b. Will he attain any status (financial, administrative
or social) through profession?
c. Will he continue the same job/business throughout
his life or does it promise diversifications,
development etc?
d. When will he start earning through service or
business?
e. Will the native be able to carry out his professional
activities smoothly or face set-backs?

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Set 2. Here the main questions are:
1. In which organizations (viz the education
department, health deptt., railways,
communication deptt., banking and financial
institutions etc.) the native will serve?
2. Will he be an industrialist, manufacturer, a trader,
commission agent, cloth merchant, a hotelier, a
shipping magnate, a publisher, street merchant,
etc.?
In short we need to find out the organization in which the person
will have his professional activities to perform, the nature of the
products he will deal etc.
In addition to the above two sets of questions, there are other
supplementary questions, relating service/ business that we need
to answer. For example, questions relating service matters include
transfer, promotion, suspension, termination, retirement,
reinstatement, change of service profiles etc. Similarly questions
relating business may include products that will fetch more gains,
change of business place etc.
Houses That Need be Analysed for Profession
To provide answers to the basic two sets of questions we need to
analyse the following houses.
1. Ascendant: Natural inclination of the native needs to match
with the potential of the 10th cusp. If the Ascendant or its
lord establishes strong relationship with 6* and the 10*
house, the person is more likely to be a service person. If
the ascendant is strongly connected with 7* and the 10*
house, he is likely to adopt business as his profession. Strong
connection with 5* and 9* without having any connection

Chapter 17: Analysing the Tenth House- Profession 273
with 6, 7, and 10 indicates that the native is likely to live his
life without any professional status. For the success in service
or business the Ascendant and its lord should be strong as
the potential of any house is subordinate to the potential of
the Ascendant.
2. Tenth House: It is the principle house for analysing
profession. It forms the apex of the materialistic triplicity;
the other two houses, being second and sixth. Strong
connection of 10* house with 6 indicates service as
profession and with 7 as private business.
3. Second House: The house of wealth or it indicates the
earning capacity of the native.
4. Sixth House: This is the house of service, labour, loans,
impediments and oppositions; it is also called the house of
gain being 12*10 the 7*, which represents competitors.
Loss of opponents is the gain of the native.
5. Seventh House: It is generally considered as the house to
represent private business, trade and social relationships.
6. Eleventh House: The strength of this house and its lord
and its connection with Ascendant and 10* House
represents the success of the native in his profession.
7. Fourth and Ninth House: This helps to determine the
education of the native.
Procedure to Determine Profession
The analysis of the horoscope to determine Profession of a native
is done as follows:
Step 1: Analyse the sign rising on the Ascendant and the planets
influencing Ascendant

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Step2: Analyse strength of Ascendant lord and the planets
influencing it
Step 3: Sign rising on the 10th house and the planets posited or
aspecting 10th house.
Step 4: Strength of 10* lord and its placement in a sign and
house in a horoscope and houses aspected by 10th lord.
Step 5: Analyse the significations of planets that play part in
deciding profession as per their sign and house position.
Step 6: Analyse the influence of Dasa periods.
We have already indicated the significations of the planets, signs
and houses relating profession in respective chapters. We will
analyse few charts to explain the application of the above
procedure.
Example 1: Legal Profession: Fig. 17.1
This is the chart of a lawyer. The planets that indicates legal
profession are Jupiter (governs law), Saturn (justice, independent
and impartial), Mercury (governs reason, argumentation,
communication - written or oral), Mars (regulates and provides
energy for argumentation) and Venus (for assessment merits and
demerits analysis).
Signs that represent legal profession are Gemini, Libra, Sagittarius,
andAquarius.
Houses that represent legal profession are sixth house, 9* house.

Chapter 1 7: Analysing the Tenth House- Profession
Step 1: Sagittarius, the sign of law rises on the Ascendant and
Sun lord of 9* house; the house that represents legal
profession is posited in the Ascendant.
Step 2: Jupiter, the ruler of the Ascendant and karaka for legal
profession is posited in the 6* house, which represents
legal profession. The Planet Mercury, lord of 10th house,
aspects Jupiter. All this represents that the native's mental
setup is attuned to legal profession.
Step 3 : Mercury, the planet for legal profession rules the sign
& 4 that rises on the Tenth House. Jupiter lord of Ascendant
is posited in the 6* house, aspects 10* house, and its
lord. Jupiter itself is under the influence of Mars (conjunct
with Saturn) who aspects it from the 11th house. Mars
own house is occupied by Mercury the lord of 10*.
Rahu, being in Pisces represents Jupiter. It aspects the
10th house. All these indicate strong prospects for legal
profession.
Step 5: Planets and houses that make connection with Tenth
house and 10* lord.
a. Jupiter, lord of 1 and 4 placed in 6. This indicates
dignified legal profession.

True Astrology- "Basicand Traditional Concepts"
b. Rahu that represents Jupiter aspects 10th house
from the 4* house. 4* house ensures stability in
profession.
c. Moon lord of 8 in 4 aspects 10* house. This is
indicative of mental agony in professional career.
Step 6: Why law as a subject of education?
Sun lord of Nine in Sagittarius and under the influence
of exalted Saturn in Libra is indicative of the native
choosing law as a subject of higher studies.
Step 7: Service or Private practice:
Ascendant lord Jupiter is in 6 and Mercury lord of 10
aspects 6* house. Venus the planet of making
assessment of merits and demerits rules the 6* and the
11th house.lt is placed in the second house-the house of
earning. Venus's own house is occupied by Saturn the
planet of Justice. All this shows that the native has to
earn through service in legal profession. Mercury's
placement in 12* house is indicative of native's making
foreign trips in connection with his profession or a
probable change in his professional career.
Example 2: Medical Profession. Ref Fig. 17.2
Planets that rale over the medical profession are Sun, Mars,
Mercury, Jupiter and Ketu.
Leo, Virgo, Scorpio and Pisces and houses 6, 8, 10, 12rale over
this profession.

Chapter 17: Analysing the Tenth House Profession
Step 1: Analysis of Ascendant: Scorpio, the sign of doctor rises
on the Ascendant. Ketu is posited there and Mars its
lord aspects it from the 1 0th house.
Step 2: Lord of Ascendant Mars is also the lord of 6* house
and is in the Tenth House conjuct with lord of 12th house
Venus.
Step 3: Analysis of 10* House: Leo the sign of doctor rises on
the 10th cusp. Mars lord of 1 and 6 and Venus lord of 7
and 12 are posited there. Mars own house is occupied
by Moon the lord of 9* house where we find lord of 10
Sun and lord of 1 1 Mercury along with lord of 3 and 4
Saturn.
Step 4: 10* lord Sun is conjoined with Mercury lord of 8 and
1 1 and Saturn lord of 3 and 4.
Step 5: Venus in 10* house being lord of 12* house, the house
of hospitals indicates that the native may be a gastroentremologist. Mars lord of 1 ,6 in 10* is indicative of a
dignified medical profession. Connection of 6* house
and Mars represent the profession dealing with diseases
relating to the lower part of the abdomens.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Mercury lord of 8* and 11th conjoining lord of 10
suggests dealing with problems relating secret parts and
general phy sicion.
Saturn lord of 3 and 4 conjoins lord of 10 Sun and also
aspects 6* house. Saturn is significator of chronic
diseases, and being lord of 3 and 4 is indicating lungs,
chest
Step 6: Analysing reasons for Medical Education:
Lord of 9* house is in the 6* house.
Mercury who is lord of 8th house occupies 9th house.
Sun the significator of medicine is in the 9* house.
Promise of higher education is already indicated by the
placement of lord of 4 in 9. Lord of 9 is placed in the
10* sign or house from its own house. Ninth lord's
placement in 6* house also indicates higher education
in medicine and related to Service.
Step 7: Service or Private Practice:
Lord of 6* house is placed in the 10* house. Similarly
the lord of 7 Venus is in 10*. Lord of 2nd house Jupiter
is in the 1 1th house. Since Mars is also the lord of the
Ascendant, the chances of the native to achieve
excellence in profession through service are more
prominent. Later on the native may carry on private
practice. He may even earn through private practice
secretively while in service (Venus also lord of 12th house
and Jupiter aspects 7* house)

Chapter 1 7: Analysing the Tenth House- Profession
Example 3: Air Pilot. Ref Fig. 17.3
Planets connected to this profession are Mercury, Venus, and
Saturn.
Signs & houses that rale over this profession are Gemini, Libra,
Aquarius, and 3rd, 9* and 12* houses.
Step 1: Analysis of Ascendant: Gemini rises on the Ascendant
and Jupiter lord of 7 and 10 are posited in the Ascendant
The native is destined to achieve status through
profession. Gemini rising is indicative of Pilot as a possible
profession.
Step 2: Lord of Ascendant Mer is in Libra and is placed in the
5* house. Jupiter placed in Gemini aspects it. Mercury's
own house is occupied by Sun lord of 3 and Mars lord
of 6 and 11.
Thus Ascendant lord is under the influence of signs,
planets and houses, which further accentuates the native's
inclination to adopt Pilot as a profession.
th
Step 3: Analysis of 10 House: Pisces rise on the 10* house.
It is aspected by Sun lord of 3 whose own house is

True Astrology- "Basicand Traditional Concepts"
occupied by Venus. Mars, lord of 6 and 1 1 also aspects
10* house. Mars own house is aspected by Mercury in
Libra.
Step 4: 10* lord Jupiter is in Ascendant in Gemini. The lord of
Ascendant Mercury itself is in Libra.
Steps 3 and 4 clearly points out that the native will choose
Pilot as a profession.
Step 5: Sun's aspect on 10* house indicates that the native's
professional activities may involve travels. Mars as lord
of 6 and 1 1 points out the native's achievement in
professional activities through service.
Lord of 2nd Moon in 12 along with Saturn lord of 9
indicates earning through overseas travel.
Example 4: Vocal Musician reference Fig. 17.4
Planets that rule over the profession of Vocal Musician are:
Venus: It knows how to magnetize, fascinate and please others;
it is symbolic of arts and music.
It rales over the second sign Taurus and throat.
Mercury: It rules over the third house in the natural Zodiac. It
gives a high degree of intelligence and taste for poetry, drama.
Sun: Being lord of the 5* house in the natural zodiac it gives a
taste for the cultivation of fine arts and promoting musical talents.
Moon: It is said, "Moon is a bom medium, spiritist, psychic,
actor, and actress". It provides the necessary sensibility and
sensitivity to the native to appreciate the subtleties of arts and
music.

Chapter 1 7: Analysing the Tenth House- Profession
Mars: It is known for boldness, confidence and courage. Its
association with Venus improves the dexterity and boldness and
removes stage fear.
Signs: The chief signs that govern vocal music are Taums, Gemini,
Leo, Libra, and Aquarius.
Houses: The chief houses whose lords when connected to the
10th house or its lord represent developments of music talent are
Let us examine the chart of Fig. 17.4. This is the chart of a very
famous woman singer.
Step 1: Analysis of the Ascendant: Taurus rises on the
Ascendant. Jupiter lord of 8 and 1 1 is posited in the
Ascendant. Jupiter's own house is occupied by Saturn
lord of 9 & 10. Mars in Libra conjoined with lord of 2
and 5 aspects the Ascendant.
Thus the Ascendant is under the influence of planets Mars
in Libra and Jupiter in Taurus that provide the native
necessary courage and confidence to develop and
expand her artistic talent of vocal music without any stage
fear.

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Step 2: Lord of Ascendant is in a Kendra in Leo without any
affliction. It aspects the 10* house.
This is also a positive signal that shows the native's bent
up of mind to adopt profession related to Venus i.e.
Music.
th
Step 3: Analysis of 10 House: Aquarius the airy sign rises
on the Ascendant and its lord aspects this house thus
boosting the potential of the 10* house. Venus aspects
the 10* house and its depositor Sun is placed in the 5*
house.
r
Step 4: 10* lord Saturn aspects the 2nd and the 5* house. This
shows why the native adopted her Profession as a singer.
Step 5: Planets and the houses that establish relationship with
the 10th house and its lord are:
Sun in the 5* house is aspected by Saturn the lord of
Venus lord of 1 and 6 is placed in Leo in the 4* house
and aspects the 10* house.
Saturn aspects the 2nd and the 5* houses ruled by
Mcrcuiy.
Moon's placement in the 3rd house in Cancer is fortified
to allow the native to develop artistic talent with the
desired sensitivity and sweetness.
All the above factors cause for the native to be a famous
singer.

Chapter 1 7: Analysing the Tenth House- Profession
Example 5: Astrologer:
Planets that we need to examine for a person to be a proficient
Astrologer are Jupiter (lord of 9* house- the higher mind and
12* house- the house of occult knowledge in the natural Zodiac)
Saturn -the planet of concentration; Mercury, the planet of reason
and intelligence; Moon- the mind and the ruler of the 4* house in
the natural Zodiac. (4* house is the house of education); Mars
provides the necessary courage and confidence to make
predictions.
Houses that need to be considered are 2, 5, 9, and 12 i.e. if the
10* house and its lord establish relation with these houses or their
lords, a person may adopt astrology as a profession.
Let us examine the chart ofFig. 17. 5. This is the chart of a practicing
Astrologer.
Step 1: Here Ascendant rises in S corpio and Jupiter in Pisces
aspects it from the 5* house. There is no other influence.
Step 2: Ascendant lord Mars is placed in 3rd house, the house
of courage and confidence. It is conjoined by Saturn,
lord of 3 and 4 (Concentration and basic education),
and Venus -the planet of artistic skills and lord of 7 and
12th (the house of occult science).

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Step 3: Leo rises on the 10* House. Leo rales the 5* house in
the natural Zodiac. Mars, the Ascendant lord conjunct
with Saturn and Venus aspects it from 3rd house. The
native will achieve name and fame in his professional
carrier with courage and self-efforts.
Step 4: Lord of the 10th house Sun is placed in second house
along with Mercury in the sign Sagittarius ruled by Jupiter.
Jupiter itself is placed in the 5* house.
This indicates that the lord of the house of profession
has established relationship with the 2 & 5 and also the
planet Mercury. All this indicates native's earning through
Astrology.
Step 5: Jupiter in the 5* house in the sign Pisces aspects the 9*
house, 1 1th house and the Ascendant. Jupiter also rules
the 2 house, which is occupied by Sun the lord of the
house of profession and Mercury the planet of Astrology.
Thus the fifth house lord has established relationship with
the relevant houses 2, 5, 9, 10, indicating that the native
will use artistic skills and astrology to carry out his
professional activities.
Mara, the Ascendant lord has established relationship
with the 9* (by its aspect) and the 12* house (by
conjunction with Venus the lord of 12). This indicates
love for artistic skills and astrology. Saturn's conjunction
with Mars lord of Ascendant and Venus the lord of
the 12th and its aspect on Jupiter and fifth house, 9*
house and 12* house further indicate the native's
inclination to astrology.

Chapter 18:
Navamsa and Its Significance
Navamsa chart has acquired great significance in Indian Astrology.
Some says that the Navamsa chart is perhaps our true geniturenot a 2nd one-or at least it should be closely measured with the
natal chart. It is, infact, considered as a karma chart because of
the number 9 used for its calculation. The figure 9 in Tarot is under
the domain of Saturn and not Mars. The figure 9 symbolizes "The
Hermit. " or “The Seeker of T ruth" . The planet Saturn is considered
to be the karmic planet. The birth chart is only intended to show
the Zodiacal emplacements of planets in different signs and also in
the Mundane Sphere (houses) at the moment of birth. The
Navamsa chart is considered to be more intimate and personal
chart, because the Navamsa longititudes are karmic, and thus
depicts the true destiny of the individual by means of mutual aspects
subsisting between the planets, which are frequently not at all
apparent in the birth chart. According to C. Fagan, "Navamsa is a
sexascopic chart. . . our sexual tendencies, and activities are better
seen through it". For example Navamsa Moon, Navamsa Jupiter
and Navamsa Venus, all in Scorpio, render a person very sexy,
glamorous anc^impressive with a deep inclination for luxurious
and fine things.
Development of Nakshatra and Navamsa Theory
Astrology is, at bottom, a criticism of life. The horoscope is a
portrait which depicts how the individual is going to lead his life.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
No two human beings are alike in the universe. The horoscope of
each individual has thus to be unique. The Astrological System
based on the analysis of the Rashi Chart fails to account for this
because of the following:
1 . Potential and Promise of each house is judged on the basis
of the Sign rising on the house and the strength of its lord.
This remains the same for all the persons bom on a day
within approximately two hours.
2. Planets behaviour is delineated as per their accidental and
essential dignities, aspects and Shad Bala strengths, yogas
etc. which again are not going to show any significant change
within two hours.
3 . Results of Dasa periods are declared as per the significations
of planets, their lordships, occupation, aspects, afflictions,
and the yogas they form. The results, in fact will and should
be the same for all persons bom on a day within two hours.
Nakshatra Concept:
The ancients considered that the delineation of a chart as per the
rising Sign on each house and the modification of behaviour of
planets as per their Sign position, more often than not give results
which are contrary to what happens to the native. It was, thus,
decided to divide the Zodiac into 27 parts, each equal to 1 3 deg.
20 min. It was called a Nakshatra. Each Nakshatra was allotted
the rulership of a planet in the same sequence in which the Dasa
periods in Vimsottari Dasa are allotted. In Nakshatra concept the
significations of the house are influenced by the Nakshatra rising
on the house. The analysis of the horoscope was done on the
basis of the following:

Chapter 18: Navamsa and Its Significance
1 . The Nakshatra rising on the house was given preference
over the Sign. The planets influencing the house indicate
Promise or Potential of the house.
2. Planets behaviour was determined as per their placements
in the Nakshatras rather than the Signs.
The characteristics of Nakshatra for various aspects like physical
and mental characteristics of the native, profession, sickness etc.
were written synthesizing the attributes of the planets ruling the
Sign and Nakshatra lord vis-a-vis the houses they rule in the Natural
Zodiac. For example, the characteristics of Bharani will be under
Mars and Venus and the houses over which they have the ruler
ship in the Natural Mundane Sphere.
Navamsa Concept:
The Nakshatra division also did not provide satisfactory results.
The Zodiac was then further Sub divided. Each Nakshatra was
divided into 4 parts, each of 3 degrees 20 minutes. It was called a
Pada, or Charan or Quarter. Each Quarter was allotted the lordship
of a planet as per the following scheme.
Starting with 0 degree Aries and the Nakshatra Ashwini the lordship

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts "

Chapter 18: Navamsa and Its Significance
Nakshatra Ist
quarter
Jupiter
(Sagittarius)
Moola
Jyeshtha
Poorva -
- shada
Uttara -
- shada
Shravana
Dh
Satbhisha
Poorva -
- bhadra
Uttara -
- bhadra
Revati
Sun
(Leo)
Jupiter
(Sagittarius)
Sun
(Leo)
Jupiter
(Sagittarius)
Sun
(Leo)
Jupiter
(Sagittarius)
Saturn
(Capricorn)
Venus
(Taurus)
Mer
(Virgo)
Saturn
(Capricorn)
Venus
(Taurus)
Mer
(Virgo)
Saturn
(Capricorn)
Venus
(Taurus)
Mer
(Virgo)
Saturn
(Capricorn)
Navamsa Chart:
It was expected by our ancients that the Navamsa Chart should
express the following:
1. The Nakshatra Quarter in which the Ascendant and other
houses rise at the time of birth.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts “
2. The Nakshatra Quarter in which each planet transits at the
time of birth.
However, in the present days the Navamsa chart is cast as follows:
1 . Navamsa Ascendant is calculated by dividing the longitude
of the Ascendant degree in the Rashi Chart by 9 and the
quarter of the Nakshatra it rales, is found. The ruler of the
quarter indicates the Sign of the Navamsa Ascendant (Refer
the Table above). For example, suppose a person is bom
in Taurus Sign in Krittika Nakshatra Pada 2; Saturn and
the Sign of Capricorn rale this Pada. Thus the Navamsa
Ascendant of the native will be Capricorn.
2. Starting from the Navamsa Ascendant the other houses are
written in sequence. For example, if Capricorn is the
Navamsa Ascendant, the 2nd house will be Aquarius, 3rd
Pisces and so on.
3. Similarly the planet's longitudes are divided by 9 and
knowing the rulership of the Nakshatra quarter in which
they are, the planets are shown as placed in respective Signs
ruled by the Nakshatra Quarter lord.
Thus this chart only reflects:
a. Navamsa Ascendant as per the Sign ruled by the Nakshatra
Quarter.
b. Planets positions in Signs ruled by Nakshatra Quarters in
which they are placed at the time of birth.
This chart, therefore, has lost the Significance of Nakshatra quarters
rising on other houses at the time of birth. The planets positions
do not bear any relationship with the destiny of the native. This
topic has been dealt in my book "Basics and Traditional Concepts'
in the chapter "Navamsa and its Significance".

Chapter 18: Navamsa and Its Significance
Role of Navamsa in Horoscope Analysis:
The significations of all the 108 quarters into which the Zodiac
was divided were declared by synthesizing the attributes of the
planets co-ruling each quarter and their lordship in the natural
Mundane Sphere. For example, in Y avana Jataka (Sphujidhwaja)
it is said, "Venus in Saturn Navamsa indicates a rich man with a
gentle wife who has little character and ends badly". Now, see
how this signification has been drawn. It is the synthesis of the
significations of Venus who is a peace lover and having the lord
ship of 7* house of the Natural Zodiac which represents wife. So
he will have a gentle wife. Its lord ship of 2 and 7 in the Natural
Zodiac and under the influence of Saturn lord of 10 and 1 1 in the
Natural Zodiac indicate his high financial status (a rich man). Venus'
lord ship of 2 and 7 and Saturn's influence upon it hints that the
native will die in pain and agony. The horoscope analysis was thus
resorted to as follows:
1 . Potential or Promise of each house was declared as per the
Nakshatra Quarter rising on the house. For example, the
physical characteristics of the native were delineated as per
the Quarter rising on the Ascendant.
2. Planets behaviour was assessed as per the Nakshatra
Quarter in which they were rising. For example, the mental
set up or the temperament of the native was declared as
per the quarter of the Nakshatra in which Moon was
transiting at the time of birth.
If we see the Dhruva Nadi Literature, we find that each planet,
according to its Nakshatra quarter i.e. Navamsa, is given a
particular nomenclature as indicated below:

True Astrology- "Basicand Traditional Concepts"
l.Lagnamsa 2.Dhanamsa 3.Vikramsa 4. Sukhamsa
5.Putramsa 6. Shashtamsa 7. Bharyamsa 8.Nidhanamsa
9.Bhagyamsa 10. Karmamsa ll.Labhamsa 12.Vyanamsa.
In Hora-Sara, there is a verse which means: "If the lord of the
Lagna be posited in the Navamsa Rashi owned by the 8* house
and the lord of 8* house occupy the Navamsa Rashi owned by
the Lagna and if they (both) conjoined with malefic, the person
concerned will live for 50 years. "
In fact, study of the books like Deva-Keralam, Dhruva-Nadi,
Hora-Sara, Vidya-Madhaviyam, and Prasana-Marg indicates that
the Navamsa in which a planet is placed or a house rises plays
very significant role in the delineation of the horoscope. Navamsa
chart is thus considered as our true geniture by the
Tradionalists. However, its use in the hands of Modern
Astrologers has degraded its real impact.
Another Method to Calculate Navamsa Chart
We can calculate Navamsa longitude of the Ascendant or Planets
by multiplying the Nirayana longitudes of Ascendant and Planets
in the Natal chart by 9 and deducting from the result 360 ( if
needed) and multiplies there of.
For example: Let the Ascendant degree be Taurus 1 degree.
Then the Navamsa Ascendant will be 3 1 x 9 =279 deg.
i.e. Capricorn 9 deg.
This method will thus provide not only the Sign position of
Ascendant and planets but also their longitudes.
It may be emphasized that the accuracy of the birth chart is
dependent upon :

Chapter 18: Navamsa and Its Significance
a. Time of birth
b. Lattitude and longitude of the place of birth
c. Ayanamsa used.
The accuracy of the Navamsa chart will, therefore, depend upon
the birth chart and this plays a significant role in the calculation of
Navamsha chart. For example, if a planet, say Saturn is in Aries
19 degree 59 min. as per Lahri Ayanamsa, a small difference of
Ayanamsa of minus 2' say of New Comb's may place Saturn at
Aries 20 degree 1 min.. Now in the first case the Navamsa of
Saturn will be as per the second Nakshatra quarter of Bharani i.e.
ruled by the quarter lord Mercury (Virgo). In the second case the
Navamsha of Saturn will be as per the 3 Nakshatra quarter of
Bharani i.e. ruled by the quarter lord Venus (Tula).
The Astrologer for simplicity says that in the first case the planet
Saturn has acquired the Navamsa of Virgo and in the second case
the planet has acquired the Navamsa of Tula and as such Saturn is
said to be exalted in Navamsa. This tenninology has caused more
confusion than simplifying the matters for the analysis of the
Navamsa chart. As a matter of fact the planet has not acquired
anything by the division of its longitude by the figure 9. It is only
indicating the specific area of the Zodiac as per its Nakshatra
quarter. The confusion has arisen because of using the sign ruled
by the Nakshatra quarter in place of the Nakshatra quarter lord.
Analysis of Navamsa Chart:
1st Theory.
The Navamsa chart is, in fact the microscopic chart and the Rashi
chart is the macroscopic chart. If the microscopic chart i.e.
Navamsa chart is cast as per the true philosophy i.e. Nakshatra

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
quarter theory, then the expert astrologer can analyse the
horoscope without any reference to the Rashi chart. Unfortunately,
the Navamsa chart is cast which does not reflect the Nakshatra
quarter rising on houses other than the Ascendant. This forces us
to say that the Navamsa chart should be analysed in consonance
with the Rashi chart. It is a fallacy to say that Navamsa chart
should be studied for spouse. No doubt, as C. Fagan said,
Navamsa is sexascopic but it is our true geniture and should be
analysed for all aspects of life as we study the Rashi chart.
However, the analysis as is done by the modem Astrologers is
beset with the following problems :
1. The houses in the Navamsa chart are only sequentially
counted from the Navamsa Ascendant sign. Thus the house
positions bear no correspondence with the destiny of the
native. The moment of birth of the individual is chosen by
the Supreme Intelligence in accordance with his past
Karmas. Corresponding to the Ascendant degree, each
house is formed which indicates how the native will
channelise the energy apportioned to him for various aspects
of life. This is expressed by the Nakshatra quarter rising on
each house. Navamsa chart cast as above is arbitrary. Thus
to analyze, say profession of the native from the Sign that
appears on the 10th house of the Navamsa chart or from its
lord is nothing but a far-fetched fantasy.
2. Similarly analyzing the behaviour of planets on the basis of
their placements in Navamsa chart is nothing but groping in
the dark.
3 . Theory of Aspects is based on the actual longitudinal distance
between planets or between Planets and the degree rising

Chapter 18: Navamsa and Its Significance
on the house in the Natal Rashi chart. Using theory of
Aspects in Navamsa chart is an anomaly.
Second Theory:
It is based on the Western Concept of analyzing the horoscope.
The Westerns like Cyril Fagan equate the Navamsa Ascendant to
Navamsa Moon. They believe that since Navamsas are calculated
using the mystical number 9 from Taurus 0 degree, near the degree
of exaltation of Moon in Taurus 3 degree, there is a good reason
to believe that the Navamsa of Moon is an occult path that leads
to the veiled nature of a person. According to them the Moon is
the sole determinant of the degree rising on the houses and the
general direction of the Navamsa layout; and its disposition is the
occult but ever- present master behind dialogue with the rest of
the heavenly bodies.
The Navamsa Moon has to be logically, in any chart, the most
important of all the planetary Navamsa longitudes. The Moon
relates us to psychic, non-human and irrational realms. It has full
sway upon the constitution of our etheric double and aura. Since
they equate the Navamsa Ascendant degree with the Navamsa
Moon degree, the rising Navamsa degree becomes tremendously
personal and revealing. As far as karma, heredity and genetic are
concerned, in Astrology, the Sun is regarded as the spirit or soul,
which is also a part of the Universal Soul. The Natal Sun's Sign
and degree embodies this and Navamsa aspects by conjunctions,
opposition and square to it sums up in a nut shell, what an individual
has been at heart for countless or good number of reincarnations
and is presently. The influence of aspects of Navamsa planets on
Natal Sun are indicated below:

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts "
Mi
The whole Navamsa chart with Navamsa Moon as the Ascendant
is analyzed by the aspect made by Navamsa planets with the Natal
planets, and also the aspects made by the planets in the chart. For
example if Mars aspects Venus in the Navamsha chart, it is
presumed that the native has a great amount of energy and lust for
life. If Mars is aspected by Saturn, the native might become a
fakir.
True Navamsa Chart as used by Ancients
The deep study of the influence of planets as per their Navamsa in
a horoscope indicates that the Navamsha chart should be cast as
follows:

Chapter 18: Navamsa and Its Significance
1 . Calculate the Rashi chart as usual .
2. Calculate the degree rising at each house (cusp i.e. the
beginning of each house).
3. Calculate the longitude of each planet.
4. Show the Ascendant and other house positions indicating
the Sign lord, Nakshatra, and the quarter lord.
5. Show the position of planets as per Sign, Nakshatra and
Nakshatra quarter.
Example: The Rashi chart of the Native is shown in fig. 18.1
The planets and house positions are shown in Table 18A and
Table 18B respectively.
Fig. 18.2 shows the Traditional Navamsa chart.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Table 18A
Navamsa acquired by each planet is shown both in tenns of planet
that rale the Navamsa and also by the sign.
House position Table 18B

Chapter 18: Navamsa and Its Significance
Note: The degrees are as per Placidius System using New Comb's
Ayanamasa. The readers may calculate the cuspal degrees using
the Ayanamsa and house formation system as they prefer.
How to Correctly Interpret Ancient Rules
If we see the Dhruva Nadi Literature, we find that each planet
according to its Nakshatra quarter i.e. Navamsa is given a
particular nomenclature as indicated below :
l.Lagnamsa2. Dhanamsa3. Vikramsa4. Sukhamsa5. Putramsa
6. Shashtamsa 7. Bharyamsa 8. Nidhanamsa 9. Bhagyamsa
10. Karmamsa 1 l.Labhamsa 12. Vyanamsa.
For example, in the above example chart Sun in Pisces is in the
Navamsa whose ruler is Mercury. Since Mercury is placed in the
4th house it is called Sukhamsa. Where is the use of Virgo in it ?
Nor we are trying to use Mercury's position in the 7 house in
Capricorn as per Traditional Navamsa Chart.
In Horasara, there is a verse which means : "If the lord of the
th
Lagna be posited in the Navamsa Rashi owned by the 8 house
til
and the lord of 8 house occupy the Navamsa Rashi owned by
the Lagna and if they (both) conjoined with malefic the person
concerned will live for 50 years. "
Let us try to interpret the above using the example horoscope.
Lord of Lagna is Mars and Mercury rales the 8th house and the
sign rising is Gemini. If in the horoscope Mars as per its longitude
is in the Nakshatra quarter i.e. Navamsa, which is ruled by

True Astrology- "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Mercury, then according to DhruvaNadi Mars, will be said to be
Sukhamsa. But as per Horasara, Mars should be in the Nakshatra
quarter or Navamsa whose lord is Mercury but the Sign should
be Gemini. Placement of Mercury in the chart is not taken into
consideration.
In both cases, the Ancient scholars have not made use of the
Navamsa chart as cast by the present-day Astrologers-It is a
different matter that according to one Mars is Sukhamsa and for
the other Mars is Nidhanamsa.
The reader finds himself in a fix; torn between the two
worlds, Sukhamsa and Nidhanamsa It is, perhaps confusion
confounded. But he knows that those who possessed great
insight and intuitive power have written these Verses. Why
can't both be correct? We are probably in the habit of
interpreting things in isolation. The reader may seek refuse
in talking of missing links. Dear readers both are correct.
One has said it in the context of lagna lord's potential in
respect of domestic happiness; the other has said it in
respect of mode of death and longitivity. Lagna lord may be
in the Navamsa whose lord is the lord of the eighth house in
the Rashi Chart. The lagna lord becomes a killer planet. It
has thus acquired Nidhanamsa .If the lagna lord is placed in
the fourth house it has also acquired Sukhamsa.
Let us take simple examples.
1. Profession: The profession of the Native is indicated by the
planets influencing the 10th house and 10* lord in the Rashi
chart and the house lords which establish relationship with
10 house or its lord in the Rashi chart. It is said that we
should judge it also as per the Navamsha lord of the 10 in
the Rashi chart. Now if any astrologer says that it should be

Chapter 18: Navamsa and Its Significance 301
judged by the sign lord of the 10th house in the Navamsa
chart or the sign of the 10 house it will be totally wrong.
2. Diseases: The Nature of the disease, if it is said , should be
th
analysed from the sign on the 6 house or the planets placed
in the 6 house in the Navamsa chart is totally misleading.
Neither the sign on the 6th cusp is related to our destiny nor
the placement of planets in the 6 cusp. We know that
conjunctions are of two types viz.
a) Two planets in the same Nakshatra quarter i.e. in
one Navamsa Sign.
b) Two planets at a distance of 40 degree, 80 degree,
120 degree, 160 degree, 200 degree, 240 degree,
280 degree and 320 degree from each other, will fall
in one Navamsha causing conjunction in Navamsa
Chart.
From the above it should be clear that placement of planets in
houses in the Navamsa chart is as per their ruler ship of Nakshatra
quarter and does not relate to their house positions.
It is suggested that Navamsa position of houses and planets should
be used to analyse all aspects of life as per the chart indicated in
Table 17A and 17B. For example, if we want to analyse profession
using Navamsa concept it should be done taking into consideration
the following:
1 . Navamsa i.e. die Nakshatra quarter rising on the 10th house.
2. Nakshatra quarter ruler, its placement in the Bhava chart,
the influence of other planets on it.
3. Planets placed in the 10th house in Bhava chart and the
planets influencing the 10th Bhava and its lord.

True Astrology - "Basic and Traditional Concepts"
Example:
In the example chart Fig. 18.1 and Table 18B, the Nakshatra
quarter rising on the 10th cusp is ruled by Moon. It is the ruler of
the 9th house in the Rashi chart and is placed in the 2nd house
along with the Ascendant lord. Jupiter lord of 2 and 5 placed in
the 6th house along with Saturn lord of 3 and 4 aspects 2nd house
and planets placed there in. Mercury and Jupiter aspects the 10th
house. This analysis clearly justifies the Native's profession as a
senior officer in the Communication Department.
til
Moon the Nakshatra quarter rising on the 10 cusp is lord of 9
til
and Mercury aspecting 10 cusp indicates Communication
Department. Moon's association with Lagna lord Mars and
Jupiter's aspect both on Moon and Mars indicates dignified
Profession. Moon's association with Mars lord of 6 and Jupiter's
til
aspect on it from 6 house confirms Service. Now both Jupiter
and Mercury are influencing the profession of the Native and both
are Karkas for Education. The Native had in fact long terms of
teaching assignments during Service.
Divisional Charts and Theory of Disposition:
r
Our Ancient seers had sound knowledge of the Zodiac and the
nature of Planets. They were very specific in declaring dictums of
Astrology. They stated categorically that a Planet exalts at a specific
degree. For example Moon exalts at 3 degree Taurus. In saying
so they never laid down any condition about the state of Venus
(dignified by Sign or House position) that rules Taurus. They were
clear in their mind that Zodiac is the store house of energy formed
by collective rays of celestial bodies. When a Planet is in a particular
degree the energy content of which synchronizes with its own
nature we say that Planet is in the state of exaltation. At our level
we say that the Planet is under the influence of zodiacal energy

Chapter 18: Navamsa and Its Significance
content that synthesizes the energy content of the Planets that corale that particular degree of the zodiac.
Our Ancients created the Varga concept to delineate the
significations of particular aspects of Human life. They were
conspicuous in their understanding that Human being takes birth
at a particular moment on a particular day when the energy content
of the Ascdt and Planetary positions in the chart corresponds to
the Kannic code of soul that incarnates. To them Varga only meant
specifying the degree of the Ascdt and correspondingly other house
positions. Similarly for Planets these Vargas meant to place the
Planet in a specific position according to the concept of Varga.
Moon in 3 degree Taurus in a natal chart is disposed by Venus
that tells upon the nature of Moon which has to be as per native's
Karmic code. Placing Moon in Capricorn as per its Navamsa
Sign would greatly defy the very concept of Human birth as per
theory of incarnation. '
In the light of above it is difficult for me to reconcile to the^tudy of
Divisional Charts as per prevalent technique of casting these charts.
Applying theories of disposition to divisional charts means to me
confusion confounded.
Above are my personal views based on my under standing
of Ancient Seers d ic turns on Astrology. Many may not agree
with me. Let us follow the principle "Agree to disagree".
To conclude we may say that Rashi Chart or Nakshatra
Chart (if cast using rising Nakshatra lord's Rashi as the
Ascendant) are the Divisional Charts at the Macro level
and the Navamsa and other Varga Charts are the Divisional
Charts at the Micro level. It is the word Division that has
created division in our integrated approach.
