READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_kp_sharad_joshi_nakshatra_light.json
Dataset number: 239 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 153,784 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_KP_Sharad Joshi_Nakshatra light
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_KP_Sharad Joshi_Nakshatra light
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 123
  • total_words: 28564
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.977
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NAKSHATRA
LIGHT
by
SHARAD C. JOSH I

PREFACE
In our ever changing world of today remains stagnant and
even an ancient science such as astrology must undergo a
; transformation to keep pace. Every science is enriched by experience
and in this regard astrology is no exception. The great sages of yore
'have always taken into consideration different kinds of experience,
and in addition, present day practitioners also enlist the help of
modem scientific techniques where necessary, to make their
predictions.
Today, people approach astrology much more scientifically
and when they ask a particular question, they want more specific and
precise answers from the astrologer. Therefore, today's astrologer has
to adopt a scientific approach with respect to the analysis of the
available data and also draw upon his experience to make his
predictions.
In my earlier book Nakshatra Chintan Part-I and KP =
Nirayan + Sayan , I had discussed KP theory with limited examples.
But as stated earlier, in today's changing world I have come across
situations where a simple question can have numerous possibilities.
For example a friend's son wanted to go abroad for higher studies and
his father asked me questions regarding where he would get the
admission and whether he would get his visa and a bank loan easily.
Based on my answers he sent his son abroad for higher studies.
Recently he again approached me about his son's prospects of getting
the internship, which is a mandatory requirement in his college and I
was able to give him satisfactory replies.
I have been a keen student of astrology since 1979 and in my
books so far I have shared my experiences in this field. Whenever I
have felt the need to make some modifications or add further details
to the previous publications in order to benefit the students and
readers of astrology, I have come up with a new book. This book is a
much more detailed one, both in terms of the topic and in its
analytical charts, which are based both on theory as well as my own
experience in the field. In this endeavor I have ensured that I remain
unbiased by any one system.

• This book covers all the important topics of a man's life from
the time of birth rectification to the mode of death. I have discussed
various possibilities and have also provided various chart to support
my discussion.
This book is not exhaustive of the KP system. In the future, I
hope to dwell on the topics that I haven't dealt with so far with more
details and will share more experiences with you .
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Mr. Vipul B .
Achary a for encouraging me to bring out a book of this kind, which is
topic specific and covers various dimensions. There is ample scope
for further research work. Mr. Vipul Acharya is himself an
enthusiastic student of astrology and has gone to great lengths to
compile data and has persuaded me for long to write this book for
the benefit of the students. His help in the various stages of this book
have been indispensable and is indeed greatly appreciated. I pray to
God to shower him and his family with great prosperity and success
always.
I am grateful to Mr. Achrya's family, Mrs. Gira V. Acharya
and Kum. Devashree and Master Tirth for extending their full support
while the book was being written. I am also thankful to my Son
Chintan and my wife Mrs. Jayshree S. Joshi for her invaluable
support, for all her sacrifices and for always remaining at my side like
a guardian angel and for being a real source of inspiration.
I am also grateful to Mr. Kamla P. Vaidya and his family
members to extended supports and Mr. Vimal V. Patel for graphics &
page setting of my computerized work.
I trust and fervently hope that students in the present era and
times to come would benefit by this book.
SharadC. Joshi

18. Exaltation
of
planets

Different methods for Rectification of Birth Time :
1. Adhan Kundli (Pre Natal Epoch)
2. Primary Direction
3 . Events happened in life
4 . Elements , Nakshtra at the time of birth
5 . Ruling Planet
1 to 4 are based on mathematical calculations.
In KP we know that the cusp sub lord is a decisive factor in a
chart and it makes distinctions in the twins horoscope or those who
are bom in the same locality within the difference of two to three
minutes. The error in minutes in the birth time makes the chart wrong
as well as judgment.
The minimum area of the sub is 40 minutes of Sun and
maximum area of the sub is 2d 13m 20s of Venus. If we consider the
average movement 1 degree per 4 minutes than in 2 to 3 minutes the
difference of the birth time gives different sub lords of the cusp.
So first of all we will try to find out the chances of such types
of errors .
1 . If the calculation of the casting of the horoscope is wrong
2. If the table of houses used other than the placidius semi arc and up
to the minutes
3 . If different Aynamsa is used other than KP Aynamsa
4 . An error in noted birth time
From the above first third errors one will be able to rectify the
error by applying the correct calculation method, proper table of
houses and KP Aynamsa up to seconds .
However, in the fourth situation rectification is required to
find out the correct birth time .
Now we will try to judge each type of error may be there in the given
birth time. Here we have to use some practical approach.

1 . Now a day almost every one knows the importance of noting the
correct birth time, even in villages. The chances of error in birth
time may be 5 to 1 0 minutes plus or minus .
2. The birth data particularly more than 50, 60 years old or birth in
villages or in semi urban area, have chances of 1 5 to 30 minutes
error plus or minus.
3. When the data is provided with time around particular hours like
around 7 a.m. In such case possibility of the difference is 15
minutes plus or minus.
4. When the data is provided with the time around the Sun set or sun
rise or noon, than in such cases one can expect the difference of
20 to 25 minutes plus or minus.
5 . When the data is provided like birth time between 6 to 8 a.m. but
the correct time is not known.
6. When the data i s provided like 7.3 0 but it i s not known whether it
is a.m. or p.m.
7. When the data i s provided with the time but don't know whether it
is a wartime or standard time or summertime.
In all above-mentioned situation Ruling Planets (RP) are to
be used with different criteria.
Every degree of the zodiac is ruled by a minimum of three planets 1)
Sign Lord 2) Star Lord and 3) Sub Lord. Further division like Sub
Sub and Sub Sub Sub can be adjusted after fixing the above three
planets.
First of all find out in which category the birth data falls from the
above list. We have to keep in mind that there are two types of
Sandhies.
1) Sign Sandhi and 2) Star Sandhi
First calculate the Asc on the base of the given data:
• Rashi sandhi
• Nakshatra Sandhi
• Both

For Exp.
Arise 29 D
Cancer 29 D
Rashi Sandhi Rashi Sandhi
No Nakshatra Sandhi Nakshatra Sandhi
Leo 13 D - No Rashi Sandhi
ButNakshtra Sandhi will take place in near future
Always work out the Asc according to the time given .
L When the difference expected as per the above category is
around 5 to 10 minutes plus or minus. If the birth Asc is not in
Sandhi either by Sign or Star than the importance has to be given
to select the Sub, Sub Sub and Sub Sub Sub lord from the Ruling
Planets. If the birth Asc is in Star Sandhi than first adjust the Star
lord and then adjust Sub, Sub Sub lord etc. If the birth Asc is in
Sign Sandhi than first adjust the sign lord according to the star
lord in that sign and then adjust the sub etc from the Ruling
Planets.
2. When the difference is expected to be 15 to 30 minutes plus or
minus, in such case first adjust the star lord from the RP. If the Asc
sign is not in Sandhi than adjust the sub etc. If the asc sign gets
change during that period, then first adjust the Asc sign and then
star lord according to the RP.
3. When time is given between 5 to 7 a.m. in such case work out the
Asc for the 5 a.m. and also the asc for the 7 a.m. and adjust Sign,
Star, Sub and Sub Sub lord from the RP with in these two Asc
boundaries.
4. When the time is given like 830 but not mentioned whether it is
a.m. orp.m. in such case work out the Asc for both the time 8.30
a.m. and p.m. and compare their Rulings with the RP and select
correct Asc accordingly.
5. When the time is given without mentioning summer or war time,
in such case work out the Asc for the normal given time and
adjusted time and compare their Rulings with the RP, first adjust
the Asc lord then Star lord and further.

So from the above different categories one will be able to
adjust the different type of time problems.
All above cases are such where some time clue is given by the
native. Now we will discuss another type of problem
We all know that day changes from Sun rise to Sun rise and
date changes at mid night. If the birth is after mid night and before sun
rise and suppose they don't mention the actual birth day and birth date
then it is a problem for astrologer to judge which one is correct.
For example suppose a native is born on 24 April 1968 at
2.30 a.m. inMumbai.
In such a case there are following possibilit
In such cases work out the Asc and Moon positions for both
the days and time and compare with the RP as follow. If on both the
days Moon's Star lord also remain the same then give importance to
Moon's sub lord on both the days and compare with the RP.
After that give importance to the birth day from the RP and
with the help of these two adjustments one can select the correct birth
data.
Something about theRP (Ruling Planet):
RP are in the following order.
1. The Asc Star Lord
2 . The Asc Sign Lord
3. Moon Star Lord
4. Moon Sign Lord
5. Day Lord
If Rahu or Ketu represents any RP by the sign or the aspect
than consider Rahu or Ketu as a representative of that planet but don’t
rej ect the planet only give the preference to Rahu or Ketu.

Consider the following planets if
1 . A planet aspect to the Asc Star Lord
2 . Aplanet aspect to the Asc Sign Lord
3. A planet in the Asc or aspect to the asc
Now consider the following instructions.
1. If a RP is in the Star of the other RP then give more importance to
that first planet.
2. Don't reject any planet even though it is in retrograde planet star
or in the sub or itself is a retrograde planet.
3. Lastly consider the planet which are aspecting Moon Star Lord,
Moon Sign Lord and Day Lord .
So in the above order consider the RP.
Once the rectification is done correctly, in future when ever
we come across the same chart, the RP of that time tally with one of
the following conditions.
1 . The birth Asc rulers according to RP
2 . The birth RP and the j udgment RP (current RP) remain the same
3 . The present Dasha, sub sub period should match with the RP or in
the star's of the RP in the birth chart
4. The significatorsofthe queiy houses are the same just like RP.
So always keep in your mind what you want to rectify and
only then take the help of divine Ruling Planets (RP).
For more details please refer our Nakshatra Chintan Part I.
Example : 1 : Birth Data for Birth Time Rectification : (Male)
Asc Libra 6 21 IP 46"
V J J
Birth Rectification Time : @ 19.01 p.m. 1ST on
Place : Khar - Mumbai
Date : Q\a February 2007,

Asc Cancer 3 25 52T 58
• When any planet of Asc conjunct with Rahu or Ketu It will be
taken in to account
• On 1 .2.07yMercury& Venus in Aquarius with Rahu & Ketu
• So Rahu and Ketu will represent the planet in whose sign they are
deposited, with whom they are conjunct or aspect to aspect by
(Mercury , Venus)
• First right i s always given to Rahu or Ketu
• 1 .2.07 Rahu in Aquarius and as such represent Saturn
Asc Star Lord : Cancer 25 52' 58" - Ashlesha -Mercury
L : Asc Sign Lord : Cancer - -Moon
S : Star Lord of Moon : Moon in Cancer - Pushy a - Saturn
R : Rashi Lord of Moon ! Moon in Cancer - Rashi Lord- Moon
D : Day Lord : Thursday - Jupiter
Moon is important today because it is appearing twice in RP as Asc
sign Lord, Moon Sign Lord also in Pushya Nakshtra which lord is
Saturn
Birth Asc Libra 6 21 IP 46"
Libra 20 New Nakshtra - Vishakha is started - whose
star lord is- Jupiter
Before that Rahu Nakshtra was running
So it is Nakshatra sandhi Point.

Saturn is Retrograde today (01.02.2007)
Rahu in Aquarius Saturn Sign Representing Saturn But because
Saturn is Retrograde became weak even though it is situated in
Asc itself.
Daylord 01.02.07 Thursday Jupiter
Today 01.02.07 Jupiter in Scorpio, aspecting Asc Cancer, Asc
Lord Moon (also in Cancer),
As Jupiter is day lord (One of the RP) plus aspecting Asc & Asc
lord it is most important planet for today's birth time rectification
BirthAsc Libra 6 21 IP 46"
Venus Jupiter Jupiter-Sign Lord, Star Lord, Sub Star Lord
There for Jupiter Nakshtra must be there at the time of Birth and
not Rahu Nakshtra (Ending)
Rahu Nakshtra Ending will be Mars which is not in today's RP
Now we will go for Sub Lord Determination :
Our BirthAsc Libra 6 21 IP 46”
Venus Jupiter Jupiter
Today Saturn is Retrograde and Saturn is Represented by Rahu
(Rahu in Aquarius). Because Saturn itself is retrograde this
possibilities is cancelled.
Out of Five RP
o Mercury even though it is Asc Star Lord but not figure
in the picture as cancelled .
o Moon Star Lord is Saturn, which is Retrograde and as
such Moon is also cancelled
o Again Saturn itself is Retrograde cancelled
o Only Jupiter is important as it is appearing as RP plus
aspecting Asc & Asc Lord Moon,
o Jupiter is the only possibility.
So Jupiter Sub Lord is also confirmed and correct.
From Libra 20 D 00' 00" , Jupiter sub area will start and will end at
Libra 21 D46'40H

Sub Sub Calculation :
Vimshottary Dasha Year
lDll'46" ?
So Sun Sub Sub is one of the possibilities
• Now today (0 1 .02 .207) Sunis not appearing in LSRD /RP .
• But today Sun is in Capricorn i.e. in Saturn sign, which is also a
RP (weak) and also aspecting Asc plus Asc Lord Moon + Saturn
(RP)
• But as stated earlier Saturn is retrograde and is weak, represented
by Rahu so Sun can not be Sub Sub Lord but it will be Moon as
Sub Sub Lord.
• Because Moon is represented twice in Ruling Planet (RP) plus
deposited in Asc and also in aspect of the two RP Jupiter and
Saturn. So even though it is deposited in Retrograde star Saturn
we have to consider Moon as Sub Sub Lord.
• Moon should be Sub Sub Lord of the Asc .
• Rahu represent Saturn (RP) (as well as deposited in Asc plus
conjunct with Moon in Asc and also in aspect with the Jupiter)
and also in conjunction with another RP Mercury. So it becomes
Sub Sub Sub Lord.

Now we will find Moon Area (SSL) :
So Moon Sub Sub Area will start from
Jupiter 20 D 00' 00" Nakshtra Start @ Libra
Moon 21 D 15' 33" Starting
Therefore Asc must be in between Libra 6 S 21 D 15' 33" to 6 s 21 D
21 24 27 Moon Dasha Year - 10 Year
21 15 33 Mars Dasha Year - 07 Year
+ oodor 16"
KP Asc Libra 21 d 16' 49” - Rectified Asc
KP correct Ay anamsa on 1601 .1962 :

Asc 224 d 30* 25" - Sayan Asc
Our Birth Place 23 N 54, 72 E 06
As per KP Table of house :Page 141 for 23 dand 147 for 24 d
Sidereal Time 23 d 24 d

H
• Venus SL, Jupiter NL, Jupiter SL, Moon SSL, Rahu - SSSL
ST is for Mumbai
In future when you cross check the corrected Birth Time out of
one from the following Four must tally :.
1 .Venus, Jupiter, Jupiter, Moon Must be connected withLSRD / RP
2. Dasha, Bhukti,Anter Dasha
3. Birth Ruling Planet and Particular Day /Time (when 'you once
again wants to cross check) should tally
4. Question should be connected with mat particular house, which
represent the question.
If any one out of these four is tally then we can say that the
Rectified Birth Time is co rrect.

Example : 2 : Birth Data for Birth Time Rectification :
(Female)
Time: 1555 p.m. 1ST
Birth Time Rectification Date : 08* February 2007
Time : 1833p.m. 1ST @ Khar-W
Moon
Sun in
Mercury in
Venus in
Mars in
Jupiter
Saturn in
Rahu in
Ketu in
Capricorn
Aquarius
Aquarius
Sagittarius
Scorpio
Cancer
Aquarius
Leo
1 . As per our Birth Asc , Mercury is Birth Asc Star Lord and while
checking 8 Feb 07 RP, Mercury is also Asc Star Lord and as such
Birth Asc Star Lord should be Mercury.
2. As per our Birth Chart Asc , Rahu is Birth Asc Sub Lord.

3. Rahu and Venus are in Aquarius and as such Rahu will Represent
Venus. Venus is also Moon Sign Lord and as such one of the
Ruling Planet.
4 . So that possibility of Rahu as Sub Lord is very high .
5. Rahu Sub Area in Cancer Sign, Mercury Star is : Cancer 24 d 06*
40" to Cancer26 d OGMO"
6. Now as per Birth Chart only Mercury (NL), Rahu (SL)
and Mercury (SSL) are there.
7. But Mars or Jupiter is not present even though they
came as a Ruling Planet.
8. 8 Feb 07 order is given is descending order.
9. We have taken Mercury, Moon and Venus only and Mars and
Jupiter is not considered.
10. But Mars is more powerful then Jupiter today (08.02.07) because
Mars is Moon's Star Lord.
1 1 . Mars is also aspect Asc by it's 8 aspect.
12. Mars is alsoin Venus Star, which is also aRP of S^Feb 2007.
13. So Mars should be the Sub Sub Lord of the Native.
14. Now we will calculate for Cancer Sign, Mercury Star, Rahu Sub
Star, Mars Sub Sub Star
1 5. Rahu Sub area is of 2 d.
16. So we will Calculate from Rahu Sub Star to Mars Sub Sub Star
which is 1 1 3 years
120 Years 2 d Rahu Sub Area
113 Years ?

Now Rahu Sub Area in Cancer Sign, Mercury Star is
17. Now in Cancer Sign, in Mercury Star, in Rahu Sub- Star and
Mars Sub Sub Star area is
b. Moon Mercury Rahu Mars
c. Sign Lord NL . SL SSL
18. Now we will check for Jupiter and also will tiy to consider the
same because Jupiter is Aspecting Asc by its 91h aspect.
19. Nowin Cancer Sign, in Mercury Star, in Rahu Sub Star, Mars Sub
Sub Star and Jupiter Sub Sub Sub Star area is
Now we will calculate for Rahu SL,Mars SSL and Jupiter SSSL:
Ma Ra Ju
120 Years 7' Mars Dasha years (Mars Sub Sub Area)
25 Years ? Mars to Jupiter total Dasha Year in Rahu
Sub
= OOd Or 27"
Therefore, in Cancer Sign, Mercury NL, Rahu SL, Mars SSL are as
we have calculated earlier is

Now, in Cancer Sign, Mercury NL, Rahu SL, Mars SSL and Jupiter
SSSL we will calculate :
Therefore, in Cancer Sign, Mercury NL, Rahu SL, Mars SSL, Jupiter
SSSLare as we have calculated earlier is
Asc 3s 26 d 01' 07" Jupiter SSSL in Mars SSL
Area Starting
Asc 3s 26 d 02' 03" Jupiter SSSL in Mars SSL
Area ending
Therefore our Asc will be in between Cancer 26 01'07 " to Cancer
20. Our Correct Asc is Cancer (Moon,
Sayan Asc

KP Table of Houses : Page no 133 and Page no 139
Now Three Hours are already Completed, so pi add these three hours
in the answer.

Correction
Correct Rectified Birth Time
Moon SL, Mercury NL, Rahu SL, Mars SSL, Jupiter- SSSL
Example : 3 : Birth Data for Birth Time Rectification : (Male)
Birth Time : 08.05 1ST am.
Birth Time Rectification Date : 18Ul February 2007 @ 16.05 p an.
1ST. Grant Road Mumbai
Now on 18.02.2007 @ 16.05 p.m. 1ST atGrantRoad

Asc Star Lord : Cancer 01 17' 16" - Punarvasu - Jupiter
L:Asc Sign Lord : Cancer - -Moon
S : Star Lord of Moon : Moon in Aquarius- Sattaraka -Rahu
R : Rashi Lord of Moon • Moon in Aquarius- Rashi Lord- Saturn
D :Day Lord : Sunday - Sun
As per Birth Chart ;
Asc Libra 6s 5d 46' 37”
Venus Mars Moon Rahu
Sign Lord NL . SL SSL
1 . As per birth chart Venus is Asc Lord ,
2. As per Ruling Planet Jupiter is Asc Star Lord, in Scorpio sign,
aspect Asc and Venus. Venus is also in Pisces sign.
3. And as such Jupiter is showing connection with Birth Asc (Libra
Sign Lord Venus)
4. Asc sign lord Moon is in Satataraka Rahu Star
5. Moon i s al so in Aquarius with Rahu Rahu become representative
of Moon a RP
6. Sun also in Aquarius with Rahu -Rahu again become
representative of Sun a RP
7 . Rahu itself in Aquarius become representative of Saturn a RP
8. So Rahu become representative of Moon, Saturn, Sun and he
himself is a RP also. . -
9. Therefore our Birth Nakshtra Lord should be Rahu, Sub Lord
also should be Rahu and Sub Sub Lord should also be Rahu.
In Libra sign Rahu Star and Rahu Sub Star area : Libra 6d 40* to
Libra 8d 40’
So for Rahu Star, Rahu Sub Star and Rahu Sub Sub Star : Libra 6s
6d 4 P Correct Asc
KPAsc 6s 06 d 4 V 00" KP Asc-Rectified
+ 23 35* 08" KP Ayanamsa
Our Birth Place Longitude : 24 N 1 2, 72 E 24
From KP Table of Houses : Page no 147

Mumbai ST As per JB Panchang Page no : 130
Birth Time Rectification Date : 01st March 2007
Time : 19.09 p.m. 1ST @ Khar-W
Moon
Sun in
Mercury in
Venus in
Mars in
Jupiter
Saturn in
Rahu in
Ketu in
Aquarius
Aquarius
Pisces
Capricorn
Scorpio
Cancer
Aquarius
Leo

Now on 01.032007 @ 19.09 p.m. 1ST at Khar (Mumbai)’
Asc Star Lord :
L:Asc Sign Lord :
S : Star Lord of Moon :
R : Rashi Lord of Moon
D : Day Lord :
Leo 23 18’ 24 - P. Phalgun - Venus
Leo - - Sun
Moon in Cancer - Ashlesha - Mercury
Moon in Cancer - Rashi Lord- Moon
Thursday - Jupiter
As per Birth Chart :
Asc
• Mercury is common in both Birth Asc Lord & RP - Virgo Sign
confirmed
• Moon is NL in birth chart and also appears as Ruling Planet.
• Sun star is also the possibility as Sun appears as RP Sign Lord
and in birth chart before Moon Nakshatra, Sun Nakshatra may be
completed.
• Now, main Sun and Moon both are connected and appear as
Ruling Planet.
• Our Birth Asc is Virge 11 d 58’ and before that at 10 d Sun
Nakshtra is completed.
• B oth in Sun & Moon , Sun is more powerful Ruling Planet
Today 01 .03.2007 Sun is in Aquarius with Rahu
• Mercury is also in Aquarius with Rahu
• There for Moon is totally separated.
• Rahu represent Sun and Rahu is also Sub Lord of our given Birth
Asc
• Therefore given Asc is approximate correct
• Now we have to check for Sub Sub Lord .
• Venus will be Sub Sub Lord as it is a Transit (01.03.2007) Asc
Star Lord and as such it will become Sub Sub Lord for our
rectified birth chart's Sub Sub Lord.
• Putting all these combination
Our Rectified Birth Asc Virgo 13 d 22' 12"
Correct Rectified Birth Time :
1 1 h 20 m 54s 1ST a.m. Mumbai

2. 3rJ House
3 . 8th House
4. Planets risingin Asc or close aspectto Asc
5. Sun
6. Moon
7 . Saturn
Sun and Moon if weak in any horoscope It will weaken the entire
chart
Sun - Resistance
Moon - Mind, Mental Capability
Saturn - Karaka for Longevity

4th House is both Positive as well as Negative.
Long Longevity - More than 66 Years
Medium Longevity - Up to 66 Years
Short Longevity - Less than 3 3 Y ears
Short Longevity :
• Sub Lord of 1 , 3, 8 is connected with either Maraka or
Badhaka or B oth Danger forlifeupto 3 3 years.
• 3 rd Dasa from birth will always be N egati ve for such person
• Because 3rd Nakshatra's from birth Nakashatra is "Vipada" and 3rd
Dasa of Vipada Lord will always dangerous for such native
• 1 , 3, 8 SL connected with Positive House Purns Ayushya 7th
Dasa from birth will always be dangerous for such a person.
• 1, 3, 8 SL connected with both Badhaka, Maraka + Positive
House Indicate Madhya Ayu 5T Dasa from birth dasa for such a
native will be dangerous
Planet in Asc or on Cusp of Asc or in close aspect :
• Planet in Asc or on cusp of Asc not connected with either
Badhaka or Maraka or Both Positive point for the chart
• But if connected Highly Negative point for the chart
Sun, Moon & Saturn :
• If all these three are connected with either Badhaka or
Maraka or Both will reduce the longevity of the native
• If Mercury is affected by any planet, aspect or by sign will reduce
it's strength
Saturn :
• S atum being a Karaka of longevity if connected with
Badhaka or Maraka Itwill reduced the strength of Saturn
• Saturn in 8th House Increase Longevity
• Saturn aspect 8l House Good for Longevity
• Saturn is Yoga Karaka Planet for Taurus and Libra Asc Good for
Longevity

Birth Data : Unknown Person

Longevity of above chart :
1 . S atum , Mars and Jupiter are rising planet in the Asc .
2. Saturn and Mars in Asc
3 . Saturn lord of 6th House
4. Mars Lord of 8th House
5. Asc lord Mercury which is enemy of Mars and
6. Mars is in Asc, also lord of 3rd & 8m House with Saturn lord of 6*
House
7. Asc Lord Mercury- Connected with Rahu
8. Asc Lord Mercury - Square - Mars & Saturn lord of 3 , 6, 5 & 8
9. Asc Lord Mercury - Square - 10th Aspect of Saturn
10. Asc cusp is also afflicted by first grade malefic like Saturn &
Mars
rrj
1 1. So in this chart there is a strong connection between 1 ,3 and 8th
House
12. Asc Sub Lord -Rahu -In 10th House
13 . Asc Sub Lord - Rahu - In Mercury Sign & Mercury is Lord of I *
14. Rahu - Conjunct - Mercury , Lord of Asc
1 5. Rahu in his own Nakshatra
1 6. Rahu is also connected with Moon Lord of 1 1 01 & Venus Lord of
2,ttland9th
17. Rahu in 10th house conjunct Mercury so represent 1 & 10th
House House of Mercury sign
18. Asc Virgo 13 23 37 - Duel Sign. For this Asc, Jupiter being lord
of 7* become Maraka & also Badhaka. As Jupiter is also in Asc It
is strong Badhaka + Maraka
19. 8th House Sub Lord Mercury Also Asc Lord conjunct with Rahu
and also is aspected by Jupiter Badhaka + Maraka
20. Summary
a. Strong connection between 1st, and 8th Houses
b. Rahu st House Sub Lord connected with 1st , 9th and 10
House & Badhaka + Maraka Jupiter
c. Majority planets are in influence of Jupiter Badhaka +
Maraka either Conjunction in one sign or by aspect
d . Moon in House Lord of 1 1 thHouse
e. Venus in 9th House Lord of 2nd and 9th

21 . Person expired after two month of marriage on 17.022007
a. Moon approx. 10 d
b. Jupiter Maha Dasa Badhakesh + Marakesh
c. Moon Anter Dasha Moon in Rahu Star deposited in 10th
House Heart Disease
Transit Position at the time of Death : 17.022007 at time 11.00
a .m. Mumbai
Transit Period Chart :
Mercury, Sun, Jupiter & Rahu Badhaka Sthana Indicator Jupiter in
birth chart lord of 7th Maraka + Badhaka Sthana in 1st house (Jupiter
in Asc also aspect 6th and 8th house and 10th house 1st, 6th and 8th house
and 10th house operated) 6*h SL Mercury is in lO*1 10th house connected
with Heart Heart Disease Jupiter (Maraka + Badhaka) shows
expansion also connected with Rahu in 1 0th Heart Problem
, Therefore Expansion of Heart, Heart Failure Rahu is also in
10th Wrong judgment and conjunction Mercury Sub Lord of 6th
House.

Sun in birth chart in Cancer watery sign and Pluto Square Aspect
7aSL Maraka Sthana - Rahu in 10,K with Asc lord Mercury + Venus
2nd Lord Marakesh
At the time of death:
Maha Dasa ~ - Jupiter
Anter Dasa - Moon
Prati Antar - Ketu
Also showing unwilling marriage.
Moon connected with ll^House
Moon connected with Rahu
Moon connected with Mercury Barren Sign
There is a possibility that person knew about his condition but not
revealed.
Mercury is SL of 6th & 8th House and connected with 1st & 10th
House
Mercury aspectedby Saturn, Saturn is lord of 5th & 6th House
Mercury is in Gemini Dual Sign and he himself is a dual planet
8* House shows Death due to illness
Mercury Dual Planet and in Dual sign First time survive but not
second time
Saturn is lord of 5 6 both the house No recovery
Native was bom in Rahu Maha Dasa
Rahu in 10h House in Star of its self and Sub of Mars and Mars is
connected with 1 st & 8th House Problem since Birth
Jupiter Maha Dasa in Mars Star Mars 1st, 3rd and 8th House
Jupiter is in Venus sub Venus in 9th Bhagya House but lord of 2nd
Maraka Sthana
Rahu in Gemini sign -A dual sign such incident will be repeated ,
multiple situation
Rahu is aspected by Saturn and Jupiter (Badhaka + Maraka)
Prati Antar Ketu is represent Jupiter so it is related Badhak and
Marak

1* House
5th House
6th House
disease
House
^““House
Resistance
12th From 6th - Recovery
til
Disease Sub Lord of 6 will indicate the
Danger to Life
Defect Physical, Mental
D Asc Watery Sign SL of Asc watery sign - Low resistance
power
D (fSL Shows disease, duration, part of body
6* Sub Lord Connected with :
Sun
Moon
Mars
Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn
Low resistance power + Stroke
Psychological Problem + Blood
Due to more aggression and work beyond
one's capacity in challenging
form
Climatic effect
Heavy meal /diet
Luxurious life, Habituated factors
High labor beyond capacity, Low food
habits and nutrition
Planet and Connected Disease :
Sun
Resistance
Moon
Mars
Mercury
Jupiter
Heart, Eye sight, Head, Bone, Pitta,
Blood circulation, Infections, Eye sight,
Organic Chemicals, Digestive
System, Diabetes, Cancer
Blood circulations, Fire, Aulcer, Boils, Red
cells, Injury, Habits, Blood
Pressure, Pitta, Genetic organ, Vitality and
monthly period for women
Nervous system, Skin allergy, Gas trouble,
Brain, Breathing, lungs
Blood circulation, Liver, Diabetes
and Obesity, Productivity, Pitta, Kidney
Indigestion, Cholesterol, Cancer *

Venus - Eye sight. Sexual organ parts, Any kind of
deficiency to that sexual part.
Physical appearance, Physical defects
Saturn - Bone , Hair growth , Teeth, Chronic disease ,
Paralysis, Muscle pain, Hereditary disease
Rahu /Ketu - Rahu/Ketu’s as deposited signs, disease of
those planets which are represented by Rahu
and Ketu. But it indicates very complicated
disease and as such take more than one
doctor's opinion
6'h SL Where it is deposited House Part of Body Get affected
6th SL Saturn Deposited in 3rd House Arm, Shoulder, pain in
shoulder, arms etc.
6th SL Saturn Deposited in 3rd House in Leo Sign Problem in Back
Bone
3rd SL Connected with 6, 8 and J 2House More Problem
3 SL Connected with Positive Houses Not a serious conditions
6th SL' Connected with recovery house Fast recovery
6th SL Connected with Movable Sign - ^ast Recovery
Painful Disease but
for short time
6th SL -Connected with Fixed Sign - Long time disease,
Slow recovery
Saturn, Rahu, Ketu like slow moving planet
Connected with 6* house - Long time disease
Saturn in 6th House - Long time - Paralysis or chronic
disease
6th SL Connected with Common, sign -
If also connected with Mercury, JupiterOne disease from
another type disease
Multiple types of
disease
Multiple disease &
will repeated in future
Like Jaundice

6th SL Connected with Rahu or Ketu - Chances of
wrong
diagnosis
Diagnosis
must be done
by more than
one doctor
6th SL Connected with Hershel, Neptune
Pluto - Unexpected
Disease, Be
careful
10th House - Heart
4lb House - Chest
5th House - Back Bone
Sun in 10th House Most Powerful, Sun rules heart main part
of body
During life time persons passing through various types of
disease but 6* house will remain common for all the disease
1st House - Resistance Power
Dasa / Timing Factor for' Disease
Maha Dasa Lord - Connection with - 6, 8 or 12 - indication of
disease, ill health
AntarDasa lord - Connected with - 1, 6, 8, 12 - According to Sub
Period planet
Disease
Will be decided
according to
planet, house, sub
period
Female Chart Exam, Chart -2 ;
Cancer Asc, Watery Sign,
Asc Lord Moon in 12th and
1* House Sub Lord Rahu in 2nd with Mars
Mars being lord of Scorpio is connected with 5 House
(Recovery / Protection)

Sun,* Venus and Ketu are in 8 House Required High Protection /
Resistance Power
Sun “ Infection in Food,
No Hotel Food .
Limited Sports
Sun
Saturn
Mars
Eye sight
Minus Number
Chemical infection in eyes due to eye drops
If the 6 house sub lord is connected with :

Disease according to elements of zodiac signs :
Fiery signs
Earthy Sign
Airy sign
Watery sign
Inside part of the body, energetic and
productive part of the body
Main parts of the body, Heart, Kidney and
structure of the body
Nervous system, Organization part of the
body
Blood cells, shortage of water, chemicals in
body
Positive Houses
Negative Houses
Cardinal Asc
Fixed Asc
Common Asc
Significations of positive houses will decide which type of
treatment will be helpful for the native.
Significations
Type of Treatment
Sun, Mars, Jupiter
Saturn and / or Moon
Venus
Jupiter & Moon
Mercury
Allopathic
Ayurvedic
Homeopathy
Allopathic and Naturopathy
Always changes treatments
Significations should not be connected with negative houses and
should not be afflicted.

3rd House
9* House
Moon
Mercury
Subconscious Mind
Conscious Mind
Mind
Planning & Arrangement, Intelligence
Rising Planet- Rising Planet in the Asc or
close aspect to Asc will also change the
Nature of the Person
1* House
3rd House
9th House
6th House
Efforts
Interest
Source of interest fulfillment
Person wants to be leader in every field
Moon
Mercury
Mercury
Mercury
If afflicted will not give support to the 1st
House
If afflicted will not give support to the l*1
House 3lj and 9th house
Person having full capacity but can not
shine in outside world
Connected with 5th & 8th House Give
problems to the native
Mercury is a planet of planning and
arrangement and being lord of 5 & 8
house, always plan in such a way that
person wants success at any cost
Should be connected with 1st, 3rd & 9,h Good
• If 1st, 3rd and 9fn SL are not connected with each other than
person is not exactly what he is appearing
• 1* Self, 3rl Subconscious Mind and 9th Conscious Mind
• 3ld House Subconscious mind will decide what to do, go for
any specif ic field / interest
• 3rd SL connected with 5* 9th and 12th houses + Mercury, Jupiter
or Saturn Interest in astrology, Interest in occult science
• 9th House *- Search for knowledge from different sources
for fulfillment of desire will use different sources

• 3rd & 9th combination - Reflection as 1* house
• 3rd House - Inner capacity, Aptitude, Interest of native
• 9th House - Will provide the support to fulfill the desire of 3rJ
house
• l*r connected with 12th house - May have capacity but can’t do
much
• 9* SL connected with 5*, 8th or 12th SL Misguided support,
wastage of time & money
• 9 SL afflicted Will not get proper / timely guidance
• 3rd SL afflicted Personal problem. Can not be easily rectifiable
• T* SL afflicted Can be trained, guided
• 1* SL connected with Moon + Venus Strong Personality
• Not a single house is totally negative
rd
• 3 SL is bad Find short cuts, No confidence, Over or less
confidence
Rising Planets «
As per planets characteristic native will be impacted.
Jupiter
Saturn
Mars
Sun
Moon
Mercury
Uranus
Neptune
Pluto
m
Expansion, Ambitious, Pretended
if afflicted
Compress, Short
Aggressiveness and leadership
Command and status
Imaginative and sensitive
Mild , expressing , explain with
examples
Eccentric , Highly intellectual
Imaginative, sensitive, dreamy and
having a depth
Extreme stage for any action
Good Planet
Good Personality
• If more than one planet in Asc
o Then the planet which is on the cusp of the Asc will give more
prominence to the personality
o More confusion, no clarity of thoughts, avoid responsibility

• From 3 Is1 January 1962 to 2nd February 1962 Eight planet
were in Capricorn sign
• Asc Taurus 5 planet in 7th &7 * House Scorpio sign Only boy
child of his father Love affair with Muslim girl Got married
to another girl and got divorce and still relation with another
girl.
• Indrajit Son ofRavana 8 planet in in 11 ""house 11* house
of uncle Vibhishana Became source for Indrajit's death
Saturn escape in 12th house (Loss to 1" house) Karaka for
longevity
More planet in 6 House Good for carrier but 1 2 from
7* house Problem in marriage
Person will not have his own house but will live in luxurious
house :
1 * SL connected with -
4* SL connected with -
Saturn & Mars
Venus & Jupiter
3rd, 4,k and lCT
2"J, 4lh and U,h
2nd, 4lh and ll,h
Own House - 4>S,& 12feSL connected with - 4th, li "'2nd
Hershel is higher octave of Mercury if deposited. in 1st House
High Intelligence
Neptune is higher octave of Venus if deposited in 1st House
Artistic telent, Dreamy person, Depth, more habits either good or
bad, Totally different thinking
Pluto is higher octave of Mars if deposited in 1st House Very
dangerous, Self-disaster,
Family distress
Pluto with Fiery sign in Asc Highly dangerous, highly aggressive
If Hershel, Neptune or Pluto either of them is in Asc + Asc getting
aspect from Moon, Mercury, Venus Native will get some kind of
achievement in his life, some times give complex also
If Hershel, Neptune or Pluto either of them is in 7 House
Problem in marriage / business

If there is connection between 1* House, Spouse, 6U house +
Mars / Sun High Ego
If 1st & 3rd SL connected with 6th SL + Mars, Sun Person will be
highly egoistic •
Psychological Fear :
Moon and Saturn
Hunting Moon
Scorpio Native
* It is a fixed sign
• It is a watery sign
* Ruled by Mars & Pluto Planet of Fiery element & owner
of watery sign
- • Moon get debilitated in Scorpio sign
• As Moon is debilitated here, native will not think about the
end result
’ • Once they decide their point of action and only after
planning they will attack
• Normally they can't change their mind Fixed sign
* Last Nakshatra is Jyeshtha and as such all their action,
whether good or bad, will be in big way
# Scorpio 13 & 14 degree (Sayana) Two fixed Star North
Scale & South Scale creat the disaster, stubborn attitude of
the native.
• Asc Libra, Mercury in 3rd House
o Multiple planning for a single tiling
o Delete some planning because of 12 ^ House (Virgo will
be 121hin Libra Asc)
o Change the planning according to current position,
conditions because 3rd Sagittarius Dual Sign for Libra
Asc.
Connected with each other
(Conjunction, Square, Opposition)
Person will have psychological fear,
Less confidence, so late Gaining,
Spiritual life at the later stage in life
by sacrifice manner

1 * 3rd &9*11 SL connected Inner and outer personality same
Irt house sub lord connected with :
Actor 3rd house (Daring), 5th house (art), 7th house (Public
performance) and Venus and Mercury
Handicapped 12th house (defects), Earthy sign and Asc is afflicted
Self confidence and daring
Come forward for daring
Daring and self efforts make him successful
Diseases, Danger, Defect and obstacles
Create enemies, defect in character, Don,
Successful but not in proper way
Success by doing daring
Short cuts, Speculative, Not active, Lethargic
Very active, come up through his own efforts
Tiy to come up with family support, through
education
Try his luck from a place away from his birth place
Success in sports (Mars and Jupiter must connected
with Firy or Airy sign with sub lord)

3,8, 12 Failure by doing daring,
1, 3, 8 Mental tension
2,5,7 Love affairs, finance,
4,8/7,11 Residential based business (4, 8 homely
atmosphere, customer, 11 benefit)
•3,8,6,10 Plus Mars Discipline, Police, soldier
5, 12 Indiscipline
3.7.11 Estate agent (3 Deal, 7 Customer, 11 Benefit)
3.6.1 1 Manufacturing, profit in business
3,9,8,12 Loss by improper daring
2,6 Efforts for existence, finance
6,10 Efforts for development
10. 11 Development is an achievement
2.1 1 Finance is an achievement
3 rd house sub lord connected with :
Mercury/Jupiter with Air or Fix sign then native will think twice
before taking any action
Attitude : 3rd House :
r d
If 3 house sub lord is connected with :
• P' house Importance to his own intellect, mentally ready to
do any thing, difficult to explain or convince them, obstinate
• 2nd House - Emphasis given to wealth, family and
speech
• 3rd house - Ready for any kind of daring by over
estimating oneself, mix with the people, leadership,
.addicted to any bad habits
• 3, 10 house I am only right tendency
• 4th house Busy with his own activities, only homely
atmosphere, dislike to go away from the home, potentiality,
good concentration

• 5th House Moody, irresponsible, interested in speculation,
love and affections
• 6th House Ready to do work, service, production line,
surrounded by enemies, wants success
th
• 7 House Interested only in business, publicity, travel, has
daring to insult any body
• 8th House Taking risk, suspicious mind, protecting legacy,
attached with family customs and due to it may suffer loss or
profit, interest in technical work
• 9th House Attitude towards the religion, knowledge and justice.,
truth speaker
• 1 0th House I am only right attitude
• 11th House Want success
• 12th House Bad habits, try to avoid responsibility
Expression : 3rd House :
'jii
3 house sub lord connected with :
Sun
Moon
Mercury
Mars
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn
RahuKetu
In limit but impressive
Excited
Over limit
Threatened, Argumentative
Seriously
Like actor, with body expression
Less but to the point
Improper
Cannot express as want

Education : 1. In mother tongue
2. In other language
2 Sub Lord connected with Rahu - Study in other language
2'a Sub Lord connected with Rahu & Mercury - Study in other
language
2mX Sub Lord not connected with Rahu & Mercury - Go for study
in mother tongue
Culture (Sanskar) :
Mother is a first teacher for child and if Chouse is afflicted then
there is a deficiency in a culture or native does not get proper
culture (sanskar) from mother.
4^ House
6th House
9* House
11th House
12* House
Basic / Academic / Primary Education
Mother first teacher
Competition, Scholarship and Loan
Higher education
Success, Benefit
Study in Abroad
3rd House
Aptitude, Interest in particular subject,
choose the line accordingly
5* House
Intelligence / Intellectual point of view
9* House
House
6th House & 12th House -
Supporting House
6* House Competition
12* House Study Abroad
11th House - Success, Benefit
Which line should be selected, 9 should
support that line
Admission : Horary Chart :
Answer can be given based on the horary chart whether native will
get the admission or not?
If he will get the admission than whether it will a donation sit or
merit sit? -

If native will be able to get the admission in home town or at the
distance place ?
Native
1st child
2^ child
3 11 child and so on
Please treat the 5* house as Asc and see the chart for prediction if
question asked by the parents or directly start with the Asc if
student him / herself ask the question.
4a Sub Lord connected with :
.4,6,11 - Will get the admission in the institution where he
has applied for
• 5, 8, 12 - Will not get the admission where he has applied
• 4, 6, 1 1, 12- Will get the admission on payment sit
• 4, 6, 9, 11 - Will get the admission with some one's
recommendation
• Jupiter +4,6,11,12 Initially institution will say no. But
subsequently will give Admission by
expanding number of sits.
• S atum +4,6,11,12 Initi ally institution will say no but
subsequently will give the Admission due to
cancellation of some one’s admission
• 4USL or it's Star Lord is retrograde and also connected with 4,6,11
Native will get the admission only after retrograde planet becomes
direct and after passing the degree form where planet was become
retrograde.
• Prepare different chart for different institution.
• If 4th house Sub Lord is connected with duality with 4, 6, 1 1 , student
will get the admission in other institute run by the same management.
1st House
5* House ”
7th House
9^ House _

Progress in Education :
4,h Sub Lord connected with :
Good education up to
10* standard
Disturbance, failure
in education
Slow track, Pass / Fail
etc.
• 6th & 6* Sub Lord & also connected with 2 & 1 1 - Will get
scholarship / winning price
• Positive Houses + 3,5,10 - During education
child will involve in
extra activity in
School
• 5,6,8,1 1 - Will get passed by illegal means /theft
• 3,5,10 - Before completion of 10* standard, school
will be changed due to any
reason like transfer of parents or other
reasons
• 4,6,11 + Jupiter and/or Mercury
• Positive and negative house
Positive House + 3, 10, 12
Jupiter + Moon
Venus
Saturn
Sun
- Study in hostel
- Good command in
Literature
- Good in Arts subject
- Good in History
- Good in Politics,
Economics, Science

•If Mars & Mercury is powerful and connected with 4 house
native will have good command on Calculation part
After 10th Standard Diversification in Study :
Higher Education - 9 “House
4fhHouse ” Basic / Academic / Primary 'Education
Mother first teacher
6* House
9*House
ll*House
12m House
9*House
9*House
support that line
a
9th Sub Lord is connected with:
• 9, 6, 11 + Mercury / Jupiter - Will go for Higher Education
Mercury Knowledge, Jupiter
Higher study
•5,8,12 - Not good for higher study
• 5,8, 12 with 6 and 11 - Will study up to graduate level /
Diploma course
• 9,6,11 + Mercury + Jupiter +
Competition, Scholarship and Loan
Higher education
Success, Benefit
Study in Abroad
6* House & 12th & 11* House -Supporting
House
6** House Competition
1 2th House Study Abroad
1 1 * House Success and Benefit
Which line should be selected, 9* should
Average study

Which Line Should Be Selected ?
9th Sub Lord connected with :
•Mercury and Jupiter
• Sun, Saturn, Mars
• Moon, Venus
Commerce , Management,
Finance, C A, Law, MBA,
ICWA, FCAetc.
Medical, Engineering
Arts, Literature
Sun
Saturn and / or Mars
Moon and / or Venus
Mercury and Jupiter
Medical Field - Karaka for Medical
Line
Engineering
Arts
Commerce , Management , Finance ,
C A, Law, MBA, IC WA, FC A
Commerce :
CA, MBA, Lawyer, Financial Management, ICWA, FCAetc.
Mercury “ Accountancy, Counseling,
Consultancy, Project Report,
Documentation
Cost Accounting, IC AW, Audit
Finance, Management, Law, LLM,
Legal Matters , Taxation *
Taxation, Audit
Management Course
Sun Power, Control
Jupiter Ambitions
9th Sub Lord connected with :
♦ 12*SubLord+12*House + 9,6,11 - AbroadStudy
♦ Law Religion -Jupiter must be connected with 9* House
♦ Law ~ Jupiter + Venus - Matrimonial cases
- Jupiter + Sun ** Government cases
- Jupiter + Sun - Public prosecutor, Judge
- Jupiter + Venus - Family court of Law
" Jupiter + Moon ** Family court of Law
- Jupiter + Saturn - Labor, Property, Dispute
cases
- Jupiter + Mars - Criminal Lawyer (>44
Saturn
Jupiter
Mercury + Jupiter + Saturn
Sun+ Mercury + Jupiter

Educational Loan:
6th House - Loan
9* Sub Lord + 6* House, 8* Sub Lord + 6* House, 6* Sub Lord
connected with 2,lJ and 1 1 * house Native will get the loan
8ftHouse - 8thHouse is 2nd House for the
person who is giving a loan
81h Sub Lord + 6th Sub Lord - Loss to the person giving the
loan Financial benefit to us
That is our 2nd House
Also connected with 1 1* House Benefit to Native
m
Science : Medical Field : SUN:
9th Sub Lord Connected with :
• Sun
• Sun + Jupiter/ Mars
• Sun + Saturn
• Sun + Venus
• Sun + Venus
• Sun + Saturn
Sun + Mars
Medical Field Allopathic,
Ho-meopathy, Aurvedic
Allopathic
Ayurvedic
Homeopathy
Cosmetology
Orthopedic
Cardiologist, Surgeon
Sun + Jupiter
Sun + Jupiter + Venus -
+ Moon
Sun + Saturn + Venus -
Sun +Satum+MercurySun + Moon +NeptuneSun + Moon/ Venus
Sun+Rahu
Sun+Hershel
Sun + Virgo / Scoipio Sign
Sun + Virgo + Scorpio
orb^orS^House
Sun + Saturn + 8th HouseGeneral Consultant
Gynecologist, Child Specialist,
Pediatrician
Vernal, Sex related disease
Skin Specialist, Ear & Throat
Specialist
Psychiatric
Eye Specialist
X Ray, Sonography, Anaesthetist
Scanning, MRI Specialist
Pathologist
Pathologist
Dentist
r£

Science : Engineering Field : Saturn and / or Mars :
9* Sub Lord connected with Saturn and/ or Mars - Engineering Field
9* Sub Lord Connected with :
Venus + 5m House

• Mars + Venus or Saturn +
. Venus or Neptune + Watery sign - Marine Engineering
• Mars + Saturn + Sun - Combination of
Engineering and Medical
field
• Uranus + Neptune - Meteorology
Arts : Moon and Venus :
9* Sub Lord connected with Moon and / or Venus - Arts Fi el d
9* Sub Lord Connected with :
• Moon + Venus - Fashion Designing
• Moon + Venus + Mars - Resort, Water Rider
• Moon + Venus + Mars +
4th / 5th / 6* House - Hotel Management
• Moon + Venus + 3rd + 9th house +
Mercury Journalism, Media,
Advertising, Photography,
Tourism
• 9* Sub Lord is connected with Dual sign + 6 & 1 1 and 11th Sub
Lord is connected with 6* and 9* House Native will get Double
Degree
• 9°Sub Lord is connected with Earthy Sign + Moon + Venus + Sun
+ Scorpio Sign Native will get specialization in Genetic
Technology
• 9th Sub Lord + Jupiter + Mars + Sun - IAS, IPS
• 9m Sub Lord + Sun + Jupiter - IFS

L Service
2. Business
• 1st Sub Lord - Risk taking capacity
• 1* Sub Lord connected with Earthy sign / Fixed sign or with
Saturn or such slow moving planet Native wants stability
• 1st Sub Lord is connected with Movable sign or Dual Sign or
connected with Sun / Mars / Jupiter Native is always ready to
take Risk and don't think about stability
1 * Sub Lordis connected with both situation as stated above
Native will go for Service + Business simultaneously
10thHouse: 6* and/or 7* House
til.
10 SL connected with 6*House - Service
10 ■ SL connected with 7 House - Business
lO^SL connected with 6th & 7* - Service + Business or Both
Business independent or with. support ;
1 * Sub Lord Connected with :

7* Sub Lord connected with :
7'h Sub Lord is connected with Dual sign + Jupiter / Mercury and if
either of one condition will be there Native will break one
partnership and entered in to another partnership.
• Duality sign /house- Native will be connected with more
than one company
• 7*SLor7*House +
Hershel /Neptune - Native should be cautious in business, no
* partnership, Fraud, Unexpected changes,
loss may take place
.10th House and Business *
10* Sub Lord connected with :

5*House
6* House
7* House
8*House
9* House
5th & 9* House -
3rd& 9th + Jupiter +
Sports, Entertainments, resorts,
gymnasium, Medical field, YogaJCanna
Kand, speculative business, Horse riding,
share market, Art
Service industries, Labor, HRD,
employment assignment, Food Products,
Pat animals
Public life, social activities, Business
Insurance, Revenue Dept, Income Tax,
Sales Tax, Wealth Tax, Havala business,
All types of taxes , Cremation activity
Education, Tourism, Religious activity,
Lawyer
Fluctuating activity
Mercury + Mars - Printing, Press, Journalism, Media Dept,
10* House - Family Business, Government, Big
Industrialist
7,9,10,11 - Politics, Politicians
^th
2, 4, 10 House Family Business
• lT House
• 12* House
Dasha Factor
Success in all the activities, social, public
life
Jail, Hospital, Criminals, Illegal
activities, settling at distance place
One to another service, Business changes
but work will remain same
Change of Job/ Place :
5*&9*MainHouse
Operate in Dasha - Give change in Job/
Place
Good Change
Bad change. Not advisable

Partnership /Business / Support :
7* House is the main house for Business, Partnership, Support
7* Sub Lord connected with :
• 2 ,4 ,5 ,8 , 1 1 - Support good for partnership
• Fix sign + Saturn -• Private Limited company
• Jupiter + Duality +
Saturn +*
Watery / Fiery sign •- Public Limited company
Achievement:
l^andlO* House
Success
2nd House
House of Income Single or more than
one source of income
2,kl SL+ Fix Sign +
Saturn
Single income, one source of income
2* SL L Earthy Sign +
Saturn - Single income , one source of income
2nJSL+ Duel Sign +
Jupiter + Mercury - More than one source of income
Corruption or Unearned Income : 1st and 3rd Sub Lord
connected with :
+ 3rJHouse 5,8,12
Main condition also speculative
Daring to do wrong act
Native can do anything positive or
. # negative

S^SLjS^SL, 12*SLConnectedwith2Jl - ffiddenincome
8* Wealth House for opposite person
5* Benefit House for opposite person
12*House Without efforts
If connected with your 2 & 1 1 means benefit to you.
Yours 9* House is 3 of the opposite person - He will brain wash you
for any wrong deed.
1* House - Implementation ' of your thought/ action.
Jail Yoga - 12* SL connected with 3,8, 12+Fixedsign /
Earthy Sign + Rahu / Saturn -
10* SL connected with Mercury, - Trading, Sales man, Agency,
Jupiter, + 3, 9, 10, 11 Consultancy, counseling
10th SL+Mars/ Satum+Earthy / - Industrialist, Manufacturer
7^ub Lord Connected with :
• Sun
• Mars -
• Jupiter-
• Saturn
• Saturn -
• Me,Mo,Ve
Native will take a person as a partner having good
status in society / Govt
Native will take a person as a partner having good
Manufacturing talent
Native will take a person as a partner having good
Financial knowledge
Native will take a person as a partner having good
Financial capacity,
Native will take a person as a partner having good
Legal knowledge
Native will take a person as a partner having good
knowledge of labor job
Native will take a person as a sleeping partner
Native will take a person as a partner from
Trading, Media point of view

Abroad :
12 SL connected with 3, 9, 12 with Moon, Mercury, Jupiter Foreign
Yoga
1 0th SL connected with 9th & 1 2*Houseor
12th SL connected with 10th & 7* House - Prefer to go abroad
4th SL connected with 12*, 10*& 3rd
House or4* SL or 4*House afflicted - Prefer to stay away
from birth place
12*SL not connected with Fix Sign “ Native will go abroad,
come back & will stay
and settled
at Birth place
1? SL not connected with 2, 6, 1 1 House - No success in abroad,
comeback
1 21h SL connected with 3 , 9, 1 2 with 8th House &
also afflicted by Rahu, Neptune, Saturn - Indicate problem in
10th SL or 7th SL connected with 5, 8, 12 -
house
2, 6? 10; 1 lthSL or House are connected
ltf'SL connected with 8* House
Lottery :
3ld House is important - Because it is fixed amount + Daring +
Agreement
+ Other conditions like speculative tendency
3rd SL+ 5, 6, 1 1 , 2 - Sure Lottery win
5* SL+ 6, 2, 1 1 - Sure Lottery win
Smuggling, Hawala Business :
abroad
Not advisable for any
venture
Full success,
Industrialist
Good and Bed both
conditions at a
time
Tax Dept/Govemment
trouble

Marriage institution is being established by the society to
maintained life on the earth and cordial relations among people by
forming some rules for the family life. Every society has it’s own
rules for the normal age of marriage and number of marriages
allowed. But most of the marriages today are based on reasons such
as financial backing, backing from the partners family, for career or
social standing or even to get settled abroad. One might marry
another partner for fame etc. Now a days there is a new concept
developed in which couple decide not to have children,
The 1st house represent the native, 7* house represent the
partner and same partner is bound to be a family member which is in
the 2nd house and permanent tie relationship shows by the 1 1 * house.
Before proceeding for the matching of the horoscope, one
should consider the following points in an individual chart.
1 . Longevity
2. Health Physical and Mental both
3 . Promise of marriage life
4. Status of marriage life
5. Promise of the child
6. Financial aspect
7. Dasha and progression after marriage
1. Longevity:
1 , 3 and 8* house sub lord, Saturn and the rising planet, Sun and
Moon should not be strong significators ofBadhaka / Maraka
houses and less connection with 6, 8 and 12* houses and their
representatives.
Health:
Physical Health : 1st house, Sun, Moon the rising planets in the
Asc or aspect to the Asc should not be connected with the 6, 8,
12* houses or it's significators or 6, 8, 12 houses significators
should not signify the l^liouse.
Mental Health : Ist , 3rd and 9* house sub lord. Moon, Mercury
and the rising planet, and Moon's 1st aspect after the birth play an
important role in determining the mental condition.
a)
b)

3. Promise of Marriage Life:
The 7* house sub lord shows the promise if it is connected with
2, 7, 1 1 and also with Venus.
4. Status of the marriage I if e :
a) If the 7th house sub lord afflicted, duality, barren sign,
significator of negative houses
b) More then one marriage indication due to duality and promise
through 2,hl house then question arise of a second marriage due to
the death of thepartner Orby the divorce
c) PI anets in the cusp of the 7th house
d) The Venus Karaka also play the important role From the above
radical factors, one can judge the status of the marriage life like
harmony, disturbance, separation, early death of the partner,
divorce, remarriage Ofto live alone.
5. Promise of the Child:
The 5th, 1 1th and 2"d house sub lord and Jupiter's significance with
positive houses, effect of the fertile planets and the fertile sign
6. Financial :
In today's materialistic world money become the main factor in
every field so one shouldjudge that native is able to meet the
requirement of the spouse and the family.
7. Dasha
Dasha and the following dasha for nearly 15 to 20 years should
be connected with the marriage houses after the marriage.
After considering the above factors in both the charts one should
goforthe match.
In matching, longevity and promise of the marriage life with the
status of themarriage life play important role. Without going in much
detail, one can make different categories according to the society and
age factor. For example : In the female chart if you find a medium
longevity with more then one marriage condition, in such condition
one can select the chart ofthemale in whose chart duality by divorce.
Suppose both the charts indicates short longevities then the
marriage is not advisable because children becomes orphans in such

So such type of different categories you can classify.
For matching factors one can proceed as under.
1. The ailing planets of both the charts should be significators of
the 2nd, 5* 1 1th and 7* in each other's chart.
2. 7* house sub Jord of the both the charts should be significator of
the 2nd, 5th, 7* and 1 1th house.
3 . The running Dasha and following Dashas of the both the charts
should be significators of 2nd, 5*, 7* and 1 1th
4. Tropical aspects of the planets, the Asc .and M.C. should match
with each other. Particularly superior planets of the one chart
should not be afflicted to the inferior planets or points in the
other chart.
After considering the above factors there is no need to see or to
weigh the 36 points , Mars Dosa or one should not go to match Mars
Dosa with Rahu or Saturn.
In the chart if you find purpose other then the real marriage life,
one can expect a problem in marriage life. When one of the charts
period starts negative and if the chart does not show any kind of
separation then one person is sufFeringdueto the partner.

AY*
• vfe-- *yw!
First check the longevity ofthe native and only then check for the
marriage.
Positive Houses for Marriage :
7th House
2nd House
5* House
1 l*House
Partner
family
Love and affection with each other
Permanent Partnership
Negative Houses for Marriage :
4* House
6* House
8* House
12^ House
12th from 5* No affection for partner
12*from7* Separation
Mental distress
Disturbance in personal life
Promise of Marriage Life : Yes /No
7* Sub Lord connected with
• 2nd, 7*, 11 01 House + Venus
• Venus, Moon, Jupiter, Mars
• Venus, Moon
• Mars , Jupiter, Venus
Denial of Marriage :
Marriage possible
Marriage Plus points for
marriage
For Male Chart
For Female Chart
- No Marriage
No Marriage
confirm
No Marriage if all
three present
7* Sub Lord connected with
• 6, 10, 4, 12 House / Sub Lord
• + Barren sign (Aries, Gemini, Leo, Virgo -
• + Saturn or Ketu

Single or more than one Marriage ;
7th Sub Lord connected with
• Jupiter or Mercury
• Dual Sign
• Jupiter / Mercury + Dual Sign -
• 7* Sub Lord connected with
Jupiter/ Mercury + Duel Sign -
More than one marriage
More than one marriage
More than one marriage
More than one marriage
Separation Death of a partner or Divorce ;
7* Sub Lord connected with
From 7*1101156 Badhaka /Maraka- Life Partner will die before
native
• Is afflicted - Death before native
• 6,10&I2*House - Divorce
Mercury /Jupiter - Divorce
2nd Marriage:
2nd House Sub Lord connected with 2nd or 1 1th Sub Lord / House
Native will get ready for 2nd marriage else will not marry second time.
In ancient time 9* House was considered for T* marriage because
at that time native has to marry with the brother / sister of the died
partner. But that is not correct in today's condition. Because 9* is the
3rd (Brother/ Sister) of 7*House
However, for 3ld marriage we have to check 9* house. It is 8* from 21Id
house.
2nd is 8th from the 7* House (Spouse) - 2 nd marriage due to
death or divorce
9* is 8* from the 2nd house - 3rd marriage due to death or
divorce

There forwe have to check 9* house for 3 marriage
T* House
4*House
5*House
7*House
9thHouse
1st House
House.
Self
Mother
First Child
Spouse /2nd Child
Father /3rd Child
5* from the 9* House. There for 9* is Father's
You can't check 1 7 relationship for parents (4*Mother& 9*Father)
Disturbance in marriage life :
7* Sub Lord connected with
• Positive + Negative House - Disturbance after marriage
life, Pull on Life
• Barren sign - Disturbance after marriage
life
7*!Sub Lord not connected with
Mercury / Jupiter / Dual Sign +
Connected with negative house
rsub Lord connected with Neptune
7* Cusp connected with Neptune
Timing of marriage :
Changes according to cast, place , religion, custom etc .
7 * Sub Lord connected with S atum - Late / Delay Marriage
7 * Sub Lord in Fixed or B arren Sign - Late / Delay Marriage
Saturn in 5 * House - Late / Delay Marriage
No Divorce but worst
marriage life condition
- Fraud in selection of
life partner
- Fraud from opposite
partner
Saturn in 5* House will aspect 7th, 11* and 2nd House from it's 3rd,
7A and 10* aspect.

7* Sub Lord connected with
• Moon, Mercury , Jupiter, Venus
• Sun and Mars
• Moon , Mercury and Venus
• Sun, Mars arid Jupiter
• Saturn or Ketu
Marriage at proper time
Marriage at proper time
Before / Early Marriage
Before / Early Marriage
Late Marriage
From where you will get your Life Partner :
7* Sub Lord connected with
• 3rdHouse
From which relation / Source :
7th Sub Lord connected with
• 3,9,11 + Mercury /Venus
• S^SL&S^SL with 7th SL
• 3, 9 and 12 house
• 3,7,9, 11 with Jupiter
• Positive + Negative House
• Positive + Negative House +
7th SL with 5th SL & 5th SL with 7
Nearby, same city
Nearby, Same city
Distance place
Through family / society
Through Marriage burrow,
News Paper, Inter Net
During Journey
During study, college
Love Marriage
From service place,
Religion place, Religion
institution, Journey,
Education, Through Religious
Leader
Run away from the family &
will get married
Chances of civil marriage and
then religious marriage
Disturbance after marriage
Disturbance after marriage
Marriage due to Look, Figure, Money, Talent, Status may the
reason for

5th SL connected with 7* SL but 7* L3L is not connected with 5* SL
Only Affair no marriage
5th SL connected with 4th or 6th SL * Opposite party will
break the relationship
5* SL connected with 12* House - Native will break the
relationship
5th SL connected with Duality +
5 * SL is connected with 4, 6 and 12* +
5* SL connected with 7* SLbut
7 SL is not connected with Duality but
7* SL connected with 5* SL Than 1st affair / relation will
break but 2nd affair will be
converted in to marriage
5* SL connected with Duality +
tfl
7 SL connected with Duality +
5 & 7* connected with each other +

• Sun
• Moon
• 5,8, 12th House
• Saturn
• Jupiter
4* SL connected with 5, 10, 3, 8
7 SL is connected with
Gold
Silver
Not get anything even though
rich
Opposite family will be very
orthodox & reserve
Marriage in large family
GharJamai
Rahu/Ketu
8, 2, ll^House
I2m& 3mr4lHouse
Rahu/Ketu / Saturn
Sun /Jupiter
Saturn
7* SL Indicate
3, 10 or I2,hhouse
Inter Cast Marriage
Marriage in awkward condition,
Unwilling situation
Marriage at distance pi ace or
- Marriage after running away from
home
Marriage in Lower Cast
Marriage in Upper Cast
- Native will become very choosy
for spouse
Types / Personality of the spouse
Not willing to stay with joint
family
Dasha / Bhukti and Timing of Marriage :
If the sub lord is not indicating delay marriage as discussed above
then native will get marriage at proper age according to native's
cast, religion and customs.
If the sub lord is indicating delay marriage, particularly from
Saturn then one can get marriage during the Dasha or Bhukti or
Antara of Saturn
For Libra and Taurus Asc, Saturn becomes the Rajya Yoga
Karaka planet and as such case not be considered as a planet for
delay.
Combination of Dasha and Bhukti should cover all the required
houses for exp . For marriage 2, 7 and 1 1
At the time of marriage Dasha Rulers and transit of luminaries
from the significators of the marriage or either in sign or star or
sub or in mutual aspect during transit.
S

Fortunate Spouse :
• 1 ■* house sub lord connected with 2? 1 1 with Jupiter or Venus with
out any afflictions with 1st house or 1st house sub lord or Jupiter/
Venus then native becomes a fortunate spouse.
How to find out Moon sign or Asc or Ruling Planet of Spouse ?
• 7*1 house sub lord and it's relation with sign, star and aspect of
other planets
• Dasha rulers at the time of marri age
• Significatorof2,7, 11
For example : In male chart house sub lord is Jupiter deposited in
Capricorn sign deposited with Sun + Saturn + Mercury + Ketu and
Jupiter aspects Moon + in Moon star.
In spouse chart Moon sign is also Capricorn and Moon is in Sun star,
Jupiter Sub and Asc star lord is Jupiter and sub lord is Mercury.
In female chart (spouse of above male chart) 7* house sub lord is
Mercury, and Mercury in Libra sign in Rahu Star and in Sun sub.
In male chart Native bom in Libra Asc and Mercury aspect to Rahu
also in conjunction with Sun. Moon sign is Taurus. (Mercury as a sub
lord of 'An female chart is in Venus sign)
7* House Sub Lord or Sub Lord’s Star Lord if Direct/ Stationary
/Retrograde at the time of birth :
• If it remains Retrograde in progressed chart till end of life then
spouse nature can not match with native internally
• If it becomes direct before marriage then it is a positive sign
• If it becomes direct after marriage then situation will improve
after that period
• If 7* house sub lord or sub lord's star lord is direct at the birth time
but in progress either of becomes retrograde then situation get
reversed from the above three points.
• If 7* house sub lord is stationary at the time of birth or after birth
and it remains the same till end of life in progress and if it is
connected with barren sign or Saturn / Ketu then native not
willing to go for marriage.

Note : If marriage with a particular person with a specific purpose
other then marriage then there are chances of major disturbance in a
marriage life.
Disturbance in personal life :
If 3 house, 8* house and 12 house is afflicted and connected with
4, 6 and 8 it indicates disturbance in personal life and planets also like
Saturn , Ketu or barren sign involved .
There are various reasons for disturbance in personal life
• Attitude of the person:
o By birth or by grown up conditions native may have a nature to
restrict oneself not to involved in normal personal life,
o After marriage, if native involved with some one other then life
partner
o After marriage if native involved too much with religious
tendency
For above three reasons, 1* and 3rd house is playing major role
• Physical weakn ess :
o Before marriage if 1* house sub lord is showing afflicted with 6,
o After marriage, due to Dasha running at the time of marriage or
immediately after that connected with 6, 8, 12 will affect the
personal life
• Psych ological factor / Fear :
olrt , 3rd house and Moon If they are connected with 4, 8, 12 and
also connected with Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus" Native cannot
enjoy personal life
o 1st, 3 rd and Moon aspected by or connected with Saturn Same
result
* Environment:
o If I* house is connected with Jupiter or Neptune Native may
involve with environment or status fear may create the problem
for personal life
0 If 1st house connected with Saturn or strongly connected with 6th
& 10* Native become workaholic and it will create the problem
in personal life
0 If 10* house and lrt house indicates natives much more mental
involvement in carrier also create the problem in personal life f~,l

Inmalechart - Il*and5*house I Pis 5th from 71h+ Jupiter
In female chart - 5* and 11 * house + Jupiter
5 nouse is a house of creativity.
5* Sub Lord connected with :
• 2, 5, 1 1 + Jupiter (Karaka for child ) or Moon and Venus Promise
of child
* 4, 10, 12 + barren sign (Aries, Gemini, Leo, Virgo ) or connected
with Saturn, jjtahu, Ketu No child
* 2, 5? 1 1 and 6 Child with medical treatment
9 1 1th house is the 5* house from 7th house showing partner's
position
* Mars and 121h house Indicate surgery
* Saturn or Ketu Abortion, Miscarriage. In such condition avoid
sex life after conception and don't adopt family planning
o In above conditions after conception if 2, 6 are connected
Take care in diat
o If 3,9? 12 are connected Avoid] oumey
o If 8, 12 connected No sex life after conception
• Jupiter or Mercury or Dual sign Chances of twins
Sex of child:
• Depend on male chart only
• Female chart is not at all responsible for sex of child
5* House sub lord connected with :
• Mars, Sun, Jupiter
• Moon, Venus, Saturn -
• Mercury,. Rahu, Ketu -
• Twins
• Eunuch
Male child
Female child
Depends on relationship with
other planets
Heredity conditions ?
Mercury, Jupiter & Dual sign
Saturn or Mercury connection
with out any relationship

• Bhukti Dasha decides the sex of child (Dasha is running for long
time where as in one Dasha native may have male as well as
female child. But due to the different sub dasha rulers, he will get
either male or female child or twins , which also depend on the
cusp sub lord indication.
• Planet deposited in odd or even sign also play the important role .
Odd sign indicates male and even sign indicates female child.
• Suppose native is passing through Venus Maha Dasha and Sub
period rulers of Venus, Moon or Saturn (Anter Dasha) will give
female child, while sub period of Mars, Sun or Jupiter will give
male child possibilities.
• In example chart Native was passing through Rahu Maha Dasha
and during this dasha in 1987 and in 1998 male and female both
child born respectively in Saturn and Moon sub period. Now,
Saturn in radical chart is in conjunction with Sun and Jupiter with
Mercury and Ketu and Saturn is in Sun Star. So in sub period of
Saturn, in the influence of Sun and Jupiter is more indicates male
child. While in Moon sub period, Moon is in Taurus sign and in
Sun Star and Moon is aspected by Jupiter from even sign. So
basically Moon it self is a female planet indicate female child
while Dasha lord is remain the same so one can take the
conclusion from the sub period rulers.
Defective Child:
• 5* house sub lord is connected with both positive and negative
house (4, 12) and also connected with Saturn or Ketu indicates
defective child.
Child after very long time :
• If 5* house sub lord is positive but not supported by Dasha, will
delay the child birth.
m
Adopted Child:
• If 5* sub lord is afflicted, connected with barren sign and no
relation with Jupiter There will be no hope for child.
• If 5th house sub lord is afflicted but also connected with 2 and 1 1
and some connection with Jupiter also then one can go for
adoption of child.

• If in child's chart, 4* house sub lord connected with duality and
also connected with 3 and 8* house, it indicates one can go for as
adopted child. (S^house is 12th house from mother and 8* house is
12* from father's 9* house)
• While adopting the child if birth data of the child is not available,
then one can rely on horary method and can get the condition of
the child as below.
o First mentally decide a particular child and ask the question
to the astrologer whether this particular child is ok for them
from Asc of the horary chart one can read the full chart just
like birth chart and give the opinion regarding the nature,
health, education and other factors. So if first house and lord
of 1st house is not afflicted and at the same time horary Asc
and horary Moon having a good significators in querist chart
then one can adopt that particular child otherwise one can go
for another child after getting the confirmation from the
horary chart.
o One can use this horary chart for all future prediction for that
adopted child.
Hereditary disease for child *
• In child chart, if the 6* house sub lord is connected with Saturn
and also connected with the 8* ,house, it indicates hereditary
disease because 8* house is 12* house from father side and 5*
house from the mother side (During conception only child will
have this problem) and in parents chart cusp sub lord of the *
respective child connected with Saturn or Rahu which also
connected with 4* and 12* house indicate hereditary disease in
child.
Dejection of Child by the mother at the time of birth :
• If the 4* hose sub lord of the child chart connected with 3, 8 and
12 and Moon is also afflicted at the same time Dasha at the time
of birth also indicate 3,8, 10, 12 house combination indicate that
child will not get the happiness from his /her mother.
Growing of child by other then parents :
• If 4* house sub lord of the child chart connected with 3, 10, 5, 1 2
then such child will grow at differentplace. At the same time
dasha also connected with 3, 5, 10, 12is necessary.

Lucky child for family :
• Parents chart al so indicate positive or negative time at the time of
childbirth. So one should not blame child for luck or struggle for
the family.
• If in child's chart, Jupiter is connected with 1st , 2,td, 5 * , 9* Or 10*
house indicate prosperity forthe family.
• If malefic planets and afflicted planets connected with 2 , 4* and
10th house indicates future struggle forthe family.
• In the example chart Lord ofAsc Moon is aspected by
Jupiter as a lord of 9* house and also aspect Mars Yoga
Karaka Planet for Cancer Asc indicate luck for family after
her birth.
Only one child :
• If 5 house sub lord is connected with 2,5, 11 plus Jupiter but if 7
or 9* sub lord are not connected with 2,5,11 then it indicates only
single child.
Death of parents with the birth of child :
• If 4* or 9* or both sub lord are connected with Badhaka / Maraka
from 4* and 9* in child chart and Sun and Moon are also afflicted,
Dasha also connected with Badhaka / Maraka of parents in child
chart indicates early death of parents.
Parent child relationship :
• In parents chart, if 5*house sub lord is afflicted and connected
with 6,8, 12 and Jupiter is also afflicted, it indicates parents will
not get happiness from child.
• Child's ruling planets connected with 6, 8, 12 in parents chart then
that particular child will give the problem to the parents.
• In child's chart, if 4th house sub lord is connected with the 12*
house or 8* house and 1st house sub lord is connected with 4*
house and Moon is also afflicted it indicates child wants to keep
good relation with mother but mother will not take care of the
child.
• If mother's ruling planets connected with 6, 8, 12 in child chart
then also mother will give problem to the child. rTT

• In child's chart if 9* house sub lord is connected with 12 or 8*
house and 1 house sub lord connected with 9* house and Sun
is also afflicted then father will not keep good relation with
child but child wants to keep good relation with father.
• If father's ruling planets connected with 6,8, 12 house in child's
chart then also father will give problem to the child.
• In child's chart, if 1st house sub lord is connected with 3, 12 then
child will not keep good relation with mother and if 4* house sub
lord is connected with 1st house, mother will try to keep good
relation with child.
• In child's chart, if 1st house sub lord is connected with 8 or 12*
house and 9* house sub lord is connected with 1st house then
child will not keep good relation with father but father will keep
good relation with child.
• In parents chart, if Dasha rulers of the child's chart is connected
• with 6, 8, 12then parents will suffer through that particular child
during that period.
• In child's chart, if Dasha rulers of parents chart is connected with
6, 8 or 12th house then child will suffer through the parents . -
Step Mother:
• If 3ld or 4* house sub lord is afflicted 'then possibility of step
mother (3rd house is 7* house from 9* house and 12* from the 4*
house)
• If 3 house is with duality, then possibility of step mother (When
indication of mother's short longevity, remarriage of father,
Moon is afflicted)
• If 3rd or 4* house with duality then father will remarry (Father's
marriage life disturbed and divorce ) mother and step mother
both are present
Child abuse /exploitation:
• In child's chart if 8* house sub lord is connected with 3, 8 and 1st
house and also connected with Venus, Moon or Mars and
afflicted by Suppose

o Lord of f house- then from family member,
o Lord of 3 rd house Neighbor or brother/sister or during j oumey
o Lord of 4* house Lady just like mother
o Lord of 5* house - Students
o Lord of 6* house - Servant or maternal uncle side relative
o Lord of 7* house - Known social person
o Lord of 8th house - In awkward positions / unknown person
o Lord of 9* House - Father, Guru
o Lord of 10* house- Higher authority, boss
o Lord of 11* house - Friend , elder brother/ sister, uncle
o Lord of 1 2th house - Unknown person , at hospital , at j ail

v.r
2sl House - Family and Finance /Money
3rd House - Sale of Property
4*House - Indicates fix property
5*House - Purchaser's ll*house
6*House - Loan facility or Tenants
7*House - Litigations in property
10*House - Purchaser's 4* house
ll*House - Desire to have property, benefit in sale of
property
12*House - Investment for property, loss in sale of
property
Saturn - Karaka for heredity and property,
Construction
Mars - Karaka forland
Mercury & Jupiter connected with 7* house - Indicates
litigation
• 4* Sub Lord with 3, 5, 8, 12 houses then the native can not make
his own house.
• 4* Sub Lord with 4, 1 1? 12, 2 along with Saturn or Mars then the
native can purchase the home. 6* house connection indicates
loan facilities.
• 4* sub lord connected with 4,8, 11 and 8* sub lord with 4 ,6 , 11
then the native will get the heredity property.
• 4 sub lord connected with the 2, 4, 11,6, 12 with duality
indicates one can purchase another property by mortgaging old
one.
• • 4* house sub lord connected with 6, 3, 5, 8 and 12 houses then
one will not able to repay the loan and mortgaged property will
be sold out by the lender.
• If Saturn is connected with 6* or 4* house, native will prefer to
stay in rental house or resale property.
• If 2,Kl house sub lord connected with 4* house and 4* house sub
lord connected with 6* and 11th house one can maintain his life
through rental income of the property. •
• 8* sub lord connected with 2, 4, 11 plus Saturn or Mars plus
duality indicates sharing in heredity property

• 8th sub lord connected with 2, 4, 11, 12 plus Saturn or Mars
indicates after making payment one will get heredity property
• 8* sub lord connected with 2, 4, 11 with 7* house plus Jupiter or
Mercury indicates litigation in heredity property
• If Saturn is afflicted in the native's chart it is always advisable to
purchase ready made property
• If Saturn and Mars both are in good positions then one can
construct his own property
• 4* and 10* sub lord with 3, 4, 5, 10, 1 1 and 12 and 4* house with
duality then frequently native has to change the residence.
• If 4* sub lord connected with 4, 1 1, 12, 2 plus 3, 5, 10 plus Saturn
or Mars it indicates native involve in sale and purchase of his own
property
• 4* sub lord connected with 6* house and Saturn The native has to
live as a tenant or purchase the property in resale or heredity
property.
• 4* sub lord with 7* house + Mercury and Jupiter then there is a
possibility of court case due to property.
• 4th sub lord connected with ltfh house and 10th sub lord is also
connected with 4 house plus Saturn or Mars indicate native will
get company quarter
• 4* sub lord connected with 4, 11, 12, 2 plus Saturn or Mars plus
duality or Mercury or Jupiter indicate more then one property for
the native
• 4* sub lord connected with Earthy sign or Scorpio sign with
Jupiter or Moon then one can have Farm house or Agriculture
land
• 4* sub lord connected with the Earthy sign with the 6* house plus
Jupiter or Moon it indicates the agriculture land.
Location of property :
th
4 House Sub Lord connected with
• Sun - Government colony
• Moon - Market area, sea shore, lake, river
• Mars - Industrial area
• Mercury - Marketplace
• Jupiter - Near school, temple, court
• Venus - Posh area, near entertainment location
• Saturn - Lonely place, slum area, distance places
• Rahu - Mosque, Church, pray house

Whether to purchase a particular property or not ?
Prepare horary chart when person desire to purchase a particular
property and if 4* house sub lord is connected with 2, 4/11 plus
fit th
Saturn or Mars and also 1 1 house sub lord connected with 4* & 1 1
then one can purchase the said property.
But if sub lord or it's star lord retrograde then one has to wait till
it become direct and cross the original degree from which planet
started to move back word. But in certain circumstances if above said
sub lord strongly connected with required houses 4, 11, 2 with but
any afflictions except retrogression one can deal with the property.
If the 4*hhouse sub lord is connected with 2,4, II and also with
the 7* house with Jupiter or Mercury so it indicates the litigation
In whose name property should be purchased ?
From all the family members chart, the chart which is showing a
condition where 4* house sub lord is connected with 2, 4, 11 without
any affliction and also connected with Saturn or Mars indicate batter
to purchase the property in the name of that family member.
Sale of property:
• 10* house sub lord connected with 3, 5, 10, 1 1 indicates profit in
sale of property and connected with 3, 5, 8 10, 12 indicate loss in
sale of property.
• 10th sub lord connected with 3 , 5, 10, 1 1 plus 2, 4, 12 houses then
sale of one property and purchase of another property.
• l(f house sub lord connected with 3 ,5 , 10 with 7* house plus
Jupiter or Mercury it indicates litigations
Hidden wealth from the property :
• If the 8* house sub lord connected with 4, 2, 11 and 4* house sub
lord connected with 2, 1 1, 6 plus connected with Jupiter or Venus
indicate chances to get hidden wealth from the property.
Borewell :
It is advisable to use horary chart for borewell and if you find
following conditions one can suggest proceeding further:
4* house sub lord connected with watery sign and also
connected with Moon, Venus and Jupiter then water will be in
borewell.

4* sub lord connected with
More percentage of
Sun
Moon -
Mars -
Jupiter -
Venus -
Saturn -
MercuryCalcium
Salt
Sulphur
Phosphorus
Magnesium
Iron
Mixed

3IdHouse
4*House
5* House
6* House
7* house
10*House
ll*House
1 2>h House
Sale of vehicle
House of vehicle
1 1th house ofthe purchaser
Loan facility to purchase the vehicle
Purchaser
Purchaser's vehicle
Desire of the vehicle
Investment in vehicle
Venus
Saturn
Jupiter
Karaka for vehicle
Self-driving
Driver
• If 4*house sub lord connected with Movable sign or Dual sign
with Venus and also signify 4, 1 1, Vindicate vehicle
• If 4* house sub lord connected with 10* 1 1 * and 6* house with
Movable or Dual sign with Venus indicate Vehicle from
company
• If 4* house sub lord connected with Duality plus 4, 1 1, 12, 2 and
3, 5, lOone can sale one and purchase another Vehicle
• If 4* house sub lord connected with Duality plus 4, II, 12, 2
indicates more than one vehicle
• If 4* house sub lord connected with 3, 8, 12 and afflicted
indicates accident
• If 4* house sub lord connected with Saturn indicate self driving
• If 4* house sub lord connected with Jupiter indicate # driver
facility
• If 4* house sub lord connected with Saturn and Jupiter bith it
indicates self driving plus driver facility
• If 4* house sub lord connected with Dual sign or Human
(Gemini, Libra, Virgo, Sagittarius) indicate two wheeler
• If 4* house sub lord connected with Bestial sign it indicates four
wheelers vehicle.
• If 4* house sub lord connected with Scoipio sign it indicates
more then fourwheelers vehicl e
• If 4* house sub lord connected with Watery sign indicate Ship,
Launch, Boat, and shipping vehicle.
r

• If 4 * hou se sub lord connected with Airy sign indicate Helicopter,
Air Plan
• If 4* house sub lord connected with Fixed sign it indicate
luxurious furniture with wheels
• If 4* house sub lord connected with Fire sign / Cardinal or Earthy
sign indicates road vehicle
• If 4* house sub lord connected with
o Mars and Moon or Venus - Petrol, Diesel vehicle
o Saturn, Mercury + Airy sign - CNG vehicle
• If 4* house sub lord connected with 8* house and 8* house sub
lord is connected with 2, 4, 1 1 one can get the insurance claim.
• If 4* house sub lord connected with 3,8, 12 and not connected
with 6, 11 then possibility of missing /theft of the vehicle
• If 10* house sub lord connected with Saturn and Venus with 4*
house it indicate Driver's j ob
Colour of the Vehicle :
If 4* house sub lord connected with ;
Sun
Moon
Mars
Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn
Red/ Golden
Orange / W hite / Pink
Yellow/Red
Green
Blue/Yellow
Indigo/Violet
Black/ Gray
Number of the Vehicle :
Total of the number plat one has to select according to planet
connected as under. While doing the total number only number is to
be considered and not include the state / district numbers.
If 4* house sub lord connected with
Sun - Number I
o Moon - 2
o Rahu * j
o Jupiter - 4
o Mercury * 5
o Venus * 6
o Ketu - 7
o Saturn - 8
o Mars - 9
■t

12“' House
3rd House
8*House
4* House
2nd House
1 l*House
Jail 1
Away from home
Restricted movement
Home
Family
Desire for bail
Saturn & Rahu - Karaka for Jail yoga
• If the lAouse sub lord is connected with 3, 8, 12plus Saturn or
Rahu then it indicate the j ail yoga.
• If the 12*house sub lord is connected with Fix sign it indicate for
long duration
• If the 12* house sub lord is connected with Cardinal or Dual sign
for short term
• If the 12* house sub lord is connected with 3,8, 12 plus 2, 4, 11
and Saturn or Rahu indicate native will get bail
• If the 12* house sub lord is connected with 7* or 10* house it
indicate imprisonment for business or political ground. And at
th ti
the same time 10 house is connected with 8* or 12 house
• If the 12* house sub lord is connected with 1, 8 or 7* and 8
house indicate imprisonment from criminal point of view
• If the 12* house sub lord is connected with 9* house and 9* house
is connected with 8* or 12* house indicate imprisonment on
religious ground
• If the 12th house sub lord is connected with 6* or 11th house one
will win the case and will relieved from the jail .
• If the 10* house sub lord is connected with 8* or 12* and also
connected with Sun or Jupiter and 1st house sub lord connected
with 3 ,5 ,8 , 1 Oindicate due to native's wrong action according to
government policy one will go in jail.
• If the 12* house sub lord is connected with 3, 8, 12plus2> 4, 6, 1 1
and also connected with Venus one will get the facility in the
jail.

3rd House
8* House
9* House
1 1 * House
12th House
12*fromthe4* (Residence /Birthplace)
Obstacles in journey or rejection for Visa
Longjourney *
Desire for long j ourney
Far distance / Unknown place
Moon, Mercury and Jupiter - Karaka forj ourney
• If 12 nouse sub lord is connected with 3, 9 and 1 2 and
connected with either Moon or Mercury or Jupiter indicates
foreign trip.
• If 12* house sub lord is connected with above conditions plus in
fix sign plus 4* house is afflicted indicates permanent stay or
long duration at abroad
• If 12th house sub lord is connected with Cardinal sign with above
• conditions and also connected with 3, 9, 1 1 short journey
• If 12* house sub lord is connected with Dual sign with above
condition and also connected with 3, 9, 11 indicate frequent
* * traveling
• • If 12* house sub lord is connected with 5* house and 5* is
• connected with 9*,1 ltb and 12th indicate entertainment tour
• If 12* house sub lord is connected with 6* house and 6* is
connected with 9* or 1 Chouse indicate one will get sponsorship
for traveling
fli
• If 12 1 house sub lord is connected with 7* house Traveling for
marriage / bu siness or for social activity
• If 12liouse sub lord is connected with 8* house indicate one has
to face the problem at abroad
• If 12* house sub lord is connected with 12* or 9* house and 10*
house connected with 9, 12, 1 1 indicates career at abroad.
• If 12* house sub lord is connected with 4* or 9* house then
traveling for education or religious tour.
• If 12* house sub lord is connected with 9* house and 9* is
fti
connected with the 6*, 9* , 11 and 12* indicate success in
education at abroad ■-

If 12* house sub lord is connected with 6* or 10* house
Traveling for health / service or for career purpose
If 12* house sub lord is connected with 3, 8, 12housesand also
afflicted Jupiter or Sun is there it indicates run away from the
countiy to protect oneself from the legal / government point of
view
If P* house sub lord is connected with 12* house and 12* house
sub lord is connected with 3, 12 and also connected with the
Saturn or Mars indicates to leave the country because of any kind
of threat of some one. At the same time 4* house sub lord should
also be afflicted

Speech : 2 House :
If 2nd house sub lord is connected with :
Sun
Moon
Mars
Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn
Rahu
Ketu
Rahu Ketu
Taste : 2^ House:
If iliouse sub lord is connected with:
Impressive
Can't maintain the link and divert to another
topic
Veiy fast, dominating and harsh speech
Good conversations and can speak on any
topic
Religious , egoistic
Pleasurable, if afflicted vulgar speech
Slowly, to the point
Command on many languages
Curse
According to planet they represent
Sun
Moon
Mars
Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn
Rahu
Ketu
Bitter & pungent
Salty
Chilly and sour
Mixed
Sweets
Sour
Bitter
Bitter and pungent
No taste
Writing : 3rd House :
1] J J1UUSC MIU 111 tl 15 CUIIUCCICU Willi .
Sun, Jupiter
Moon
Mars
Mercury
Saturn
Venus
Rahu
Ketu
Good expression
Good drafting
Common handwriting
' not in one pattern
Fast and without full stop and sharp
Different way, copy cat
Compli cated, short hand and to the point
Command on language, artist
Copy, overwriting
Too many points

Relation with siblings : 3rd House :
If 3r< house sub lord is connected with :
3. 11 and Mars
T House
Afflicted by Mars
Afflicted by Saturn
Afflicted by Venus & Moon
Good relations
Will spoil the relation
Younger brother will have some
problem
Good support from the younger
brother
Problem from the brother
Problem for property
Problem for legacy
Problem after marriage
Relation with neighbour : 3rd House:
If 3 rd house sub lord is connected with :
11th house
12th House
Profit and good social relations
Quarrel
Not good neighbour
Good neighbour
Loss
Short j ourney : ^ House :
If 3rihouse sub lord is connected with :
1,Y, 12+Mars
Mars /Saturn
Venus afflicted
No problem during travelling
Luxurious travelling
Accident during travel, but at the
same time 8* sub lord should be with
3,8,1 2 house
Problem
Pickpocketing
Quarrel
Loss of ornaments during journey
Venus afflicted in
Female chart with 8, 12 Take care while travelling
1,7,8, 12+ Mercury
and Jupiter - Court cases

Verification of correctness of news through horary chart :
3rd House:
If 3rJhouse sub lord is connected with :
Mars - Joke
Mercury - Halfnews
S atum - Incomplete or false news
Sun - * True News
Moon, - true News
Venus, - True News
Jupiter - True News
Balance of past birth (Good or bad deeds) / Purva Punya : 5*
House :
If 5th house sub lord is connected with :
• 1 51 , 9th and 10* house indicates good balance of last birth
• 6* house One has to do service for society without getting
adequate reward or suffer through health conditions
• 8* House - One has to suffer through accident, with out any
support of good fortune even no support from own family
members particularly father/teacher or Gum
• 12* house One has to suffer due to hardship, handicapped
mentally or physically, stay away from family members
Lottery :
If 3rd and 5* house sub lord connected with 2, 6, 10, 11 plus Jupiter
indicates profit and if connected with 5, 8, Vindicates loss
Speculation : 5* House :
• If the 5* house sub 1 ord is connected to 2, 5, 6 and 1 1 * house plu;
Mercury or Jupiter - Profit
• If the 5* house sub lord is connected to 8* and 12* house plus
Mercury or Jupiter Loss
• If 12* house sub lord is connected with 2, 6, 10, 11 indicate
investment in shares will give profit
Sports :5*House:
• 1st house sub lord connected with 3ld and 5* house with Mars or
Jupiter plus Air or Fire sign then native will be interested in
out door v sports '

J
• 1 * house sub 1 ord connected with 3 & 5* house with Mercury or
Moon or Venus with Air and Watery sign indicate interest in
indoor games
• If the 5* house sub lord is connected with 2, 6, 10, 11 and 10*
house sub lord also connected with 5, 6, 2, 1 1 one will get success
in sports and can make a career in sports
• If the 5* house sub lord is connected with 4, 8, 9, 12 indicates no
success in sports
Servant : 6,h House :
If 6* house sub lord is connected with :
• 2,4,6,10,11 Native will be benefited by engaging
servant
• 5,8,12 - Loss from the servant
• Badhaka/Maraka from Asc and 6* cusp is connected with
natural malefic planets batter to avoid engage servant
In case of the Income Tax or other raids and if 6* house sub lord is
connected with 8* and lT house then one of the employee should
have given information to the concern authority as under
When you should engage the person as servant in your company /
house?
When person approach to find out the job with your company / house
prepare horary chart and if 6* house sub lord connected .with 2, 3, 4,
10, 11 you can engage that person or ruling planet of that time
connected with your radical chart with the above mentioned houses
you may go ahead and can take the person .

Pet animals : 6lh House :
• If the 6* house sub lord is connected with Earthy sign and 2,3, 10,
1 1 houses then it is advisable to have pet animals and native may
earn good income from them.
• If the 6* house sub lord is connected with 4 ,5 ,8 and 12* houses
then it is advisable not to keep any pet animals.
• If the 6th house sub lord is connected with 7, 8 and 12* houses and
Jupiter or Mars then there will be a legal problem and financial
loss to native.
• If 5* house sub lord connected with 2, 6, 10m and 1 1 01 and also (If
the 6* house sub lord is connected with Earthy sign and 2, 3, 10,
1 1 houses then it is advisable to have pet animals and native may
earn good income from them.) then one can get good income by
horse racing as well as it is applicable for fanners.
Loan :6th House:
If 6* house sub lord is connected with :
• 6, 8, 1 1 with 2nd house Native will get the loan
• 3 ,9- Only negotiation and no loan will be available to native.
• 8 * Sub Lord connected with Saturn Native will get the loan lesser
amount of loan then applied for.
• 8* House sub lord is connected with Mercury Native will get the
loan on instalment basis
• 8* House sub lord is connected with Jupiter Native will get
present and even will get more loans in future -
• If the 8* house sub lord is connected with 5 ,8 , 1 2 plus 6 and 1 1
Native has to approach another source as he will not get the loan
from present source
Repayment of Loan : if House:
• If 12* house sub lord is connected with 5,8, 12 Loan will be
repayable by the native
• If the 12* sub lord is connected with 4* House with 5, 8, 12 houses
Loan will be repaid by way of sale of property or vehicle by loan
giving institution
• If the 12* house sub lord is connected with 2nd house with 5, 8, 12
Loan will be repaid by way of cash and sale of ornaments ^

• If the 12* house sub lord is connected with 3, 5, 8, 12with
Mercury or Jupiter Loan will.be repaid by way of fix deposit or
sale of share / debentures .
Getting Help for Recovery of Loan :
If Spouse sub lord is connected with “
Sun
Moon /Venus -
Mars
Saturn
Jupiter
Mercury
Through the influence of big / influential
person
Through compromise, peacefully with the
help of some lady
Through threatening
Less recovery and delay
Through legal notice
In instalment basis and through some mediator
The same condition will be applicable for repayment of loan with
the 12* sub lord instead of 8* House sub lord.
Court Cases : Various House :
1st House -
7*House -
10*House -
11 * House -
8*House -
3 rd House
Self
Opponent
Judge
Success 12 House - Lose in court case
Mental harassment and penality
9* House
6* House
Native's advocate
Opponent's advocate
Success
• The Dasha of the 7* house connected with Mercury or Jupiter
indicates court cases.
• In horary chart, if 7 house sub lord is connected with 2, 3, 6, 10,
1 1 Positive result in case and if the 7* house sub lord is connected
with 5, 8,9, Vindicate lose in case
• 3rd sub lord connected with 5,8, 12 Advisable to change the
advocate
• 9* sub lord connected with 2, 6, 10, 1 1 Opponent's advocate will
help the native
• 10* and 11* sub lord with 2, 3, 6, 10 and 11* Judgement in
native's favour

• 1 011 and 11 * sub lord connected with 5, 8, 9, 12 Judgement will go
against the native
• 10* house sub lord connected with duality Case will transfer
from one court to another court
• 7* house sub lord connected with 3,5,9, 11 Compromise
Selection of Doctor :
• If Radical chart of the doctor is available and Ruling Planets of
the Doctor's becomes significators of positive houses of the
native then treatment through that doctor will be helpful.
• If Radical chart of the doctor is not available prepare a horary
chart by keeping a particular doctor in your mind and if in that
chart 7* house sub lord is connected with 6*, 8, 12 or Badhaka /
Maraka don't select that particular doctor but go for another
doctor. For selection of such another doctor also, prepare the
separate horary chart and check once again as stated above and if
you find 7* house sub lord is connected with positive houses from
Asc than you may select that doctor.
Theft :7th House : Through Horary Chart :
If 7* house sub lord is connected with ;
• 1st House - Native and thief known to each other
• 2nd House - Theft from family member
• 3rd House - Younger brother / Sister, Neighbour
person, Father in law.
• 4*House - Mother herself
• 5 *House - Children, students, Finance
• 6*House - Servant, maternal uncle, pet animals
• 7 *House - Business or life partner, competitor
• 8 *House - In laws family member
• 9*House - Father, Gum, Unknown person
• 10*House - Person in authority, any government
person, mother in law
• ll*House - Friends, elder brother /sister
• 12*House - Enemy, unknown person
• If 7* house sub lord is connected with duality then more then one
person is involved in theft

• If 1 house and 7* house sub lord are strongly connected with
m
each other then native may be responsible / due to his negligence
theft may have taken place
• If 7* house sub lord is connected with 2, 8, 11 then theft is for
taking benefit of the insurance
• If 7* house sub lord is connected with 3, 6, 9 house then thief is
away from the city
• If the 7* house sub lord is connected with angle houses Thief is in
the same city
• If 1st house sub lord is connected with 3, 8, 12 then person has
misplaced the thing somewhere, no question of theft
• If Asc sub lord, House related thing’s sub lord and 1 lfh house sub
lord connected with 2, 6, 1 1 indicates recovery
If the question is for;
• 2,,J House - Liquid cash or ornaments, Keys
• 3rd House - Documents and mobile phone
• 4*House - Vehicle
If the 10* house sub lord is connected with Mars plus 6* and 11th
house Police will help in recovery
Retirement benefit ; 8* House :
• 8* house sub lord connected with 2,6, 11 then native will get
4 th
retirement benefit easily but if 8 sub lord is connected with 8, 12,
11 native will get but after some harassment
• 8* house sub lord is connected with Duality plus 2, 6, 11 then
native will adopt the pension other wise will go for PF
contribution.
■th
Insurance: 8 House:
• 8* house sub lord connected with 2? 6? 1 1 indicate benefit
o For shop 1 0 fiouse sub lord with 27 6, 1 1
o For Medical 8* sub lord with 2, 6? 1 1
. o For vehicle 4* house sub lord connected with

Religion : 9th House :
• If lrt house sub lord is connected with 9* house and 9& house is
connected with '1* house and also connected with Jupiter
Indicate native has faith in religion
• 9* Sub lord connected with 4, 8, 12 th house one can go forBhakti
Marg
• 9* house sub lord connected with 2, 6,. 1 0 Karma Marg
9 9* house sub lord connected with 3, 7, 1 1 Gyana Marg
• 9* house sub lord connected with 1,5£ Meditation, Mantra, self
development
• 1 and 9* sub lord connected with 3rd and 7* house Native will
demand proof about religion
• 9* sub lord connected with Saturn Native will follow family
tradition
• 9* sub lord connected with Jupiter Native will give educational
approach in religion institute
• 9* sub 1 ord connected with Jupiter and Mercury - Native will j oin
any religious institute as preacher, teacher, lecturer or
Pravachankar
• 9* sub lord connected with Venus Native will play musical
instrument for charity in religious institute
• 9* sub lord connected with Venus and Saturn Native will go for
construction of Temple, Ashram
Change of Religion: 4
• Either 1st or 9* house sub lord afflicted by Rahu and Jupiter
Native will go for change of his own religion
Spiritual Preacher :
• 9* sub lord connected with 5 ,9, 10, 11 and also connected with
Ketu and Jupiter Native will become spiritual preacher.
Sanyasi :
• 1st house sub lord connected with Ketu and Saturn with 9* house
Indicate spiritual progress if it is also connected with 3, 9, 12
native will become Sanyasi
• 1 st house sub lord connected with Ketu and 9* house and having a
good combinations of Mats and Venus At home native will
behave like a Sanyasi

Cr iticizer of Religion :
• 9* sub lord connected with 2, 6, 10 or 3,7,1 1 and also connected
with Mars, Mercury and Uranus.
Siddhi or Achievement :
If 5 * house sub lord or 1 1 * house sub lord connected with 5, 10, 11
and also connected with Saturn, Jupiter and Ketu Native will get
some Siddhi
Mantra Siddhi 5* house sub lord connected with 5, 10, 11 with
Saturn
m
Mantra Tantra If the 5* house sub lord connected with Rahu
Native will be interested in Tantrik Pooja and other planet
indicates the Satwik Pooja
If the 5*
Sun
Moon -
Mars -
Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn
Rahu
Ketu
house sub lord is connected with :
Sun pooj a or Gay atri Mantra
Devi pooj a or Kuldei pooj a
Ganesh or Kartikey a Pooj a
Vishnu Pooja
Brahma or Dattatrey a Pooj a
Devi Pooj a or Lakshmi Pooja
Hanuman Pooja
Naag devta and Sankar Pooj a
Sankar Pooj a
If the 5* house sub lord afflicted or connected with barren sign
then the native will not get the positive result
Moon and Saturn combination give faith in religion
If Jupiter and Moon both are afflicted then native should not take
interest in Tantra
Remedy :
Astrology is based on the reincarnation of the birth and in this theory
it believes the good or bad results of our past deeds and result of it we
get either in this birth or in the future birth. Astrology shows results in
many ways but to understand we can classify in to the following
categories.
L Objective
2. Subjective
In the objective results the native passes through such results,
where the society, the family members and other members know it.

In the subjective results, the native passes through such results,
where rarely any one knows the result except the native.
Human being make the efforts to achieve some goal in their life.
Either it may be a materialistic goal or it may be a spiritualistic goal.
Ultimately the efforts give rise to evolution of the soul and that is the
purpose of the creator.
The creator has given intelligence, thinking power, freedom to
act, mind to realise the feelings , the mental and the physical organs to
use in the proper direction in most situation. So all these factors and
freedom to act, bind us to get the results accordingly. Either they may
be good or bad that will depend upon our purpose.
Human beings have formed some rules and regulations to run the
society smoothly. In some action the purpose may be good, but
according to the society's rules and laws the purpose is not
considered, while the natural law always act on the basis of
"Bhavana" of the human being during the action. Some time we see
that some persons escape from the society's law but in the nature's
justice it is not so and one is bound is to get the result during the
present birth or in the future births.
There are seven types of bodies, in the process of evolution of the
soul. The physical, the ethertic, the astral, the mental, the spiritual,
the cosmic and the nirvanic. It is very difficult to know that the native
is passing through which body internally, without the intuition or
sixth sense or divine power.
The knowledge of astrology has given some hint, about it,.
Astrology gives guidance, particularly where the native has positive
or negative points in regards to all the aspect of the life, how to make
the efforts, in which directions so the native can get relief through this
guidance.
The 12 houses shows the circumstances, the positive and the
negative results for all the departments of the life. While the planets
are bound to give the results according to the sign, aspect, and the
constellations forthat house matters for which the planets become th<
significator.
Many people have the impression that with the help of
astrology one can change the life pattern as they wish, and with this
expectation they contact the astrologer for some remedy. But one

should understand that there are three types of Karma. Dhruda
Karma, Dhruda Adhruda Karma, and Adhruda Karma,. In Dhruda
Karma there is no escapism from the results whether one can peifomi
any remedy or not.
In the other two types of Karma, the remedy can give some relief,
if it is mentioned in the chart. The chart indicates whether the native
will get the effect of the remedy or not, and also it indicates the
remedy forthe time being or for permanent in the nature.
There are some remedial measures, which can help if the remedy
is promised in the native's chart. And if it is not mentioned in the
chart, whichever remedy one applies it will not work. Nature gives
the indication from the chart only that one will get the relief or not
through the remedial measures. It is the astrologer's duty to check this
conditions and suggest the remedy accordingly.
Now a days in all the news papers most of the advertisements
published with 100% solutions and guarantee of all the types of
problem through astrology, which is totally wrong. It creates a wrong
impression in the mind of public and it is a disgrace not only to the
astrologers but also to the divine science.
Following types of remedies are generally applied.
I. Approach according to house reflections for a particular
matter
2. Gems
3 . Mantra , Tantra, Y antra
4.. Rudraksha
5. Medicine, Naturopathy, Healings
6. Vastu
7. Muhurat
8. Radiation
One knows that, one is not able to change the birth data, the
motion of the planets, the situation of the planetary signs, aspects and
constellations positions, because one can not control the celestial
bodies. The life matters reflects through the houses and these houses
only shows plus or minus in each and every matter." So if one follows
according to the house conditions it will be batter to get the relief.
Suppose, in the chart the education shows trend of technology
and parents insist for Medicine or for Management due to their
position. In such a case the child will not shine in the other field due to

native's aptitude, likes and dislikes. Suppose in the chart one finds the
4* house is afflicted then the native will develop in the other place
according to the chart. Suppose in the chart native's development
shows dependant on some one else, then in such a cse one can not
advise for independent adventure.
Suppose in the chart. I* ,3rd and 9* house development does not
show as required and parents realised through the astrologer, one can
take the proper care from the childhood with the help of medicine,
psychiatrist.
In some cases, natives development shows service than business,
then one should go according to their situation for better results .
In this way one can use the houses and their reflections. The other
remedies improve mental power, increase the positive vibrations,
create new visions to see the situations, and all the changes the
concept towards the life. One can react better in a bad phase with the
help of all these remedies.
In some cases remedy is required for lifetime and in some cases it
is required for a particular dasha sub period. Some time it is required
for a particular transit only.
In Hindu astrology results are activated by Saturn, Rahu, Ketu
and Jupiter. If the result is activated by Saturn, better to follow the
results through house patterns with the patience and daily perform
the family devata's pooja.
If the result is activated by Jupiter, then it is better to follow the
religion, manta for specific result, radiations, gems, rudraksha,
medicine, naturopathy, healings, muhurat, vastu and yantra etc.
If the result is activated by Rahu or Ketu then apply the remedy of
Tantra, Yantra and Vastu Dosha Pooj a to get the relief.
So which type of the remedy will be useful to the native one can
find out from the chart, but at the same time one should follow 11
house sub lord. Whether it shows success. For the Mantra, Tantra,
one should follow the 5* house sub lord to get the evolution of the
soul and also to get the mental relief in a difficult time. It is not
necessary that the 5* house sub lord will give a materialistic results, it
is only for spiritual development.
Before applying a particular planet's remedy one should be aware
that not a single planet is totally beneficial or totally malefic in the
chart, it depend upon the matter. Same planet is good for a particular
matter and the same planet is negative for another matter for the same
person.

So here matter becomes the priority for the native, what he likes to
achieve by applying the particular planet's remedy.
Suppose Jupiter is significator of 6* house then for health it may
effect negative and for the career it may effect positive or for
marriage it may effect negative. So in such a condition the astrologer
should give a clear idea about it before suggesting remedy, any
remedy changes the elements balancing in all the levels accordingly.
Classification for the remedy :
1. Life time remedy
2. For specific period
According to Dasha, sub period or due to transit.
Without the blessing of the divine power or god or nature or the
creator one can not come out successfully in a remedy. The
following conditions should be fulfilled in the chart.
1 .For Life Time remedy :
The Asc and Moon should be under the influence of Jupiter and
the lord of Fortuna house.
2. For the specific period remedy:
The Asc or Moon or the Dasha lord or sub period ruler should be
in the influence of Jupiter or the lord of the Fortuna House.
So before suggesting a remedy, an astrologer's prime duty is to
fulfil the above conditions to get the desired results.
From the chart one can classify the planets in the two catagories.
1. The planet is weak
2. The planet is afflicted
The planet is considered to be weak by it's sign, it's constellations
and it's house position and also by it's strength in varga charts and in
the shada balas.
* The planet is afflicted in a chart by the aspects from the natural
malefic planets or the lord of negative houses of thechart.
If the planet itself is weak, then increase the strength of theplanet
itself with help of remedy . r?

If the planet is afflicted then suggest the remedy for the opposite
nature's planet, the planet who is afflicting the planet and also suggest
the remedy of the lord of the improving houses to make them strong
than the afflicted planet.
• • In the second case support should be there in the chart from the
opposite nature planet otherthan the planet which is afflicted.
The solar plexus also indicate the remedial measures according
to the strength of the planet in the chart. Accordingly the native gets
the problem on different levels of the bodies like physical, mental,
astral etc.
In the chart of those who are in a very high status in the process of
evolution of the soul, they are less effected by the houses. Further less
effected by the signs and further less effected by the combinations.
This is what I under stood with my limited knowledge. Here by
effected, it means they don't feel any unhappiness in heavy afflictions
of therespective houses, signs and the combinations of theplanets.
Remedy always works, if one is able to know from which body
level native is passing, in process of evolution of the soul. Disease or
problems always remain in one body level either in the last body level
or in the present one or in the next one.
Politics :
• Ist house sub lord connected with 3,7,10 and also with Mars , Sun ,
Jupiter and Mercury indicates native's interest in politics.
• 10h house sub lord connected with 9, 10, 1 1 then native will enter
in to the politics.
10* house sub lord connected with :
Sun
Mars
Jupiter
Saturn .
Venus, Moon
Mercury
Native will reach to a higher position in
politics exp . Minister, CM , PM
Native will reach up to higher position
through military or police
Native will reach up to higher position
through Religion , law , finance
Native will reach up to* higher position
through Trust, labour.
Native will reach up to higher position like
ML A or Corporate level ^

If 10* house sub lord connected with 5, 8, 12 then failure in
politics
If 10* house sub lord connected with 5, 8, 12 and 9, 10, 1 1 then
possibility of ups and down

8 * House - Longevity + Mode of Death
1. Natural Death - Sickness, Disease
2. Unnatural Death - Accident, Suicide, Murder, Hang
8* SL connected with 6m house Death by Disease
8* SL connected with 6* House-Death in home by disease
8* SL connected with - 6* & 12* House- Death in hospital by
disease
8* SL connected with - 3rd & 12th House- Death out side home
Unnatural Death:
Accident:
8* SL connected with- malefic- Mars, Saturn, Hershel,
Neptune, Pluto and Rahu
1st SL connected with 8* House and 8* SL connected with Badhaka
c&Maraka and /or
8* SL connected with malefic Accidental
Death
Suicide :
• 1 SL connected with 8* House and 8* SL connected with 1
House plus
8* SL connected with Badhaka & Maraka will indicate Suicidal
Tendency /Attempt
• 8* SL connected with dual sign OR connected with Mercury or
Jupiter Native will survive once in accident/ suicide attempt but
will die in subsequent attempt.
• 8* SL connected with dual sign and also Jupiter and Mercury
|L
connected with 7 house Litigation in suicide matter after
survival from suicide.
Different types of Accident/ Suicides :
• 8* SL connected with 3Td, 9* 12th + Moon / Mercury / Venus /
Jupiter Accident during journey

• ' 8* SL connected with 5* house / lord + 8* SL & 5* SL connected
with 8* & 12* house Death during entertainment picnic, sports,
party , entertainment
• 8 * SL connected with 6* & 1 0th Death at work place , in work area
• 8* SL connected with 9* & 12* Death during long journey, at
distance place, also in Religious, political ground / movement
8lk|SL connected
with various signs :
Earthy Sign +
Watery Sign -
Airy Sign
Fiery Sign
Suicide:.
Saturn & Mars Road / Rail Accident
Saturn & Rahu - Sea bank, River, tank,
Pond, Lake
Hershel, Venus, Mercury, Saturn Air crash,
Hanging, Fall from height,
Sun, Mars, Herschel, Unexpected fire,
explosives factors, accidental death
Person always thinks about the death Death by choice with less pain
l^SL+S* SL+Badhaka+Maraka
1st SL+8*SL+Badhaka+Maraka +
Positive House
8^ SL + Neptune + Rahu +
Virgo or Scorpio sign
8th SL+ watery sign
8*SL + Fiery
8 th SL+ Airy sign
8th SL + Earthy sign
Death by suicide
Survive & no second
attempt
Sleeping tablets, poison
Death due to water
Death due to weapons or
Accident. It includes
death by explosives
Death due to jump from
height or hanging
Death due to Road or Rail
accident —

Murder :
• 8* SL + 1 st SL, l5f SL + 8* SL and 8* SL connected with 7* House
Death by Murder
• 8* SL connected with 7* House - Death by Murder
• 1 * SL Self, 7* SL Opposite party / Life Partner or murderer
• 7* SL connected with Badhaka & / OR Maraka and 8* SL is
afflicted Death by Murder
Movable Asc 1,4,7,10-7* House is for marriage & 7* SL
should connected with 2, 7, 1 1 *
2,7, 11 are Badhaka + Maraka for these Asc but they are positive
house for marriage. *
Hence don't predict death by murder, if 8* sub lord is not supporting.
• Check l- & 6 SL as 1/3 rd population of Movable sign will
come under this condition.
2 ,7 & 1 1 - Significators Planets - Will kill the person
Indira Gandhi :
Asc Cancer, Saturn in Asc (lord of 7 & 8) and Asc lord Moon in 7*
House , Parivartan Yoga
Asclord connected with 7*House, l*1 House & 8*House
Saturn - S erVaht & security- Negative role
Murder by servant / security person
8* SL connected with dual sign Native will go for murder & will kill
some another person
Person dad - Maraka & Badhaka
Killer - Ruling Planer v Same or Equal
There must be equality in RP
of Killer with Badhaka/
J Maraka of dad person.
John F.Kenedy - Killer not known till date - Neptune
Example chart given in Nakshtra Chintan Part 11 .

Types of Murder : Unnatural Death :
Physical attack '
By smashing throat
Poison or Sleeping tablets
Death by Drowning
Hang: By Court Order:
Mars, Saturn, Fiery Sign
Mercury Airy Sign, Saturn,
Rahu
Neptune + Rahu & Virgo or
Scorpio sign
Neptune + Moon + Venus +
Watery sign
• Either Suicide or Murder or Criminal / Political angle, Hang by
Govt body
• 8* SL connected with Maraka + Badhaka, 8* SL afflicted +
connected with Jupiter and Sun (karaka of Law) + 8* & 12*
House - Through legal, punishment given by court,
death by hanging
Delay in Hanging:.
Due to positive house connection.
Mercy Killing :
1 . Physical or mental sickness
2 . Native i s mentally ready for such death / suicide
3 . Sun & Moon are most important to^take such a decision by legal +
Medical point of view
4 . 6* house, 8* House, Sun, Moon and Jupiter are connected
Position for mercy killing

Horary astrology is a branch, which gives separate result of the
query and at the same time work to support or give confirmation of
the natal result for the particular query. There are many marits and
demerits of both the branches but here we do not consider.
To cast the horary chart there are two main systems. One is time
of query in the native's mind or when he approaches to the astrologer
and the second system is through the numbers.
Those who follow KP knows that there is a system to ask for a
number between 1 to 249 and the querist gives the number which is in
his / her mind. This number system is mainly developed from
Uttarkalamruit Granth by Kalidas in which granthkar has given
number system between 1 to 108 (27 constellations x 4 pada each =
108). We know that in KP system any .zodiac degree is ruled by
minimum of three planets 1 ) Sign Lord 2) Star Lord and 3) Sub Lord .
So each constellations has nine sub lords on the base of Vimshottari
Dasha system. So 27 x 9 = 243 but Rahu Sub in Sun Star and the
Moon sub in Jupiter Star fall under another sign ruler so in these way
another six numbers are increased and the total number is 249. Now
three planets rule each number. Number given by the querist and the
zodiac ruled by the number become the Asc forthe horary chart.
In KP horary book it is mentioned that if the querist gives the
number beyond 249 then without calculating any chart the astrologer
should give a negative answer of the query.
m
But in this regards, my personal experience differs. 1 have
experienced that when you ask for a number with in a given range of 1
to 249, mostly internally the querist has a prejudice towards some
particulars numbers and will not give a number like 13 or 1 13 or 213
but they are biased by lucky numbers like 1,11,21,51, 101, 108, 158
etc. Some times they give their birth date or age as a number. So
intension to get the correct number is not fulfilled.
So personally 1 have started to take any number from the
querist with out any limit. Suppose this number is more than 249 then
divide the number by 249 and whatever quotient you arrive at is again
multiplied by 249 and the answer will be deducted from the given
number by the querist . The balance will be the correct number forthe
horary chart.

For example, suppose the given number is 123676. Now divide
this number by 249, you will get .the quotient 496. Now again you
multiply quotient by 249 and you will get the answer 123 504. Deduct
this answer from original given number 123676. The reminder
.balance number will be horary number, which in this case is 172.
\ If you work through this system for the horary chart, I am sure
that you will get the batter result if you have applied principles of KP.
I have been using this experiment since 1985 and getting
excellent results.
Example :
Querist had asked the question regarding settlement at abroad
and he has given the number 345 .
Question solved on 17.05.2007 at Khar Mumbai at 1907 hrs. The
detailed chart is as under.
Number 345 249 =96 is a horary number and it rules 4s 17d 20m
01s as a horary Asc.
Cusp * Sub Lord Planets Star Lord Sub Lord
Reflection of the query through Moon :
• Moon is in the 9th house (House for long j oumey)
• Moon i s the 1 ord of the 12th house (Foreign)
• Moon is connected with Sun Lord of the Asc and Mercury
Karaka foQourney
• Moon is in fix sign and it’s star lord Moon itself in fix sign indicate
permanent settlement at abroad
Asc sign plus Asc lord Sun both are in Fixed sign also indicate
long duration stay at abroad

How to judge abroad journey ?
• 12f1house sub lord is Mercury (Mercury is karaka of journey),.
Mercury is lord of 2 and 1 1 and deposited in the 10th house and it
is in Moon star and Moon is deposited in 9 house (long j oumey)
and lord of 12 house (foreign)
• Mercury is connected with the Asc lord Sun, Sun is deposited in
9 house . So it indicates foreign j oumey yoga in this query chart .
• 1 1th house sub lord Sun who is the lord of 1* house deposited in
Hi th
9 house and conj unction with Moon lord of 12 house and also
conjunction with Mercury. So desire house also indicate the
positive result forthe abroad journey .
Efforts of the querist :
• 1 house sub lord is Mars, deposited in *! house (Journey house)
th th
as a lord of 4 and 9 and Mars in Saturn star and Saturn is
deposited in 12,h House (Foreign) as a lord of 6th and 7th.
• So it indicates that native will definitely try to go abroad even
though he find some difficulties because the lord of the 8 house
Jupiter aspect to Mars being Mars in dual sign, it is advisable to
put more efforts for visit abroad.
• Sun Asc lord also in the fix sign indicates determination to go
abroad as it is deposited in 9th house
th
• Lord of 5* and 8 Jupiter deposited in 4 house indicate better
th
to stay distance place because the 4 house is afflicted by
th
placement of Jupiter as a lord of 8 house.
Other points:
• Querist wants to settled at abroad with family members as
indication given by Mercury 12th house sub lord a lord of 2nd and
11th house.
• Mercury being a lord of 2 and 11 indicate benefit at abroad
through career though initially native may have some
difficulties because Saturn is deposited in 12th house and Jupiter
lord of 8th aspects the Mercury and Saturn both.
• It is advisable for the native initially he should not purchase any
kind of property at abroad because 12th sub lord Mercury is a dual
planet and delaying planet Saturn is deposited in 12*. house is
also a Karaka for property.

• 10* house sub lord is Saturn deposited in 12 house as a lord
of 6* and 7* aspected by Jupiter from 4* house (support from
some one) lord of 5* and 8*. Saturn who is ;lord of 6* house
(colleagues in service),. Jupiter 5* house lord colleagues who
had left the service will extend their support in settling abroad.
Saturn lord of 7* house (spouse) and Jupiter lord of 8* house,
family members of the spouse (also indicate support from them)
• Saturn lord of 7* house and 6* house deposited in 12* house
indicate spouse is not agree to take the support from her family
members
• 1(? house sub lord Saturn in Mercury star and in aspect with
Jupiter indicate that at abroad native join a career connected with
financial management.
Time factor:
• Native is passing through Moon dasha and Rahu sub period as per
horary chart. Moon is already discussed as above.
• Sub period ruler Rahu in 7* house (journey house) Rahu is in itTs
own star and in Moon sub. Moon is deposited in 9* as a lord of 1 2th
house.
• Rahu deposited in Aquarius sign Ruler of the sign Saturn
deposited in 12* house indicates Rahu sub period only had given
the opportunity for abroad.
• Venus sub sub period ruler is much stronger because it is near the
cusp of the 1 1th house as a lord of 3rd and 10th house. Venus in star
of Rahu (as discuss above) and it is in sub of it's own and also
aspected by Mars (lord of 9 house and sub lord of V house) .
• Another sub sub period of Mars is discussed already above also
indicate positive result to go abroad
• 12th house sub lord and 1 l*house sub lord both are direct and fast
moving planets indicates result in short time.

KCs
Chart No : 1 :Male Chart
Birth Time :02.20.04 a.m.
Nature of the person :
1st, 3,9 house sub lord is Jupiter. Jupiter is deposited in 3 rd house
as a lord of 3,d and 6* house it is in conjunction with Mercury,
Sun, S atum and Ketu,
Jupiter aspect to Moon and Rahu and it is in .square aspect of
Neptune and Asc.
Jupiter in Moon star. Moon is the lord of 10th deposited in 7*
house.
Jupiter is in^ cancellation of Neech Bhanga Yoga and Moon
•exalted .
Moreover Moon in Sun Star and Mercury Sub and Sun is
deposited in 3 rd house as a lord of 1 1th House.
Mercury in 3 House as a lord of 9* and 12 in conjunction with
Sun, Saturn, Jupiter, Ketu and aspect to Rahu. Also Mercury in
Moon Star and Mercury Sub.
Neptune is deposited on cusp of Asc and Mars is on the cusp of 3rd
House. >

• From above analysis it indicates native is very spontaneous,
ambititus, practical and having a boldness to say any thing in
front of a person. At the same time having a interest for more
progress in materialisic life as well as practical and spiritual
life also.
• Native is interested in public life at the ame time having a fond of
to aquire a knowledge also. Willing to take leadership in the
society or at work place.
• Jupiter being a sub lord of 1* house indicate generocity with the
practical approach though initially native suffer 's from the
misunderstanding from the society.
• Native is ready to accept responsibility, basically more mentally.
• Native has interest in travelling and also interested in preserving
valuable documents or informative materials. At the same time
native is also interested in law.
Education :
• 4* house sub lord Mars in the 3rd house as a lord of 2nd and 7th house
connected with Venus lord of A sc .
• Mars is in sextile aspect with Neptune and aspect to 6* 9* and 10,h
houses.
• Mars in Venus star and Venus is deposited in 3rd house as a lord of
1st and 8th house.
• Karaka Mercury in the 3 rd as a lord of 9* and 12th conjunct with
another knowledge karaka Jupiter and conjunction with Saturn
lord of 4* and 5* houses (Education + Intellectual) and also
conjunction with Sun lord of 1 1th house.
• Mercury in Moon Star and Moon is exalted in 7 house and
Mercury is it's own Sub.
• 9* House sub lord Jupiter is already discussed as above.
• Education point of view it indicates in primary education initially
native finds some difficulties but due to support from Venus,
Neptune and Jupiter native was able to complete the education
during that period. There is a condition of change of institute or
residence and also participated in cultural activities being Mars in
duality sign and Mar’s star lord also in duality sign indicate
change of the line or having a knowledge of technical as well as
during study having participated in other activity.

• 9* Sub lord Jupiter indicate, native have interest in finance
management plus because the connection with the Sun, Saturn,
Mercury, Moon, Ketu Chemistry / Biology (Science) but due
to square of Neptune there are chances of misguidance or
chances of wrong decision in selection of the branch.
• Native is Msc. (In Drugs), LLB and CAIIB 9* house sub lord
Jupiter is as discussed above connected with science plus Jupiter
itself is karaka for Legal and Finance.
• As per chart, Jupiter and it's Star lord are in Earthy sign and also
connected with Sun., Saturn, Mercury also in earthy sign indicate
finance management, import, export policy and taxation audit are
suitable lines for the native .
Career ;
• 1 5t house sub lord Jupiter (as discussed above) connected with
Earthy sign its star lord Moon also in Earthy and Fixed sign
indicate native is very far sighted and not taking any kind of risk
at the same time Jupiter is connected with Mercury planet of
intellectual plus connected with Saturn planet of stability and
Sun lord of 1 1th house.
• Jupiter is lord of 6th house and Neptune is degreecaly in
opposition to 7* cusp and square with the Jupiter indicate that it
is always advisable to go for service than business. At the most
one can go for own self assignment job or consultancy.
Partnership is also not advisable.
• 10th house sub lord Mars as a lord of 2nd and 7th in 3rd house and
aspecttob'^^and 10,hhouse,
• Mars in dual sign and it's star lord Venus also in dual sign indicate
that native will go for Job but due to duality changes are there
from one industry to another industry because of 9m and 8* house.
• 10th house is aspected by Jupiter, Mercury, Saturn, sun and Mars
and Rahu is on the cusp of the 10 house indicate that native will
get different type of opportunities in different types of industries
but due to Neptune native himself will not take any kind of risk
due to some misunderstanding or suspicious factors.

• So from above discussion it indicates either native should go for
finance industries or connected with the management industries
only.
• Native had work in Drugs industries and Petrochemical
industries for short time and now working in Banking industries.
Abroad :
• lAouse sub 1 ord i s Rahu in the 10th house and i t i s Mercury star
and Mercury is connected with 3,9, 12 and as such it indicates
abroad journey.
• Rahu is aspected by Jupiter, Saturn, Sun, Mercury and Mars and
so most of all the planets are connected with Rahu indicates that
native will go abroad and will also get the support from some
body who are already settled there.
• Being Rahu is connected with the 1 0th house and also aspected by
Mars and Jupiter, Saturn, Sun, Mercury indicates through
company also one can visit abroad.
• Native has already visited abroad as personal visit and also send
by the company for official work.
Marriage :
• Chouse sub lord is Jupiter in the third house as a lord of 3rJ and
6 in Moon star and Moon is in the 7 House of marriage.
• Jupiter is in conjunction with Ketu lord of 4* and 5,h and also
conjunct with Saturn lord of 4* and 5* connected with Mercury
and Sun lord of 9, 1 1, 12
• 5* house sub lord Ketu also connected with 7* sub lord Jupiter
and in Mars star. Mars is lord of 2 and 7 connected with marriage
karaka Venus indicate love marriage. But due to connections of
6 and 12 indicates some kind of disturbance at the time of fixing
the marriage either from status or family point of view. But due to
square of the Neptune also play some misunderstanding from the
different society to create the problem but at the same time Sun
and Saturn both are provisional factors to celebrate the marriage.

Chart No :2 :Male Chart
BirthDate:03 .10.1 987
Birth Time :08.09 ,04a.m.
Education:
• 4* house sub lord is Ketu and Ketu i s deposited in 11* house with
Mars , Sun and Venus.
• Ketu is lord of 9th and 1 2th house.
• Education karak Mercury ri sing in Asc as a lord of 9th and s ii
Rahu Star and Saturn Sub.
* th
• Ketu connected with 11 house house of success plus also
connected with the lord of 11 41 house Sun and also connected
with the 9* house (Higher study).
• Ketu in Virgo sign indicate native puts more efforts but due to
connection with the 12* house initially will not get the desired
results.
• 9* house sub lord is Moon deposited in 4* house in it's own star.
Moon is Saturn sign also aspected by Saturn indicates native have
A
interest in engineering line due to Saturn combination and 4*
house also connected with the Mars combination with Sun and
Venus. So it is advisable to go for chemical, electrical,
electronics , pi astic engineering line .
• Native is studying in electronics engineering.

Career :
• 1* house sub lord is Rahu in dual sign in the 5* house as a lord of
3rd and 6th and also in Star of Saturn lord of 4,h and 5*in2nd house .
• Mercury rising in Asc as a lord of 9* and 12* and Jupiter is
aspecting the Asc as a lord o and 8 from the $ house.
• 1 0th house sub lord is Ketu arid Ketu as discussed above .
• From above analysis it indicates that native will be interested to
go for own professional career rather than service but initially
will start with the service for experience point of view and there
after will start his own business at distance place from his birth
place.
Chart No : 3 : Male Chart
Birth Date: 19.07.1982 Place: Mumbai 18N57,72E50
Longevity :
• 1 'ri*house sub lord Rahu deposited in 1(5 as a lord of 1st and 10th
house with Mercury (lord of 1* and 10th) Moon lord of IIth in 9*
and Venus lord of 2nd and 9th in 9*
• Rahu is aspected by Jupiter from the 1st house as a lord of 4* (End
of life) and Badhaka & Maraka lord of 7* .
• Rahu is aspected by afflicted Saturn lord of 6* and 5* from l&t
house
• 8* house sub lord is Mercury in the 10* house as a lord of 1st and
10th and also in the Star of Jupiter which is a Badhaka + Maraka
and also aspected by Jupiter. Not only that, Mercury become Asc
lord and also is in square aspect with Mars lord of 3rd and 8* house
and afflicted Saturn.
• nouse sub lord is also Rahu as discussed above.

• Sun is in watery sign in the 101h house as a lord of 12* and it is in
Star of Jupiter as discussed above. Sun is in sub of Rahu as
discussed above. Sun is also in square aspect with Pluto.
• Moon as a lord of 1 1* is in 9* connected with Venus lord of
Maraka in 9* house and also connected with Rahu, Mercury and
• aspected by Badhkesh Jupiter and also aspected by afflicted
Saturn.
• In the Asc two natural malefic planets are rising as a lord of 6* and
• From above analysis it indicates that Jupiter though a natural
benific planet here it becomes total negative for longevity. In
addition to that Saturn and Mars are also giving the support to the
Jupiter by afflicting Asc sub lord and Asc lord plus two
luminaries indicate not good sign for long longevity.
Health :
6 house sub lord is Mercury in the 10 house and as discussed
above it is afflicted and Mercury is in Jupiter star indicate
problem related with Heart disease (10* house indicate heart) a n •
Jupiter is karaka for expansion and also it is in square aspect with
Sun Karaka for Heart.
• Mercury is connected with the Rahu also leads to wrong
judgement regarding seriousness about the disease. ;
• Lord of 6* and 8* Saturn and Mars both are rising in the Asc
indicate not good condition from health point of view.
Mode of Death:
• 8* house sub lord is Mercury as discussed above aspected by
Saturn as well as sub lord of the 6* house Mercury it self indicate
death by disease and ignorance part from the native himself.
Marriage :
• 7th house sub lord Rahu in the 1 0th house and i s aspected by Jupiter
lord of 7* house and Rahu is also in conjunction with Moon lord of
1 1 ,hand Venus Karaka for marriage and lord of 2nd. So combination of
2, 7 and 1 1 is present. Rahu is also sub lord of the 5* house and also
aspected by lord of 5* house Saturn indicate love marriage and
Saturn is also lord of 6* house afflicted by Mars indicate disturbance
in marriage life.

Marriage was selebrated in the month of Dec 2006 when Jupiter
Moon Mercury sub period was running.
Jupiter is lord of 7* house. Moon lord of 11* house and
conjunction with marriage karaka Venus which is also lord of 2nd
and Mercury Asc lord in Jupiter star Jupiter is also lord of 7*
house given marriage condition.
Death :
• Native was expired on 17 February 2007 when Jupiter Maha
Dasha, Moon Sub period and Ketu sub sub period was running
through.
• Jupiter as discussed in longevity as well as health as well as in
mode of death it is highly malefic for this chart and Jupiter played
a dual role by giving a marriage (being lord of 7th) as well as death
(Badhaka + Maraka)
• Moon sub period ruler also in dual sign played the role of
marriage being a lord of 1 Ith and connected with Venus Karaka
for marriage and also aspected by Jupiter. Moon is in Rahu star
and Saturn sub as discussed above.
♦ Ketu sub sub period is represented by Jupiter and also in aspect
with Mercury lord of Asc, Moon and Venus lord 2nd (Maraka) and
Ketu is in Venus star Rahu sub as discussed above. So Ketu also
connected with Badhaka + Maraka and also aspected by Mars
lord of 3rd and 8th.
♦ In transit on IT5' February 2007 it was amavasya and Sun was
passing through Mars star lord of 8* in Venus sub (Maraka).
Moon also in Mars star lord of 8*. Jupiter in Mercury star and in
Moon sub. Ketu was in Venus star (Maraka) and in Saturn sub
lord of61h house.
♦ This chart was discussed only on 1st March 2007 .

Chart No : 4 ; Male Chart
Birth Time :07.25.05 a^m.
Education:
• 4* house sub lord Mercury (Karaka for education) in the 12*
house as a lord of 3ld and 6* and is aspected by Mars and also in /
closes square aspect with Uranus , Neptune and Mars .
• Mercury also conjunct with Moon lord of the 4* house.
• Jupiter karaka for knowledge and lord of the 9* house also is in
the 4* house
• Mercury is in Ketu star and Ketu is deposited in 2nd house as a lord
of 2nd and 7* house and also aspected by Saturn lord of 10th and
i 11th from 7th house.
! • It indicates that native has got the capacity for studies but due to
close aspects of Uranus, Neptune and Mars give strugglefull
achievement.
• 1st house sub lord is Rahu also deposited in 8* house in Mercury
star also reflect the same
• 9* house sub lord is also Mercury Karaka for higher education is
also sub lord of the 8* house (12* from the 9* house) which
indicates difficulties or break in further studies
• Mercury is in aspect with the Uranus , Neptune and Mars and that
is also closely from the angle houses indicate that native has to
take forceful decision against his own desire and which gives
negative result.
• Native was the rank holder in SSC exam in Gujarat Board and
had taken the admission in Medical collage. However he was not
able to complete his study due to .above-mentioned factors.

At that time native was passing through Moon and Mars Dasha.
Moon is connected with 1st house (as a lord of 4* house) in Venus
Star (in the 1* house as lord of 2nd and 7* house) and Moon is in
Merc 1117 sub ( lord of 3]J and 6th in 1 2th house) indie ate scholarship
or loan facility was available for studies but due to affliction of
Mercury same conditions also reflect in Mars dasha also.
Chart No : 5 : Male Chart
Birth Date: 05.08.1946
Birth Time: 16.54,41p.m.
Place: 23N55,72E23>
Cus
Asc
D I M I c I SL f SL I SL
Planet
Sun
Moon
Mars
Venus
Saturn
Rahu
Ketu
Uranus
Pluto
Career ;
• ’ 1st house sub lord Mercury as a lord of 7* and 10th in conjunction
with Saturn and in Saturn star deposited in 7* house indicate
native is interested to establish himself initially in service
(because of Saturn) and at later stage try to start some kind of his
own business because of connection with 7* house.
• 10th house sub lord is Rahu is in 6* house Earthy sign and also
aspected by Finance Karaka Jupiter, which is also deposited in
Earthy sign on the 101hcusp as a lord of 1st and 4* house indicate
that native can go for food industries, finance industries, daily
consumable items etc .
• 10th house sub lord Rahu is in conjunction with Uranus and is
aspected by Jupiter and Jupiter is aspected by Saturn indicate '
native can take leading part for the welfare of the employees or
co-worker and because of Jupiter one can reach at the high level
by trust of co-worker or employees.
• Native was working with nationali sed bank as a clerical staff and
was actively involved in union activity and was reached up to
workman director^ position in the bank.

Abroad :
• 12* house sub lord Ketu is in the 12 itself and represent Mars in
the house (long j oumey).
• Ketu in Mercury star (Kraka for journey) in the 7* house (house
of journey) indicate native can go abroad.
• Ketu is in Fixed sign and sign lord Mars is in dual sign aspecting
4* house indicate though native wants to settle abroad
permanently but somehow he has to visit the native place
frequently because Mars aspecting the 4* house and Ketu star
lord Mercury connected with Saturn lord of 2,hi and 3rd. (Family
and short journey)
• Native had gone abroad for permanent settlement but frequently
visiting native place.
Business :
• As discussed in career 1 " house sub lord Mercury connected with
ill th rti
Saturn and Saturn aspect to 10 house and 10 sub lord Rahu in 6
house (service) it is advisable to do service or to look after
someone's established business on some terms rather to go for his
own independent business.
• 7* house sub lord is Saturn and Saturn is deposited in 7* house as
a lord of 2nd and 3rd indicate that with the help of some body to start
partnership business but at present native is passing through
ft)
Venus Dasha deposited in 9* house (lord of 6* and 11 ) in Sun
star and Jupiter sub it indicates that one can-earn very limited
income against expected expectations.
Love Marriage:
• 7* house sub lord is Saturn and also deposited in 7* house as a lord
of 2,,J and 3Id with lord of 7* house Mercury, indicate promise of
marriage.
• Saturn is also sub lord of the 2nd, 5,h and 11* house and Saturn
aspect Mars lord of 5* and 12th and also aspect Venus karaka for
marriage and Jupiter l ord of Asc.
• S o it indicate love marriage with the consent of family members .

Chart No : 6 : Male Chart
BirthDate: 15.02.1964 Place:24N 12/72E24
Birth Time :09.50.00 a.m.
Nature of the native :
• T house sub lord Moon in 12,h house as a lord of 5* house with
Mars , Saturn and Sun and also aspected by Uranus and Pluto and
in Trine aspect with Neptune.
• Moon in Jupiter star and Jupiter is in it's own sign in Asc as a lord
of 1st and 1 0* with Venus lord of3rdand8* house.
• 3rd house sub lord is Sun in 1 l,h house, conjunction with Saturn,
Mars, Moon and also aspect to Uranus and Pluto. Sun is lord of 6*
house.
• 9* house sub lord is also Moon as discuss above .
• Mercury is in the 1 01h house on the cusp of the 1 1 * house as a lord of
4th and 7* in Moon star as discuss above and it is in Rahu sub and
Rahu is deposited in 3rd but on the cusp of 4th house as a lord of 4th
and 7,h house.
• Jupiter as Asc and 1 0th lord rising in the Asc .
• From above analysis it indicate that internally native is very
stubborn, ambitious, and express generosity but at the same time
become lethargic and addict also at the same time native may
involve with the spiritualism without any seriousness.
• Native is interested always in showmanship and by knowingly he
is cheating himself only.
• Moon as a sub lord of T house indicate native may become
speculative also and due to Jupiter star and trine with the Neptune
leads him to keep more trust without any reason on any body who
can psychologically praise him.

Career :
• 1 0th house sub 1 ord is Mars as a lord of 2,ul and 9th in 1 1 * house with
Saturn, Sun and Moon indicates that native is interested in some
kind of manufacturing industries because Mars is connected with
Mars star only and 1st house sub lord Moon is connected with 12,
5 in Jupiter starindicate native is interested for business but due to
connection of the 9*, 12* house, native has to be very careful,
basically in manufacturing items as well as labour and
government problems.
• 7* house sub lord is Venus as a lord of 3r and 8* in the 1 2 house in
Saturn star 11, 12 indicate not advisable for any kind of
partnership.
Remedy :
• As per theory given in remedial chapter in this book, in this case
Jupiter as Asc lord deposited in Asc only and also aspect 9* house
but Jupiter not aspecting the Moon and Jupiter is in conjunction
with Venus lord of 3 and 8 house and due to this affliction native
will not get any kind of benefit from any kind of remedial
measure because 5* house and 11th house sub lord is Rahu and
Rahu is connected with Badhaka House (Representative of 4 & 7
house) and also sub lord of 9* house is Moon is in 12* house. So
all provisional houses also connected with negative from the Asc
point of view so not a single remedy will workout.
• It is advisable for native that he has to perform Kuldevi Pooja
daily and also pooja of Dattatreya God.

Explanation for HBHKH8 of Planets
In Nirayan system for each and every planet becomes exalted
at particular degree in the particular sign as under.
Degree
So far the reasons for why certain planet become exalted at
particular longitude are not given in any available material. But
according to my studies and understanding I have certain views for
above.
In our natural zodiac Jupiter and Saturn Riles 9, 10, 1 1 and 12*
sign / houses basically they are concern with Knowledge, Dharma,
Karma and Moksha.
Sun
Sun is the karaka for soul as well as it is Karaka for Dhanvantari
(Medical)and it is in Ketu star where it becomes exalted and Ketu is a
karaka for Moksha and Ketu is ruled by Ashwani kumar.
At Aries 1 0 degree sub lord is Saturn and Saturn is a Karaka for
sacrifice or devotee and Sun is Karaka for Ego or Status. So that till
the time native will not sacrifices his ego he can not achieve the
Moksha (Ketu).
Moon:
Moon is karaka of mind and desire and its get exalted in
Taums sign (sign of materialistic) and at 3 degree Sun star is ruling.
Sun is karaka of soul and at 3 degree Jupiter sub and at the beginning
of Saturn sub so if native by knowledge (Gyan Jupiter) sacrifice
(Saturn) the materialistic life and then only one's mind dissolve with
the soul (Sun)

Mars:
Mars is karaka of energy and one can not restrict energy but one
can use the energy in the right direction with the right control that
quality is applicable here. Mars is exalted in Capricorn cardinal sign
(continuation of flow or activity) and Mars is exalted at 28 degree,
which is ruled by Mars own as a star lord and it indicates pure energy
and 28 degree is ruled by Saturn sub again planet of control with the
justifications because Saturn is the ruler of the karma sign
Capricorn.
Mercury :
Mercury is karaka of analysis and thought process and it is
exalted in it's own sign Virgo at 1 5 degree. Virgo is a Earthy sign sign
of practical and Virgo 15 degree is ruled by Moon star (Hastha) and
Jupiter sub lord.
Mind (Moon) will not take any decision without taking in to
account action and reaction by available knowledge (Jupiter) and
only after understanding consequences of the action, normal mind
will take the decision.
That is why Mercury is exalted in Virgo at 1 5 degree.
Jupiter:
Jupiter is exalted in Cancer at 5 degree. Cancer is a watery sign
and ruled by Moon and at 5 degree Saturn star (Pushy a) and Saturn
sub. Jupiter is karaka for knowledge as well as proud-ness to be
dissolved by a mind (Moon) with full understanding and knowledge
also to be directed in karma (Saturn).
At Cancer 5 degree, Saturn sub is there and .one can go for only
karma without any materialistic benefit because as Jupiter is a karaka
of finance as well as for Dliarma also. Dharma also connected with
Achar acts (Saturn).
That is why Jupiter is exalted in Cancer at 5 degree
Venus :
Venus is a karaka of luxurious life, sex and Sanjeevani. Venus is
exalted at 27 degree of Pisces. Pisces is a sign of sacrifice or to leave
and at 27 degree Mercury star is ruling and Mercury is karaka for
intellectual and understandings and at 27 degree Jupiter sub is ruling.
Jupiter is a karaka for knowledge and as such any kind ofluxurious
life or sex or desire for long life to be left with full knowledge by
convincing the intellectual then only one can get the real sanjeevani
life.
That is why Venus is exalted at 27 degree of Pisces.

Saturn :
Saturn is exalted at 20 degree of Libra. At Libra 20 degree Rahu
star is ending and Jupiter star is beginning. Saturn is a karaka of
Karma and Libra sign is a sign of justice and Rahu star is karaka for
materialistic benefit and Jupiter is a karaka for knowledge. So native
has to do Karma with full justifications with full knowledge without
any expectation of materialistic benefit. Then only karma becomes
Nishkam Karma as said in Bhagvad Geeta.
That is why Saturn is exalted at Libra 20 degree.
Note : From above analysis one can find that each every planet either
exalted in Jupiter sub or Saturn Sub and as said in beginning only
these two planet is ruling Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha.
