READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_key_to_learn_k_p_cuspal_system_s_p_khullar.json
Dataset number: 232 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 261,533 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_Key to Learn_K.P. cuspal system_S.P. Khullar
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_Key to Learn_K.P. cuspal system_S.P. Khullar
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 315
  • total_words: 48494
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.964
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
KEY TO LEARN
SUB SUB & CUSPAL INTERLINKS THEORY
SP. Khullar
I.TJS.
G.M, Telecommunications (Rtd.)
this pdf have been saved as 300dpi with maximum quality
and minimum mb. size using "luradocuments PDF compressor desktop"
_OCR text recognition (copy-paste & search unabled) have been applied
_ it was saved as PDF A so that it will not be altered or changed with time,
still pages can be extracted as images to make another pdf

Contents
S. Title Page
No. No.
1. Appreciation and Comments v
2. Acknowledgement ix
3. Preface by R S Gaunt xi
4. Introduction xvi
5. Lessons
LI: Positional Status of a Planet 1
L2: Application of Positional Status 8
L3: Stellar Status of a Planet 16
L4: Behaviour of Rahu and Ketu 18
L5: Rahu or Ketu as Star Lord of a Planet 30
L6: Sub Lord of a Planet and its Role 42
L7: Rahu or Ketu as Sub lord of a Planet 50
L8: Study of a cusp-its philosophy, promise 59
L9: Rahu or Ketu as SS of a cusp 73
L10: Vimsottari Dasa System - its application 81
LI 1: Transit and its Application 93
L12: Rahu and Ketu as Dasa Period Lords 108
L13: CIL and Birth Time Rectification 118
LI 4: Timing Future events 139
L15: Case Studies 158

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
6. Answers of Practice Exercises
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 1 208
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 2 209
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 3 209
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 4 210
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 5 211
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 6 212
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 7 214
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 8 220
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 9 222
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 10 225
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 11 232
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 12 235
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 13 240
7. Appendix A- Concept of Zero Longevity 272
8. Appendix B-Primary and Supporting Cusps 276
9. Appendix C- Sub-Sub Tables 284

Appreciation and Comments
I want first of all to thank Mr Khullar and the managers of the
list, for having set up the workshop. I have tried a few astrological
methods before, but I had lost interest in them because they never
gave me a strong impulse to continue learning them . With KCIL it
has been a different story, since the beginning of tire workshop I
got very much excited by it and I have always tried to put time
learning it. Practice makes perfect, so I will spend the next weeks
and months to master all the principles.
- Judex
The workshop has been just marvelous and wonderful. I really
admire the patience and hard work of you both.
-Murli
The systematic, to the point logical approach and the precision
ofKCILT is really amazing. Mr. Khullar deserves all the credit for
developing this theory, and has done a fantastic service to the
Astrology Community. Tire lessons in themselves have been very
lucid and clear and almost all the lessons are self contained, in that
the need to refer to the books was not felt except on very few
occasions when specifically asked to do so. Tire hard work and the
effort that must have gone in preparing these lessons and tire way
they have been presented by Mr. Khullar and Mr. Ron Gaunt
deserves a lot of kudos. I never encountered a more logical system.
Compared to other systems this approach personalizes the
horoscope in a very accurate way. Once the chart is rectified, all
events fit together to fonn a "whole" where time disappears.
Everything is "written" and happens as promised.
- Margarita

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
It has been an extraordinary experience for us. (I am sure
other members of the group also share my feelings). The way the
course was structured and presented shows that a lot of thought
and care went into it. Thank you both, once again.
- Sandeep
My thanks to both of you for demystifying CIL through KCIL
Workshop. A Great Job. Well Done.Workshop lessons have now
made the theory/rules absolutely simple and straight forward, so,
any one with interest can leam. The system is highly fine-tuned to
give very close prediction to minutes. Any one who wants to
improve his prediction ratings should not miss this opportunity.
- V. N. Rao
For the last 13 years of my astrological study I leamt many
methods of analysis but none could provide me confidence by which
I could say that Astrology is as scientific as any other science.
KCIL workshop has built my confidence and enlightened me about
True Astrology. It has cleared my concepts. I owe my gratitude to
Ron & Mr. Khullar. Both of them have done for Astrology which
according to my knowledge none other has done.
- S.K. Malhotra
My thanks to both to Mr. Kliuller and Ron for an extraordinary
amount of work, and excellent instruction.
- Chrys
KCIL gives clear and specific rules for checking various
promises and timing of such events. Tlius I can call it as a "Perfect
Analytical Tool" which adopts unambiguous method, devoid of
any vagueness. I have no word to express his brilliance, and the
effectiveness of the system
- Arnol S L Narasimhan

Appreciation and Comments
I have been lucky enough to go through all the lessons which
are now being transcribed in the fonn of a concise compendium
after rigorous synthesis. The clarity of thought and authority on
subject makes this treatise a treasure for every enthusiast of CEL.
- Chander Verma
I belong to a family of vedic scholars and traditional
astrologers and the cuspal interlinking theory has thrown many
unknown points in astrology to light. It is in fact the most scientific
way of predicting. Though, initially, the system appears to be
complex in nature, once the same is understood, it is very interesting
and amazing to give predictions. KCIL workshop has increased
my confidence level and enlightened me about True Astrology.
- A.L. Venkataraman
The systematic, to the point logical approach and the precision
ofKCILT is really amazing. Mr. Khullar deserves all the credit for
developing this theory and has done a fantastic service to the
astrology community. The lessons in themselves have been very
lucid and clear and almost all the lessons are self contained in that
the need to refer to the books was not felt except on very few
occasions when specifically asked to do so.
- Vipin Mehta
First and foremost I must express my deepest appreciation
and thanks for the tremendous amount of work that you have put
into structuring and preparing the KCIL lessons. The material has
been presented in a way that makes it much easier to learn,
comprehend and apply.
- Pursottam
Being a Professional Astrologer and teacher, after having
learned and practiced many branches, techniques, and Systems of

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
Astrology over the last four decades; I am at a loss for words to
express how highly indebted and appreciative I am, for having been
gifted the opportunity of being a student of Mr. Khullar's KCIT
System of Astrology. I remain totally in awe at the power of KCIL.
KCIL is distinctively different in application from any
astrological system in die works today.
I continue to marvel at the genius of Mr. S.P. Khullar's
brilliance and example; I can honestly say ftiat I liken his approach
in life to that of an Astrological Einstein as he continues in his
work, undeterred; determined to shine a new, credible, and brilliant
light on the ancient discipline of Astrology.
When Mr. Khullar's techniques are concentrated upon,
dutifully applied, and put into practice on charts, his exceptional
scientific approach - coupled with the knowledge of correct
understanding and application of his teachings - will certainly prove
fruitful in withstanding die test of time. The serious and dedicated
student of KCIL will come away from this study richly rewarded.
The KCIL Workshop material, now extended to the public in
book form, is an amazing gift offered to the astrological community.
This type of knowledge is simply extraordinary, and I feel highly
honored to have been a part of such a beautiful, rich, and rewarding
astrological experience. A gift indeed!
- Sandy L. Crowther

Acknowledgement
This Book "Key to Learn Sub Sub and Cuspal Interlinks
Theory" had its genesis in the KCIL Workshop carried out in MSN
Groups on the Web. The initiator was Mr. Ron Gaunt (Australia),
and the book has been written under his inspiration, and his active
involvement at all levels.
I have no words to express my gratitude to Mr. Gaunt. It would
not have been possible to write this book without his valuable
suggestions, editing and fonnation of lessons content. It has been a
wonderful experience to discuss various salient features of KCIL
with him. I would also like to express my appreciation to his wife,
who graciously accepted his prolonged absence, because she knew
that he was helping others in a way that was very important for
them.
I am equally grateful to Mrs. Sandy L Crowther and members
of the KCIL Workshop for asking questions and providing me
opportunities to give clarifications, which have been incorporated
in the book.
I express my thanks to Mr. R S Chani one of my senior students
who have mastered the subject of Sub Sub and Cuspal Interlinks
Theory. He has always helped me in improving and augmenting
the contents of all my books. He has always assisted me in my
research. I wish him success in life. In fact I owe my gratitude to
all students of Khullar Astrology Institute.
I can not forget to confess that Mr. Amol SL. Narasimhan a
senior student of Khullar Astrology Institute has always assisted
me in my research. He has been doing an excellent job of providing
clarifications to all those who have doubts about the various

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
concepts of KCIL. I am sure that he and my other senior students
will keep the torch alight which I have lit.
I will fail in my duty if I don't express my gratitude to my
sons Manish and Mohit who always help me in so many ways.
Mr. Mukesh Gupta has designed his ground breaking software
‘True Astrology' to incorporate all the necessary features to make
working with CIL charts as easy as possible. He has also made
provision to cast Western Wheel charts, and provides features found
in no other astrology software. He also provided a patch to allow
me to cast the charts, Planetary Tables and Cuspal Positions which
enable the Printer to print them without recasting them. I express
my thanks to him.
Sagar Publications has continued to show the skill and
professionalism they have attained during the years. They have
brought this my Fifth book 'Key to Leam Sub Sub and Cuspal
Interlinks Theory' out in an amazingly short time without sacrificing
quality. I express my sincere thanks to them.
S.P. Khullar
I.T.S.

Preface
I have had the good fortune to be able to work with, and learn
from Mr Khullar. His work is outstanding and has taken astrology
to an entirely new and much higher level. The results he achieves
using his method are truly exceptional, and inspires his students to
emulate his remarkable feats.
His research, resulting in concentrating on and proving the
effectiveness of his Cuspal Interlink method, is unique and very
persuasive. This system is not a figment of the imagination, as is
much of astrology, but a well reasoned method, which has
incorporated the best of Hindu, Nadi, and KP astrology in an entirely
different and compelling way. Mr Khullar's books are a must for
any serious astrologer, and have been very well received by those
astrologers who seek real as opposed to superficial knowledge of
the subject.
I am honoured to have been asked to write a preface to this
wonderful book. I have no doubt that it is destined to be a classic
in its own right. In fact I would go so far as to say that in my
opinion, it is by far the best book ever written on the exposition of
practical astrology, as applied to predictive astrology, and assessing
events.
This is high praise, and you may wonder who it is who makes
such statements, and what experience I have to make them.
My introduction to astrology was over 37 years ago, when I
undertook a correspondence course in Tropical astrology. These
early days were hard because we had no computers or databases to
test our systems. But I took an epicurean delight in the smorgasbord
of goodies offered - Secondary, Tertiary, Minor, Solar Arc
Progressions, and multiple methods of Directions, including

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
Converse as well as Direct.There were also Solar and Lunar Returns,
and other more exotic systems, such as various cycles and Harmonic
charts.
Finally die day came when it dawned on me that despite all
these systems, touted by some to be almost fool proof, that I was
seeing no one (including myself) who was successfully making
predictions.
This moved me away from Tropical astrology as it is generally
practiced, because I thought - and still do - that Sign Lords are not
the bedrock of good predictive astrology. I tiien went on, and for
some years used Cosmo biology as my preferred system. This
worked better but brought up a host of new problems witii multiple
points having to be considered due to mid-point analysis. Looking
arormd I came across the Western Sidereal School who used the
Sidereal Zodiac. This had greater appeal because the Lordships
seemed to work better. Then it was just a short step to move over
into the world of Hindu astrology.
I must admit I was quite excited when I found this because
the claims I was seeing suggested that here at last was the possibility
of finding a system that really worked. It didn't take me long to
realise that in its own way Hindu astrology was as corrupted as
Tropical. Hundreds of slokas and multiple ayanamsas. Divisional
Charts etc gave a plethora of combinations, in which it is possible
to see anything you want- after the event - exactly the same as
Tropical.
As time went by I came to realise how seductive astrology is
to just about everyone who takes the time to be enticed by it. I
certainly have been enticed into spending a great deal of my life in
studying it. Today I would estimate that I have spent at least 20,000
hours in astrological research. This is true research not just dabbling
in astrology, because I am not, and has never been a professional
astrologer, so have not had to spend time with clients. I have had
the good fortune to have the means, and the time for many years to

Preface
be able to have astrology as my prime occupation. So I think you
can see that I have served a long and comprehensive apprenticeship
in the subject.
It is the newcomers and the converts who are the most
bedazzled by astrology's infinite possibilities. Many swear it is
true and infallible .Why would they genuinely believe this when
other more knowledgeable astrologers do not? I would put it down
to lack of experience in the subject, and not realising that it is
possible to justify anything and everything in ANY system because
of the millions of possible combinations. They need to go quite
deep into the subject before they can see a systems limitation.
Some astrologers appear never to come to this realisation.
So if it is possible to see anything in any system, how do we
find a system that really does work? Obviously the proof of the
pudding is in tire eating, so I needed to find someone, or a system
that produced consistently above average correct results in
prediction. But the problem in looking at predictions is that they
are few and far between, and it could take years (if not forever) to
find someone or a system producing good results.
I therefore decided to simulate the predictive method.
I started possibly the first of the Blind Chart tests on the Web.
Blind Chart tests are a method of taking a genuine birth chart, and
asking participants which of a number of events was the actual
event that took place on a certain date. I did this consistently,
fortnightly, on a number of lists for quite a few years, and saw no
one who was achieving better than average results in the tests.
Then came the day when I saw some newcomers to our list
getting much better than average results. These were the students
of Mr Khullar using a system called Cuspal Interlinks. This intrigued
me and I decided to check out the system. Let me say at this point
I was rather blas6 even skeptical, but the Blind Test results ignited
my interest sufficient for me to get fully involved in the system. I
am glad I did, because it has opened my eyes to what can be

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
achieved with this method which is in my opinion the most scientific
of all the astrological systems I have seen.
Mr Khullar's books give a full and complete explanation of
the system so I won't duplicate this here; but I would like to explain
a couple of points which I think newcomers to the system will
appreciate.
Cuspal Interlinks (CIL) is what I call a 'Closed System". If
you look at nearly all astrologers they wfork with what I would call
an 'Open System'. They use multiple methods to achieve a result
i.e. they might regularly use say the Secondary Progression system.
Then trying to get a match for any event (after they know the result)
they might use in conjunction Solar Arc, or Solar Returns, or Lunar
Returns, or hannonics, etc, etc, etc, to prove and vindicate the event.
It is not unusual for some astrologers to use totally different or
many methods for successive cases. The same goes for Hindu
astrology and it is not uncommon to see practitioners invoking many
slokas, a number of Divisional Charts, and using simultaneously a
number of different ayanamsas on a particular case. Of course
using astrology this way is very deceptive and does not lend itself
to actual prediction.
The 'Closed System' of CIL is very different. The system is
complete in itself. There are rules of relationships between the
various Lordships, and rules about the significations of each of the
houses. The system is not plagued by 'add ons' such as planetary
retrogression, combustion, exaltation, debilitation, planets being
young or in old age, or even planetary aspects in the usual way.
Using the lordships and significations coupled to the correct way
of working with the dasa system and transits, it has been proven
that it is possible to achieve success in Blind Chart tests and
prediction. Unlike other systems it is quite common for two or
more CIL practitioners to come up with exactly the same answer
to a problem (contrast this with any other system), and even exactly
the same rectification of an unknown birth time. Incidentally, in

Preface
my opinion this book demonstrates and gives full details of the
best rectification method available.
Mr Khullar is doing sterling work educating a new generation
of astrologers in the classes at his Institute. When I saw the value
in CIL I thought it should be offered to a wider audience, so I
proposed and set up a Web workshop site. This drew many
dedicated astrologers from our parent web site Astrology Research,
who have now undertaken the course and achieved good
understanding of the system in a very short time. This book. Dear
reader which you now hold in your hands is based on that course.
I am certain you will find it interesting, informative, and more to
the point, very useful and practical in your work in astrology.
Ron Gaunt
Brisbane, Australia.

Introduction
Human personality is infinitely intricate, and delineating the
various aspects of a native's life from a horoscope is a complex
task. What is required is that we choose the right Astrological
System that helps us to generate the different horoscopes of
individuals bom with very little time difference, and provide us
with the means of clearly analysing what is promised for various
aspects of the lives, of individuals bom with a time difference of
say only a few seconds
In my Book, "Kalamasa and Cuspal Interlinks Theory" I have
explained the various concepts that help an Astrologer to cast an
accurate horoscope, and delineate it minutely without sacrificing
accuracy. Those who have been following Sub Sub and Cuspal
Interlinks Theory (both for Natal and Horary charts) have found it
very enterprising and scientific. It has, according to many, gone a
long way to remove the tag of pseudo science or superstition from
Astrology.
However, some foreign (as well as Indian readers) felt that in
their opinion, the application of this system appears to be somewhat
complex and needed to be explained in slightly different way in
order to appeal to a wider audience. It was therefore, suggested by
Mr. Ron S Gaunt Manager of Astrology Research Group that we
conduct a Workshop on KCIL, which I agreed.
Eighteen members were enrolled and Lessons were posted
on the Web site. Each lesson had a Practice Exercise which members
were expected to attempt, and provide their answers direct to Ron.
He checked the answers and provided the necessary feedback. The
experience was very motivating.

Introduction
With the success of the workshop and the fact that it speeded
the learning process considerably, it was decided to present the
material in the fonn of a book for the benefit of all readers.
How to Use this Book:
Step 1: Read the Lesson repeatedly till you become confidant
of mastering its contents.
Step 2: Attempt to answer the Practice Exercise of each lesson
without looking at the Answers.
Step 3 : After you have written your answers compare them with
the answers given in the Book.
Step 4: If your answers don't match the answers in the Book
please re-read the Lesson and find out for yourself, which
concept has not yet been mastered.
Casting the Horoscope:
Cast the horoscope using Placidus System, taking the Cusp
as the beginning of the House.
Use Geocentric Lattitude and Khullar Ayanamsa. Use True
Nodes. Apply Notation.
This Ayanamsa is calculated by the following formula:
(((MN-l)*30+DY)/365) YR stands for Year, MN stands for Months.
DY stands for Day
The following Software meets all the requirements to cast a
correct chart.
True Astrology Software developed by Mukesh Gupta of
Jabalpur (MP), India. The features of this Softw are can be found at
http://www.cvbersoftonline.com/softwares/true-astrology-software.
TP Jyotish Software developed by Dr Srikant Ojhaof Jodhpur
(Rajasthan), India sko@,redifftnail .com

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
Astracadabra Software (for Pocket PCs and Pocket Phones),
developed by Mr. Neville Lang (Australia). Available from
www.esotech.com ,au/
Key to Leam Sub Sub and Cuspal Interlinks Theory is written
with the sole objective of enabling the readers to master the
fundamental concepts of Cuspal Interlinks Theory as achieved by
the participants in the Lessons presented in the Workshop conducted
on MSN Groups KCIL.
Each Lesson is written in simple, lucid and easy to leam style
and has a Practice Exercise which provides the reader with an
opportunity to test his comprehension. Answers of each Exercise
are placed in the end of the book.
This book however, is not a substitute for my book Kalamsa
and Cuspal Interlinks Theory. If the reader masters the contents of
this book, he will be able to use the concepts illustrated in my
books on Natal and Horary Astrology much quicker and easier.
Sub Sub and Cuspal Interlinks Theory is in tune with the
Navamsa and Nadiamsa concept of Nadi Astrology. Tire reader
will find that it offers sound techniques of predictive astrology.
How to analyse the horoscope, to determine what is promised
for the native for all walks of human life, has been explained in
simple and scientific way. Whilst timing events and use of transits
are often thought of as complex and incomprehensible, it is dealt
with here in a very clear and practical way with many actual case
studies.
Suggestions from readers are welcome.
S.P. Khullar
I.T.S.

Lesson 1
Positional Status of a Planet
Introduction: Before we start talking about the subject of
Positional Status of a Planet, let us understand how the Zodiac is
divided in the Stellar Astrology Systems. In Stellar System the
Zodiac is divided into 27 equal parts each of 13°. 20'. Each part is
called Nakshatra or Star. Each Nakshatra is allotted the rulership
of a Planet. Each Nakshatra is then divided into 9 unequal parts.
Each part is called the Sub. Just like Nakshatra each Sub is also
allotted the ruler ship of a Planet. Lastly, each Sub is further divided
into 9 parts and each such part is called Sub Sub and is allotted the
ruler ship of a Planet.
The outer wheel shows the division of the Zodiac into 27 parts.

Thus, each Transiting Planet (hereafter shown as Tr. Planet)
according to its longitude will be in a particular Sign, Star, Sub and
Sub-Sub. These positions are respectively tenned as 'Sign lord',
'Star lord, 'Sub lord' and 'Sub-Sub lord ofthe planet. For example,
Sun of 07°40'48" in Pisces implies that it is in Jupiter sign, Sat
star, Ketu sub and Rahu sub-sub. This will be shown by the software
in the Planetary Table which is illustrated below.
Note: Tr has been used with reference to the Physical Planet.
The Physical Planet is a wanderer. But the zodiacal position of the
Planet at the time of an event fixes its lord ship as Sign or Star or
Sub or Sub-Sub. Tr Planet then becomes the Natal Planet and its
zodiacal position specifies its Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub which
stands fixed for the natal chart.
PLANETARY POSITION
Note: For details please refer Page Numbers 1, 7 to 9, 108
and 109 of my Book Kalamsa and CILT.

Positional Status of a Planet
Positional Status of a Planet
A Tr. Planet is said to have positional status if:
1 . There is no Planet in its Star zone area.
2. The Tr. Planet is in its own Star. That is the Planet is
placed in the zodiacal area of the Nakshatra (Star) which
is ruled by the Tr. Planet itself.
3. There is mutual exchange of Nakshatra (Star) lords.
How to Read the Planetary Table
Planetary table as shown in the first column above indicates
the zodiacal position of Tr. Planets at the time of birth of the native.
The Tr. Planets various Lordships are placed in rows. The zodiacal
position of the Planets is defined by four columns. First column
indicates the Sign in which tire Planet is placed. The second column
indicates the Star. Third column indicates its Sub lord and the last
column indicates its Sub-Sub lord. Take the case of Tr. Jupiter in
the above Table. Jupiter is in Aries 22°04'59".The reading of the
Table indicates that Jupiter is in the Sign ruled by Mars, the Star
ruled by Venus, Sub and SS ruled by Saturn.
Practical Approach to determine the Positional Status of
a Planet:
The practical and easy way to find out whether a Tr. Planet
has positional status or not is as follows:
Scan the second column in the Planetary Position Table (shown
as StL) from top to Tr Ketu and check if that Tr. Planet appears in
any row or not. If the Planet does not appear in any row other than
the row which is for the Planet itself, then the Planet is said to
have positional status. Similarly scan the StL column to find out if
there is mutual exchange of Nakshatras (Star Lords) between the
concerned Tr. Planet and any other Tr. Planet in the table.

Note: Outer Planets (Uranus, Neptune and Pluto) are
excluded.
Let us explain this through example charts:
Case A: Below is the planetary table.
PLANETARY POSITION
Let us detennine the positional status of Mars in this chart. If
we scan the column titled StL, we find Mars does not appear in the
entire column, which satisfies condition no.l, and hence Mars has
positional status. Similarly Positional Status of Moon can be
justified. Let us now consider the case of Sun. If we scan the StL
column, we find that Sun appears in the row of Moon, Mars and
Rahu. Therefore, we can conclude that the Planet Sun has no PS in
this chart.
Case B: In the table given below let us check whether Mars
has PS or not.

Positional Situs ofa Planet
PLANETARY POSITION
We notice that Planet Mars appears in a Row but this Row
belongs to Mars itself i.e. Mars is in its own Star. We declare that
Mars has PS (Condition No. 2).
Case C: In the table below let us check whether Planets Sun
and Moon have PS or not.
PLANETARY POSITION

Scanning the second column we find that Sun is in Moon Star
and Moon is in Sun Star. We declare that both Sun and Moon have
PS (Condition No. 3 ) ; ie when transiting planets have an exchange
of Star Lords they both have Positional Strength (PS.)
Note: There is one more condition that enables a Planet to
acquire positional status. That is when the Planet is in the Star
of Rahu or Ketu and Rahu or Ketu represent that Planet. This
will be clarified at the end of lesson 5.
Practice Exercises
Here are the Tables 1, 2 and 3. Please answer the questions
given below each table.
Table 1
PLANETARY POSITION
Please indicate which of the Planets (In Table) have Positional
Status.

Positional Status of a Planet
Table 2
PLANETARY POSITION
Please indicate if the Planets Moon, Mars Jupiter and Ketu
have Positional Status? Provide reasons for your answers.
Table 3
PLANETARY POSITION
Please indicate if the Planets Rahu, Ketu, Sat and Sun have
Positional Status or not. Provide reasons for your answers.

Lesson 2
Application of Positional Status of a
Planet
Let us now discuss what results a Tr. Planet will offer to the
native in whose horoscope this Planet has positional status.The Tr.
Planet will offer the results of the following houses:
A. The house occupied by the Tr Planet in the Bhava
(houses) chart
B. The houses where the Tr. Planet appears as Sign or Star
or Sub or Sub Sub in the cuspal positions of those houses.
How to read Cuspal Position Table:
Cuspal position table has 12 rows corresponding to 12 houses
and four columns. The Sign rising on each cusp indicates the Sign
lord ship of the house. It is indicated by the first column. The second
column indicates the Star lord of the cusp; third column indicates
the Sub lord of the cusp and the fourth column indicates the SSL of
the cusp. The Sign lord, Star lord. Sub lord and SSL of the cusp are
called the co-rulers of the cusp. For example in chart of Fig 1 shown
below Ascdt rises in Scorpio 02°.35'.02".The Ascdt is said to be
co-ruled by Mars, Jupiter, Rahu and Ketu.
Some times we say the Planets co-ruling the Ascdt are Mars,
Jupiter, Rahu and Ketu. The above two statements are identical in
significance.
Let us explain through an example chart Fig 1

Application of Positional Status of a Planet
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Figure 1

Application of Positional Status of a Planet

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
In this chart we notice that the Planet Mars has positional
status because there is no Planet in Mars Star. Mars occupies second
Bhava. It appears as Sign lord of cusps 1 and 6.1t is Sub lord of 5th
cusp and Star lord of 8th cusp.
Thus due to the fact that Mars has positional status it will
offer the results of the houses 1, 2, 5, 6 and 8.
Let us take the case of Tr. Planet Moon. In the chart shown
above we notice that Planet Moon has positional status. It occupies
second house in Bhava chart. It appears as SSL of 3rd and 7th
cusp, and Sign lord of 9th cusp. It also appears as Star lord of 1 1th
cusp. This means Planet Moon having PS will offer the results of
Notel: Remember that this only indicates that the Planet
Mars or Moon during their Dasa period (Dasa or Bhukti or
Antara or Sookshma or Prana) will offer the results of the above
houses. It does not state whether the results will be positive or
negative. About this aspect we will discuss in future under the
topic Role of Sub lord of the Planet.
Note2: The Tr. Planet who has PS will also give the results
of the houses as per its Stellar Status. This will be discussed in
a separate Lesson.
Note3: Number shown in the Bhava chart indicates the lord
ship of the house. For example in Fig 2 number 9 shows that the
lordship of 11th house is allotted to Jupiter. This is because the
degree that rises on the 11th cusp is Sag 27°48'40". Please read
page 28 of the Book Kalamsa and Cuspal Interlinks (Revised
Edition). It is explained there how the Planets are placed in the
Bhava chart and also how the lordship of Houses are allotted
Practice Exercise: Lesson2
Here is the chart of a native. Please find which of the Planets
have the positional status and also indicate what results these Planets

Application of Positional Status of a Planet
will offer during their Dasa period.
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Figure 2

Lesson Three
Stellar Status of a Planet
In our earlier lessons, vve have learnt that a Tr.Planet is always
placed in a Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub according to its longitude.
The Planet does not confer anything on its own (unless it has
positional status), but it gives the significations of its Star lord. It
is called Stellar Status* . This statement means that the Tr. Planet
will always offer the results of the following houses:
1. The house occupied by its Star lord in the Bhava chart.
2. The houses where its Star lord appears in the cuspal
positions as Sign lord or Star lord or Sub lord or SubSub lord.
* Stellar Status is the position of Star lord in various houses of
which the planet under consideration will offer results.
It may be noted that the Tr. Planet will always offer the
result as per its stellar and positional status (if any).
Let us try to explain it through example chart (Fig 1 - Refer to
lesson 2). If we consider the Tr.Planet Sim in the chart we find that
Sim has no positional status, because there are Planets who are in
Sun Star. Sun is in Saturn Star and Saturn occupies 6th house in the
Bhava chart. It also appears in cuspal positions 3, 4, 5, 6, 9 and 10.
Summarizing the whole thing, we may say that Planet Sun will
offer the results of houses 3, 4, 5, 6, 9 and 10 as per its stellar
status.
Now let us consider the case of the Planet Mars which has
positional status (Explained in lesson-1). Therefore, it will offer

Stellar Status of a Planet
the results of houses 1, 2, 5, 6 and 8. Mars is in the star of Sun who
is placed in 4th house in Bhava chart and appears in cuspal positions
3, 7 and 10. Tlius, Mars as per its stellar status offers the results of
houses 3, 4, 7 and 10. It can be deduced that Mars will offer the
results of the houses 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 10 in summation.
Practice Exercise: Lesson Three.
Refer to the chart in Fig-2 of Lesson 2. Please indicate the
houses of which the Planets Jupiter, Mercury and Moon will offer
results to the native.

Lesson Four
Behaviour of Rahu and Ketu
The Earth orbits around Sim from West to East, and likewise
Moon orbits around the Earth in the counter clockwise direction
i.e. West to East. Since, Moon's axis is inclined to the Ecliptic at 5
deg 8 minutes; it cuts the Ecliptic at two points which are
diametrically opposite to each other. The ascending node i.e. north
node is called Rahu or Dragon's Head and descending node i.e.
south node is called Ketu or Dragon's Tail. This is illustrated below
in Fig 3:
Fig3: Illustration of Moon's Nodes

Behaviour of Rahu and Ketu
In classical Hindu astrology, Rahu and Ketu are considered
as Planets and the interpretation of their influence is that Ketu is
the Kannic luggage that we carry' in this life, while Rahu represents
the target set forthis life i.e. it represents the direction in which our
life is heading, the lessons we need to learn in our life. Rahu
represents Soul's mission to accomplish in this life. Some
Astrologers go to the extent of saying: "The North Node is the
single most important point in the chart ....it describes what your
soul wants to learn and experience in this life. It is a Soul
Messenger."
Much has been written about the behaviour of Rahu and
Ketu in the revised edition of Kalamsa and Cuspal Interlinks
Theory. Let us present the same material in an easy to learn format.
Behaviour of Rahu and Ketu
Rahu and Ketu are considered as Planets. They will offer
the result as per their PS and Stellar Status. Let us see what
result Rahu and Ketu will offer in the chart of Fig 4.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Figure-4

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory

Behaviour of Rahu and Ketu
Tr. Planet Rahu in this chart has positional status because
there is no Planet in its Star. It can be verified from the second
column of the Planetary Table. Thus Rahu will offer the result both
as per its positional status and as per its stellar status.
Positional Status Result: Rahu occupies 11th house and in
cuspal positions 3, 7, 9 and 10. Thus, Rahu will offer the result of
Stellar Status Result: Rahu is in Saturn Star. Saturn occupies
8th house and appears in cuspal positions 4, 5,6, 11 and 12. Thus,
Rahu will offer the results of houses 4, 5, 6, 8, 11 and 12 as per its
stellar status.
In summation, Rahu in this chart will offer the result of houses
What we discussed above are the results of Rahu as Rahu i.e.
when we consider Rahu as a Planet like any other Planet.
In the given chart, Ketu also has the positional status because
Ketu is in Moon Star and Moon is in Ketu Star (mutually exchanging
star lords - as explained in previous lesson).
Positional Status Result: Ketu occupies the 5th house and
appears in 4, 5, 8, 10 and 1 2 cuspal positions. Thus, Ketu will offer
the results of 4, 5, 8, 10 and 12 houses.
Stellar Status Result: Ketu is in Moon Star and Moon
occupies 12th house. Furthermore, it appears in cuspal positions 8,
11 and 12. Therefore, Ketu will offer the results of 8, 11 and 12
houses.
In summation, Ketu will offer the results of 4, 5, 8, 10, 11 and
12 houses. These are the houses which signify the Positional and
Stellar status of Ketu as Ketu.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
Planets That Rahu and Ketu Represent:
We have stated above that Rahu and Ketu are the points of
intersection. These points are represented by the Zodiacal positions
of Rahu and Ketu. We also know that each zodiacal point is ruled
by a Sign and a Star lord. It is believed that Rahu and Ketu
absorb the energy of the Planets that co-rule their zodiacal
positions.
In Fig 4, Tr. Rahu is in Can 10°. 08'. 33". This position is ruled
by the Planet Moon as Sign Lord and the Planet Saturn as the Star
lord. According to inter-cuspal theory, Tr. Rahu and Ketu represent
the planets which are their Sign and Star lords. In the chart under
reckoning, Moon and Saturn are the sign and star of Rahu
respectively; therefore, Rahu is said to represent Moon and Saturn.
In other words, Tr. Rahu will also provide the results of Moon
and Saturn as per their positional and stellar status. In brief,
we can say that Rahu will offer the results of Rahu as Rahu, Rahu
as Moon, and Rahu as Saturn as per their positional and stellar
status. Ketu can be analyzed on the basis of same principle e.g. in
the given chart Ketu will be studied as Ketu, Saturn (Sign lord of
Ketu) and Moon (Star lord of Ketu).
Note: However it should be remembered that the result of
Rahu as Rahu, Rahu as Moon, and Rahu as Saturn has to be
considered independently. This is because the result of a house
that the Planet offers has to be qualified by the Sub lord of the
Planet. This will be explained in future lesson. It is, however, to
be remembered that Rahu or Ketu will act as three Planets.
Fig 4.1 shows the diagramatic representation for determining
the significations of Rahu in a chart. The same procedure can be
addopted for determining the significations for Ketu.

Behaviour of Rahu and Ketu
Fig 4. 1 Flow chart
Flow Chart for Determining Significations of Rahu
1. Rahu as Rahu
Stellar Status Result
Star Lord of Rahu in Cuspal
Positions and Bhava.
PS Results:
Rahu appearing in Cuspal
Positions & Bhava
Stellar Status Result:
Star Lord of Rahu in Cuspal
Positions and Bhava
2. Rahu as
Sign Lord
Stellar Status Result
Cuspal Positions & Bhava
occupied by Star Lord of
Sign Lord of Rahu
PS Results:
Cuspal Positions & Bhava
occupied by Sign Lord of
Rahu
Stellar Status Result:
Cuspal Positions and Bhava
occupied by Star Lord of
Sign Lord of Rahu

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
3. Rahu as
Star Lord
Stellar Status Result
Cuspal Positions and Bliava
occupied by Star Lord of
Star Lord of Rahu
PS Results:
Cuspal Positions & Bliava
occupied by Star Lord of
Rahu
Stellar Status Result:
Cuspal Positions and Bliava
occupied by Star Lord of
Star Lord of Rahu
Rahu will offer result of 1 +2 + 3.
Practice Exercise: Lesson 4
Please refer to Fig 5 and indicate what results (houses) Rahu
offer to the native.

Behaviour of Rahu and Ketu
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Figure-5

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
RASHI CHART

Lesson 5
Rahu or Ketu as Star Lord
of a Planet
We have seen in lesson 1 that Rahu and Ketu have also been
allotted the rulership of Nakshatras (Stars). Tims any Tr. Planet as
per its longitude may be in the Star of Rahu or Ketu. Let us discuss
what result a Tr. Planet will offer when it is in Rahu or Ketu Star.
Refer Fig 5 in Lesson 4.We notice that Tr. Saturn is in Ketu
Star. In this Chart Ketu represents Sun because Ketu is in Leo sign
and also in Sun Star. The principle is that any Planet in the Star
of Rahu or Ketu will be treated as if the Planet is also in the
Star of the Planets which Rahu or Ketu represents.
Thus the Planet will be considered in this case as if in the first
it is in Ketu Star and in the second it will be assumed to be in the
Star of Sun. Tims at the stellar level Saturn will offer the following
results:
Saturn in Ketu Star: We have seen in lesson 4 above that it
will give the result of houses 2, 9 and 12.

Rahu orKetu as Star Lord of a Planet
Saturn in Sun Star: Sun is placed in second house and appears
in cuspal positions 8 and 12.Thus Saturn will offer the result of
houses 2, 8 and 12.
To sum up we will say that Saturn in this chart will offer the
results ofhouses 2, 8, 9 and 12.
Let us take another example. Refer Fig 1. In this chart we find
that Mercury is in Rahu Star. Rahu is in Virgo Sign ruled by Mercury
and Rahu is in Sun Star. Mercury in this chart will offer the following
results:
Mercury in Rahu Star: Rahu is placed in 10th house and
appears in cuspal positions 1,4, 11 and 12.Thus Mercury will offer
the results ofhouses 1,4, 10, 11 and 12.
Mercury in Sun Star: Sun occupies 4th house and appears
in cuspal positions 3, 7 and lO.Thus Mercury will offer the results
ofhouses 3, 4, 7 and 10.
Mercury in Mercury Star: This is as good as Mercury has
the positional status in this chart. Mercury is placed in 3rd house
and appears in cuspal positions 2, 3, 8, 9 and 11. Thus Mercury will
offer the results ofhouses 2, 3, 8, 9 and 11.
Summarising the above results we say Mercury in this chart
will offer the results ofhouses 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12.
Let us now discuss the case where we find Rahu in Ketu
Star. Refer Fig 6.Here we find that Rahu is in Ketu Star.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Figure 6

Rabu orKetu as Star Lord of a Planet
ftASHI CHART

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory

Rahu or Ketu as Star Lord of a Planet
Tr. Ketu in this chart is in Mercury Sign and Mars Star. Thus
Ketu represents Mercury and Mars.
Tr. Rahu in Ketu Star: Ketu is placed in 8th house and
appears in cuspal positions 2, 6, 9 and lO.Rahu will thus offer the
results of houses 2, 6, 8, 9 and 10.
Tr. Rahu in Mercury Star: Mercury occupies house 3 and
appears in cuspal positions 4, 8, 10 and 11. Thus Rahu will offer
result of houses 3, 4, 8, 10 andll.
Tr. Rahu in Mars Star: Mars is placed in 6th house and
appears in cuspal positions 1, 6 and 8. Rahu will thus offer result of
houses 1, 6 and 8.
Summarising we may say that Rahu will offer the result of
Ah! Have we not forgotten something? In lesson 4 we said
that Rahu and Ketu also offer the result which the Planets they
represent have to offer. We, therefore, have to include the result
which the Planets Rahu and Ketu have to offer. In this chart
Table 6, Rahu is in Jupiter Sign and Ketu Star.
Results offered by Jupiter: We notice Jupiter has PS. It is
placed in 3rd house and appears in cuspal positions 2, 5, 6 and
11 Jupiter is in Mars Star who is placed in 6th house and appears in
cuspal positions 1, 6 and 8Jupiter will thus offer the results of
Results offered by Ketu: Ketu is in Mars Star who occupies
6th house and appears in cuspal positions 1, 6 and 8. Thus Ketu as
per its stellar status offer the result of houses 1, 6 and 8. But Ketu
has also to offer the result of the Planets Mercury and Mars which
it represents.
Ketu as Mercury: Mercury has PS in this chart. It occupies
house 3 and appears in cuspal positions 4, 8, 10 andll. Mercury is
in Moon Star. Moon is placed in second house and appears in cuspal
positions 2, 7, 9 and 1 1 .

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
Thus Ketu as Mercury will offer the result of houses 2, 3,
Ketu as Mars: Mars has no PS. It is in Venus Star who
occupies 3rd house. Venus appears in cuspal positions 1, 3, 5, 7, 8
and 12.Thus Ketu as Mars will offer the result of houses 1, 3, 5,
Thus in this chart Rahu will offer the result of all houses.
Need to Remember:
Principle of Nakshatra/Stellar theory is based on the following
fundamental concepts:
1. Each specific area of the Zodiac represents a specific
energy content represented by the static (in the natural
zodiac) and dynamic significations (in the concerned
natal chart). Since in stellar systems, Rahu and Ketu are
treated as planets, so they are also allotted specific areas
in the Zodiac. As far as Zodiac areas are concerned, Rahu
and Ketu only represent themselves, for static
significations. Like Signs each Nakshatra is allotted
specific significations. You may refer my Book Basic
and Traditional concepts Pages 77 to 101.
2. Planet offers results of the areas of the Zodiac as per
their Star lords' position. House cusps are only divisions
of space at the background of the Zodiac.
3. Suppose a Planet is in tire Star of Moon, it will only hit
at the cuspal positions where Moon appears. Now if in
the chart Moon is represented by Rahu or Ketu, the
planet is not said to be hitting the cuspal positions
where Rahu or Ketu appears.
Suppose a Planet is in Tauras Sign and Moon Star.
The Planet's nature is modified by the influence of

Rahu or Ketu as Star Lord of a Planet
Venus and the sub influence of Moon. Suppose Moon
in the chart is represented by Rahu or Ketu, the Planet
cannot be said to be under the influence of Rahu or
Ketu. The influence on the Planet is as per its Zodiacal
position. The cuspal positions where Moon appears
are the mundane positions which indicate the areas
where the influence of the planet will be observed.
4. Rahu and Ketu are intersection points and are said to
absorb the energy contents (static as well as dynamic) of
the planets that represent those intersection points by
Sign and Star. Thus any planet in Rahu/Ketu Star is taken
to be in the Star of the planets that Rahu/ Ketu represent.
Suppose a Planet is in Ketu Star. Let Ketu represent
Moon. The Planet is then under the influence of the
sign lord and the sub influence of Ketu. However the
Planet will be said to be linked to the mundane
positions where Ketu appears as well as where the
planets that Ketu represents appear.
Practical Approach:
From a practical application point of view, the easy way
to consider the foregoing is to look at it as follows:
a) In the table titled 'Planetary Positions' whenever
Rahu and/or Ketu are shown, here you also substitute
the Tr. planets that Rahu/Ketu represents. The reason
for this is that the Nodal Points take on the attributes of
the planets that rule the nodal points.
b) hi the table titled 'Cuspal Positions' whenever Rahu and/
or Ketu are shown, here you do NOT substitute the Tr.
planets that Rahu/Ketu represents, because these are
NOT planets positions, they are only the zones (zodiacal
positions) represented by Rahu or Ketu as Lords.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
Note: However there is a specific application for which we
will replace Rahu/Ketu in cuspal positions by the Planets they
represent. This will be clarified in later lessons.
Please master this lesson.
Supplement to Lesson 1: Positional Status of a Planet
We have discussed three conditions which declare that a Planet
has Positional Status. There is another very important condition
which enables the Planet to acquire PS. This happens when we
find a Planet in the Star of Rahu or Ketu and the Planet itself
represents Rahu or Ketu. Refer Fig 1 of Lesson 2.Here we find
Mercury to be in the Star of Rahu. Now Rahu in this chart is placed
in Mercury Sign. Thus we say Rahu represents Mercury. We have
said above that a Planet in the Star of Rahu or Ketu is as well as in
tire Star of tire Planets that Rahu or Ketu represent. Thus Mercury
which is in Rahu Star will be considered as well in the Star of
Mercury whom Rahu represents.
You may refer to the Planetary Position on Page 94 of the
Book. There you notice that Mercury is in Ketu Star. But Ketu
being in Virgo Sign mled by Mercury represents Mercury. Thus
Mercury will be considered in Mercury Star.
In both the above cases Mercury has PS.
Practice Exercise: Lesson 5.
Refer Fig 6.1 and indicate what result Planet Rahu will
offer to the Native during its Dasa Periods.

Rahu orKetu as Star Lord of a Planet
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Figure 6.1

Lesson 6
Sub Lord of a Planet and its Role
We have discussed in Lesson- 1 that each Planet as per its
longitude is always in a Star and a Sub. We have also seen in lessons
2 and 3 that a Planet offers the results of houses signified by it as
per its Positional and Stellar status. Now there may be more than
one Planet in a chart which has the same Star lord. Take the case of
Fig-1 (Lesson 2). Here we notice that the Planets Moon, Mars and
Ralru are all in the Star of Sun. Will all these Planets offer the same
results for all the houses signified by these Planets? The answer is
the result offered by the Planets is qualified by the Sub Lord of the
respective Planet. If Moon, Mars and Rahu are in different Subs
the nature of the result offered by them may differ. In other words
we say that the Sub lord of the Planet qualifies the nature of the
result offered by the Planet.
The role of the SUB Lord can be summed up under 2 rules
1. STAR PROPOSES AND SUB DISPOSES.
A Tr planet's STAR Lord may appear in a cuspal position.
This signifies commitment to the experiences and events
offered by that house. The TV planet's SUB Lord will either
confirm or deny these experiences/events.
The SUB Lord will indicate confirmation or denial by its
position in relation to the house being assessed ie the Sub
Lord in the 7th house from the house under consideration
would deny the STAR Lords commitment to that house.

Sub Lord of a Planet and its Role
Favourable houses are taken as 1, 3, 5, 9 and 11 from a
cusp under consideration. Houses 2, 6, and 10 are taken
as neutral houses, and houses 4, 7, 8 and 12 are taken as
adverse houses.
2. STAR INDICATES INVOLVEMENT AND SUB
COMMITMENT.
Here again a Tr planet's STAR Lord may appear in a
cuspal position, while its Sub Lord may appear in a cusp
that is relevant to the experience/event. This will enable
the experience/event to happen irrespective of whether the
position from the relevant cusp is considered to be
favourable or unfavourable.
Suggested Reading: Pages 14, 15, 123 and 124 of my Book
Kalamsa and Cuspal Interlinks Theory (Revised Edition).
Let us explain the role of the Sub Lord through an example
chart of Fig- 1 (lesson 2). Here the Planet Moon is in Sun Star
and has PS also. Moon will therefore offer the results of houses
2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10 and 1 1 due to its PS and Stellar Status. Now,
Moon is in the Sub of Moon which appears in cuspal positions
2 (PS and is placed in second Bhava), 3, 7, 9 and 11. Thus the
result of houses 2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10 and 11 will be qualified by
houses 2, 3, 7, 9 and 11. The criterion for sub lord's
qualification is illustrated below:
First Criterion:
This is based on the concept of Rule 1 that Star proposes and
Sub disposes. If the position of Sub lord is 4 or 7 or 8 or 12 with
respect to the position of the houses of which the Planet has to
offer the results as per its PS or Stellar Status then the Planet is
believed to offer unfavourable result.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
In the above case, Moon is to offer the results of second house
i.e. say money matters. The native's financial status will improve
during the Dasa periods of Moon if the Sub Lord of Moon does not
appear in cuspal positions 4 or 7 or 8 or 12 from second house. We
have stated above that Moon is in Moon Sub that appears in 2, 3, 7,
9 and 1 1 from Ascdt. These positions of Sub Lord with respect to
Second house are 1, 2, 6, 8 and 10. This means that on an average
the Planet Moon in this horoscope will offer favourable result but
the Sub lord's position in 8th cusp from 2 also indicates that native
may also face some financial crisis.
Second Criterion:
This is based on the concept of Rule 2 that Star indicates
involvement and Sub indicates commitment. Let us explain it
through an example. In Fig-1 (lesson 2), we notice that Mars has
PS and is placed in Second House. Thus, Mars is said to involve
Second House i.e. it will offer the results of Second House e.g.
money matters or addition in the family etc. Now, Mars is in the
Sub of Mars which is the Sub lord of the 5th cusp (refer cuspal
position table of Fig- 1) and 5th cusp is 4th from the Second cusp.
Thus, Mars should offer unfavourable result for Second house
(Considering only this position ofthe Sub Lord Mars). Undoubtedly,
Mars will not give positive result related to money matters, but
Mars will offer desired result as far as addition in the family is
concerned.
This is because 5th house is the relevant house for the first
child birth. Remember that if the Sub Lord is in a cuspal
position which is one of the relevant cusps that takes part in
enacting an event then the first criterion (i.e. a planet offers
negative result of the house where its Star lord is placed if its

Sub Lord of a Planet and its Role
Sub lord is placed in 4th or 7th or 8th or 12th cuspal position
front the Star lord position) is ignored. Any Planet which
involves the 5th cusp and commits to 11th cusp can offer the
native faourable results for the birth of the first child or even
for romantic relations though the 11th position is 7th from
5.This is because for the birth of child 11th house is one of the
relevant cusp.
Favourable or Unfavourable Result:
The concept of favourable or unfavourable result is subjective.
There may be two Planets in a chart whose Star lords appear in 7th
house or in 7th cuspal position. Both these Planets will offer the
native the result of the 7th house, say marriage or divorce. Now
the Planet whose Sub lord appears in 5 or 1 1 will be considered
favourable for marriage. However the Planet whose Sub lord
appears in 6th cusp will be considered favourable for divorce. In
other words for marriage we need to select the Planet whose Sub
lord appears in 5 or 1 1 and for divorce we need to select the Planet
whose Sub lord appears in 6.The Planet which is favourable for
marriage is unfavourable for divorce and the Planet which is
favourable for divorce is unfavourable for marriage. This has to be
interpreted as: Involvement represents the partner and commitment
implies separation from the partner or union with the partner.
Specific Role of Sub:
This Role of the Sub lord has more applications when we
discuss the promise of a cusp. We will therefore discuss this aspect
in detail in a future lesson. For detailed study of discussed subject,
please read Page numbers 123 and 124 of my book.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
Practice Exercise: Lesson 6
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Fig 7

Sub Lord of a Planet and its Role
After reckoning Fig 7, answer the following questions:
Question 1
On 23.09.2004 the native was running Bhukti of Sun, Antara
of Saturn and Sookshama of Moon. Please indicate whether these
Planets can offer the native child birth or not.
Note: blouses offering first child birth are 2, 5, and 11
Question 2
Will the Planet Mars during its period offer favourable result
to the native regarding his financial status?
Note: blouses offering improved financial position are 2, 6,
and 11.

Lesson 7
Rahu or Ketu as Sub Lord
of a Planet & Role of Sub-Sub Lord
of a Planet
In lesson 4 we said that Rahu and Ketu offer the results of
three Planets as follows:
1. Rahu or Ketu as Rahu or Ketu.
2. Rahu or Ketu as Sign lord of Rahu or Ketu.
3. Rahu or Ketu as Star lord of Rahu or Ketu.
In Lesson 5 we explained that if a Planet is in the Star of Rahu
or Ketu it will be considered as follows:
1. Planet in the Star of Rahu or ketu.
2. Planet in the Star of Sign lord of Rahu or Ketu.
3. Planet in the Star of Star lord of Rahu or Ketu.
We also said that this should be seen from Planetary Positions
Table. For example let us say that a Planet A is in the Star of Rahu.
Let Rahu represent B as Sign lord and C as Star lord. Then first
read the Planetary Table as A in the Star of Rahu. Then in place of
Rahu under the column STL against A replace it by B. And then we
may replace Rahu by C.
Another way of saying the same is, "any planet in the Star of
Rahu or Ketu will also be considered as if that planet (which Rahu
or Ketu represents) is substituted for Rahu or Ketu in the Planetary
Positions Table."

Rahu or Ketu as Sub Lord of a Planet
Similarly any Planet in the Sub of Rahu or Ketu will be
considered as if that Planet is also in the Sub of those Planets
which Rahu or Ketu represents.
Let us refer to Figl in Lesson 2.Here we notice that Tr Planet
Sim is in Saturn Star and Ketu Sub. The results which the Planet
Sun has to offer to the native during its Dasa periods will be qualified
or specified by the Sub lord Ketu.
Sun in this chart has no PS. It will offer the results as per its
Stellar Status that is of houses 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, and 10.
Ketu who is the Sub lord of Sun in this chart represents Jupiter
and Saturn. Qualification of results for the houses signified by Sun
will be studied as follows:
1. Sim in the Star of Saturn and Sub of Ketu. Ketu appears
in cuspal positions 1,2,4, 6, 8, 10 and 12. Ketu is placed
in 4 with PS.
2. Sun in the Star of Saturn and Sub of Jupiter. Now Jupiter
appears in cuspal positions 1, 2, 5, 7, 11 and 12Jupiter
is placed in 6 with PS (Jupiter is in Venus Star and Venus
is in Jupiter Star.).
3. Sun in the Star of Saturn and Sub of Saturn. Here we
notice Saturn appears in cuspal positions 3, 4, 5, 6, 9 and
10. Saturn is placed in 6 but has no PS.
Summarising the above we may say that the results of houses
signified by Sun will be qualified or specified by the cuspal positions
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12. This means that the Planet Sim
is capable to offer both the favourable as well as unfavourable result
of the houses signified by it. Yes you will be asking the question:
But what result do we choose?
The answer to this question requires knowledge of the
principles of Vimsottari Dasa and also the transit potential of the
Planet Sun. We will discuss in detail on this subject in future lesson.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
Role of Sub-Sub Lord of a Planet:
The Sub-Sub lord of a Planet indicates the end qualification
of the result of a house signified by a Planet as per its PS or Stellar
Status. It should however be remembered that the native has to
first experience the result of the house signified as per the
qualification of the Sub lord of the Planet Let us explain this
through an example.
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Figure 8

Rahu orKetu as Sub Lord of a Planet
Figure 8 is the chart of a man whose father died on
1 9.09. 1979.0n that date the native was running the Dasa of Saturn
and Bhukti of Venus.
Note: This chart is not a rectified chart It is only used to
explain the role of the Sub-Sub lord of a Planet.
1 : OPERATION OF SATURN AS DASA LORD
In the native's chart the 9th house represents the father ie the
first house or Ascendant of the father. The 8th from any ascendant
always represents death, injuries and accidents. So the natives 4th
house being 8th from the 9th signifies the house of death of the
father.
A. Dasa lord Saturn is in Ketu Star and Ketu is in Saturn
Star. We say Saturn has PS. Saturn thus becomes the
significator of 4th cusp being the lord of 4th house. Saturn
is in Ketu Star who is the Sub-Sub lord of 9th cusp. So
Saturn becomes the significator of 9th house also. Both
relevant cusps for the death of father are signified.
B. Dasa Lord Saturn is in Ketu Star which also represents
Jupiter, but we can ignore this because the condition has
already been fulfilled by Ketu representing Saturn.
C. Saturn is in the Sub of Rahu (which has PS and is Star
lord of 9) and also represents Moon. Moon is the Star
lord of 4th cusp. (Both Rahu and Moon would confirm
commitment).
We say that the Planet Saturn has the potential to cause
the death of father of the native because it involves
relevant cusps 1 and 8 with respect to 9th cusp and also
commits to 4th cusp (8th from 9th) which is the house of
death for father.
D. Saturn is in the Sub of Rahu that also represents Mercury,
but we can ignore this because the potential for death of

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
the father has already been established by Rahu
representing the Moon.
E. Saturn is in the Sub-Sub of Moon that appears in cuspal
positions 4 (i.e. 8th from 9), 10 (i.e.2 from 9).Thus the
Sub-Sub lord of Saturn appears in cuspal positions which
are death inflicting houses. We say the Sub-Sub lord of
Saturn supports the end result of death of father.
F. If Moon as Sub Sub Lord had not appeared in death
inflicting houses from the 9th cusp then the Dasa lord
could not have killed father. It could have only offered
the father of the native, events such as accidents, injuries
or some kind of surgery.
2: OPERATION OF VENUS AS BHUKTI LORD
Houses considered for death are 1 (representing the body of
the native), 2, 7 and 12 which are Maraka (harm inflicting) houses,
and the Badhaksthana (house of obstruction, commonly considered
as death inflicting) is 11 for charts with the ascendant in Cardinal
signs, 9 for fixed signs, and 7 for mutable signs.
A. In this chart Venus is in Venus Star and Jupiter Sub. Venus
appears in 3, 4, 9 and 10 and is placed in 10. All these
houses are death inflicting houses for the father.
(Remember to count from the 9th house ie 10th is the
second to the 9th).
B. Venus is in Jupiter Sub which appears in 3rd cusp i.e.
Maraka and Badhaka (7th from 9th and 9th is ruled by
mutable sign Gemini) house for father. So Jupiter
confirms the Star indications.
C. OPERATION OF SUB SUB LORDS
Venus is in the Sub-Sub of Venus. We have already seen
that Venus appears in the death inflicting houses for

Rahu orKetu as Sub Lord of a Planet
father. Tims the Sub-Sub lord of the Bhukti lord confirms
the end result. You will see from 1 (E) above that the
Sub Sub Lord of the Dasa Lord likewise gave the same
confirmation.
3. Suppose a Planet involves the Ascdt or the first cusp and
commits to the 6th cusp through its Sub lord. We say that this
Planet is capable to cause sickness to the native.
Now if the Sub-Sub lord of this Planet appears in 8th or 12th
cusp then the native may not recover from sickness during
tlie period of this Planet. However if the Sub-Sub lord of the
Planet appears in 1 (health), or 5 (12th to 6), or 11 then the
native may recover from the sickness during the period of
this Planet.
Another way to explain the Role of Sub-Sub Lord: Some
times we find that a Planet in its period gives marriage as well as
divorce. This happens because:
1 . Planet involves 7th cusp and commits to 5 or 1 1 and
also to 6.
2. Sub-Sub lord of the Planet appears in 6 and 12.
Let us explain the role of Sub-Sub of a Planet in yet another
way.
The Planet involves 7 and commits to 5 or 1 1 .But the SubSub lord of the Planet appears in 6 and does not appear in any of
the relevant cusps 5 or 7 or 1 1 .This may indicate that the proposed
marriage may not take place.
4: Rahu or Ketu as Sub-Sub lord of a Planet: Please treat it in
the same way as we have discussed for Rahu or Ketu as Sub
lord of a Planet. In simple words any Planet in the Sub-Sub of
Rahu or Ketu in the 'Planetary Positions' Table will be taken
as if it is in the Sub-Sub of Planets that Rahu or Ketu represents .

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
Practice Exercise: Lesson 7
Look at figure 7 of Lesson 6. The native of this chart will be
running Dasa periods of Dasa -Bhukti- Antara {at some time in
future} as shown below:
A. Rahu-Jupiter-Sat
B. Rahu-Jupiter-Ketu
C. Rahu -Jupiter-Moon
Please indicate during which Antara period the native can
expect enhancement in financial status and during which
Antara period there will be no enhancement in financial status.

Lesson 8
Study of a Cusp
1. Formation of Cuspal Chart: For every event (remember birth
of a person is also an event) a particular degree rises in the
Eastern Horizon at the time and place of happening of the
event. We call this as the Ascendant or Lagna or First Cusp.
A: The chart is then cast using Placidus System of House
Formation and Khullar Ayanamsa. You may refer Page
33 of my Book. The degree rising on each cusp is
calculated and this is shown in Cuspal Positions in the
chart. How to read Cuspal Positions have already been
explained in Lesson 2.
B : Each cuspal position is defined by a particular Sign, Star,
Sub and Sub-Sub. The lords of Sign, Star, Sub and SubSub are called the co-rulers of the cusp.
2. Purpose of Study of a Cusp: We analyse a horoscope to
determine the following:
A: What is the native's destiny? That is, what is promised
to the native for all aspects of human life?
B: Timing the specific events.
3. In CIL Theory, the study of the horoscope is basically the
study of the Planets that co-rule the cuspal positions.
However we should remember that the potential and
promise of each cusp is dependent upon the significations
of the Sub-Sub lord of the cusp which differentiates persons
born with a little time difference. The study of the cusp of

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
a house is basically the study of what the destiny of the
individual has promised to the native regarding the
significations of that house.
It should be borne in mind that a promise is not a guarantee
that an event will happen. Sometimes promises are kept,
sometimes not. We will see below how to check whether such
a promise is fulfilled.
A native experiences in his/her life only that which is promised
in the horoscope. If tire Sub- Sub lord of the 5th cusp in a
nativity does not promise the birth of a child, the person will
never get a child. A person gets his/her first child during the
joint period of the Planets that signify 2, 5 and 11. This person
may mn the joint period of the Planets that signify these houses
but he/she will not get the child if it is not promised. Native
during this period will get the other results of houses 2, 5 and
The concepts Potential of a cusp and Promise of a cusp have
been explained in my Book on pages 118 to 120. Here we
will discuss how we can study the horoscope for detennining
the promise of specific events.
4. Procedure to Study the Promise of Specific events.
We follow the following procedure to detennine the promise
of specific events that may or may not happen in the life of a
person.
A: Step 1: Study of the Ascendant.
(1) A native is bom at a particular moment on a
particular date and at a particular place. Planetary
and Cuspal positions at that moment corresponds
to his/her Karmic code. The Ascendant at that
moment reflects the very being of the individual.
The person's nature, his capacity to enjoy the
pleasures and straggles of life; his/her style of
functioning; what is destined for him in this

Study of a Cusp
incarnation as per the wisdom acquired from earlier
lives is depicted by the Ascendant
(2) In other words, study of the Ascendant, in fact is
the study of the whole horoscope in general. Nay it
is the epitome of the whole horoscope. In simple
words we may say that the native enjoys the
significations of those houses with which the SubSub lord of the Ascendant has established link. This
can be a direct link or an indirect link.
Direct Linkage means linkage with the Primary Cusp of the
matter under consideration through Star lord or by way of
Positional status. If the matter under consideration is the
capability of the native to produce a child i.e. addition in the
family the 2nd cusp becomes the Primary cusp. (Note this
does NOT mean that the Primary Cusp for determining the
procreative power or the capability of the native to produce
the child is the 2nd. It is in fact the 5th. Second house plays
the role of Primary cusp at the time of birth of the child).
Indirect Linkage means that the Star lord appears in 1 1th
cusp, the house of fulfillment of desire. The Sub lord linkage
specifies the area through which desire will be fulfilled. In
the matter of child birth if the Star lord appears in 1 1th cusp
and Sub lord appears in 2nd cusp it should be read as the
fulfillment of desire by way of having a child. If the Sub lord
appears in 7th cusp it would mean fulfillment of desire of
marriage. Indirect linkage is also said to be established if the
Sub Sub lord of the 1st cusp has positional status and it appears
in 1 1th cuspal position or Bhava and its Sub lord appears in
2nd cuspal position (for child birth).
Direct or Indirect linkage has nothing to do with the strength
of linkage. Strength of linkage is checked by the position of
Sub lord in favourable or unfavourable cusps with respect to
the desired cusp.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
B: Step 2: Fix the Primary and Supporting Cusps that
will take part in enacting the event. Refer Appendix B
for this purpose.
C: Step 3: For aparticular event's promise we need to look
for the linkages of the Sub-Sub lord of the Primary cusp
with the desired cusps.
5. Let us explain this through examples.
D. Example 1: Promise of Child Birth. Refer Fig 7 of
Lesson 6. Let us analyse the chart to determine whether
the native is promised birth of a child.
Fifth house in a chart signifies Progeny. Second house is
the house that signifies self acquisition. It may be self
acquired wealth or addition in the family. 11th house is
fulfillment of desire.
Step 1 : If the native has to enjoy the birth of a child the
SSL of Ascendant should be linked directly or indirectly
with 2nd cusp. Sub-Sub lord of Ascdt is Venus who is in
Moon Star. Moon is placed in the second house and is
also the Sub lord of the second house. Moon is also the
Star lord of 11th cusp (fulfillment of desires).
Step 2: Since the addition in family has to be by way of
child birth we need to study the 5th cusp. For promise of
addition in family (by way of child birth) 5th cusp SSL
should be linked with 2 directly or indirectly.

Study of a Cusp
Step 3: Sub-Sub lord of 5th cusp is Sun who is in Sun
Star. Sun is placed in second Bhava. Sun is in the Sub of
Venus who is the SSL of second Bhava.
We can say native is promised the birth of a child.
Position of Sub lord of SSL of 5th cusp in cuspal positions
which are 4, 7, 8 and 12 from Fifth cusp indicates delay and other
problems.
This is stated as a general principle. Remember Sub lord
does not qualify other positions of Sub lord. Sub lord only
qualifies Star lord position.
In this example chart SSL of 5th cusp is Sun who is in Sun
Star. Thus it signifies 5th house significations (Progeny). Sun is in
the Sub of Venus that appears in 2 (addition in family). Now if
Venus also appears in positions which are 4, 7, 8 and 12 from 5
then this indicates adverse effects on the 5th house significations.
Here in this chart Venus appears in 4 and 8 positions from 5.This
accounts for delays etc.
Note: In Astrology we say an event may happen if it is
promised; but an event will never happen if it is not promised.
Here we have declared that the native is promised birth of a
child. We can not say that the native will definitely have a child.
Reason for this is 5th cusp has many other significations also;
for example Speculation. Linkage of the 5th cusp SSL with
second cusp will also promise gain to the native through
speculation.
Example 2: Promise for Higher Education. Refer Fig 8.1

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Figure 8.1

Study of a Cusp
RASH! CHART

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory

Study of a Cusp
(1) Conditions for Higher education are: (Refer page 198
of my Book)
a. Fourth Sub-Sub lord should maintain a connection
with 9th house.
b. Ninth house Sub-Sub lord should be linked with
favourable houses with respect to itself and also
with respect to the Ascendant. Favourable houses
for achieving excellence in higher education are 5,
c. Linkages of the Sub-Sub lord of the 9th house with
4, 8 or 12 are not considered good.
d. Linkage of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord with 9th
house through its Star lord or through 1 1th house
promises success in higher education.
Step 1: If the native is to enjoy or experience Higher education
the SSL of Ascdt should be linked with 9th cusp either directly
or indirectly i.e. through 11th cusp.
Here the SSL of Ascdt is Venus who is in Venus Star and
Saturn Sub. Both Venus and Saturn appear in 9th cusp.
Thus we say that the native is capable to enjoy the
significations of the 9th cusp. One of the significations of 9th
cusp is Higher Education.
Step 2: 9th cusp represents Higher Education. But for that
the native needs to have the basic education and there has to
be a link between the basic education that is 4th house and
the 9th house.
Here SSL of 4th cusp is Saturn who is in Saturn Star. Saturn is
Sub as well as SSL of the 9th cusp. Thus 4th cusp maintains a
link with the 9th cusp. Saturn is in the Sub of Sun who appears
in 4, 8, 11 and 12. Cusps 4, 8 and 12 are unfavourable houses
for 9. 1 1th cusp is favourable for 9.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
We, therefore, say that the native may have higher education
and there may be a break between the basic and higher
education.
Step 3: 9th cusp is the Primary cusp for higher education.
Sub-Sub lord of 9th cusp is Saturn who is in Saturn Star.
Saturn appears in cuspal positions 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 10.
Saturn is in the Sub of Sun which we have stated above appears
Thus 9th cusp also indicates that the native may go for higher
education but it is beset with problems.
Linkages of SSL of 9th cusp through its Sub lord with 4, 8
and 12 that is 8, 12 and 4 from 9 is adverse for the significations
of the 9th house (in the present example we are talking of
Higher education). Linkage through Sub Lord with 11th cusp
that is 3rd from 9 is very positive as 3rd house from any house
is the house of multiplication of significations of the house
from where it is 3rd. Thus we conclude that Higher education
is possible but with attached problems.
We will study some more examples in next lesson where
we will discuss how to analyse the promise of a cusp when
Rahu or Ketu is the SSL of the cusp.
Practice Exercise: Lesson 8.
Refer Fig 8.2.

Study of a Cusp
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Fig 8.2

Study of a Cusp

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
Please answer the following questions:
Question 1: Does the chart promise birth of a child to the
native?
Question2: Does the chart promise gain through property to
the native?
Questions: Does the chart promise that the native is prone to
sickness?
Question4: Does the chart promise native earning by way of
service?

Lesson 9
Rahu or Ketu
As Sub-Sub Lord of a Cusp
We have discussed in Lesson 8 that the promise of various
aspects of a house is determined by the significations of the SubSub lord of the cusp.
I. It is possible that for a cusp Rahu or Ketu appears as SubSub Lord. In such a case the promise of that cusp is studied
by following the procedure stated below:
A: Step 1: Treat Rahu or Ketu like other Planets and
determine promise as stated in Lesson 8.
B: Step 2: Replace Rahu or Ketu by the Sign lord of Rahu
or Ketu. That is, treat the Planet who is the Sign Lord of
Rahu or Ketu as the Sub- Sub lord of the cusp and
determine the promise.
C: Step 3: Replace Rahu or Ketu by the Star lord of Rahu
or Ketu. That is, treat the Planet who is the Star lord of
Rahu or Ketu as the Sub-Sub lord of the cusp and
determine the promise.
D: Step 4: Summation of Steps 1, 2 and 3 will declare the
promise of the cusp.
Thus we may say that when Rahu or Ketu appears as SubSub lord of a cusp then that cusp can be treated as if it has
three SSLs:

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
(1) Rahu or Ketii
(2) Sign Lord of Rahu or Ketu
(3) Star lord of Rahu or Ketu.
This concept is used only for determining the promise of a
cusp.
If a TIPlanet is in the Star of a Planet that Rahu or Ketu
represents it will not be considered as being in the Star of
the SSL of the cusp whose SSL is Rahu or Ketu.
Suppose Rahu is the SSL of 4th cusp in a chart. In that
chart Rahu may represent Mercury as Sign lord and Sun as
Star lord. If a Tr Planet, in that chart, is in Mercury or Sun
Star then that Planet will not be considered as in the Star of
SSL of the 4th cusp.
2. It is possible that the promise of a particular condition as
shown by Rahu or Ketu as SSL of a cusp, and as shown by
the Planets that Rahu or Ketu represent, is of opposite
nature. In such cases we should remember that this
indicates weak promise. However, the promise shown by
Rahu or Ketu takes precedence.
Let us explain this concept through an example.
A: Example: Promise of committing Suicide. (Self
assassination or taking one's own life) Refer Fig 1 of
Lesson 2.
(1) The SSL of Ascendant should meet one of the
following Necessary Conditions;
a: SSL of Ascendant should involve the 8th cusp
(house of death) through PS, or its Star lord,
and commit to Maraka houses (2 and 7) and
Badhaka house, through its Sub lord.

Rahu or Ketu As Sub-Sub Lord of a Cusp
b: The Star lord of SSL of Ascendant (or if SSL
has PS) appears in 1 and 8, and its Sub lord
appears in Maraka and Badhaka houses.
c: The Star lord of SSL of Ascendant (or if SSL
has PS) appears in 1 and Sub lord appears in
2, and 7, or 8 and Badhaka house.
(2) Similarly the SSL of the 8th cusp should satisfy
one of the following conditions:
a: SSL of 8th cusp should involve the Ascendant
through PS or its Star Lord and commit to
Maraka and Badhaka houses.
b: The Star lord of SSL of 8th cusp (or if SSL
has PS) appears in 1 and 8 and Sub appears in
Maraka and Badhaka houses.
c: Tire Star lord of SSL of 8th cusp (or if SSL
has PS) appears in 8, and its Sub appears in 1,
2, or 7 and Badhaka house.
B: Essential Condition:
The Sub-Sub lord of the SSL of Ascendant should appear
in 8 or Maraka and Badhaka houses.
3. Study of SSL of Ascendant of Fig 1 Lesson 2:
The SSL of Ascendant is Ketu who represents Jupiter as Sign
lord and Saturn as Star lord. Thus we say that the SSL of
Ascendant is Ketu, Jupiter and Saturn.
A: Ketu as SSL of Ascendant:
(1) In this chart Ketu has PS. We can say that Ketu is
as good as in its own Star.
(2) Now Ketu is SSL of 1 and Sub Lord of 8.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
(3) Ketii is in the Sub of Venus that appears in 2, 7 and
9 (Badhaka). Thus Ketu meets the necessary
condition for committing suicide.
(4) Ketu is in the SSL of Mars who appears in 8 as Star
lord and is placed in 2 with PS. Thus Ketu meets
the essential condition also.
B: Jupiter as SSL of Ascendant:
(1) Jupiter has PS because it is in Venus Star and Venus
is in Jupiter Star.
(2) Jupiter is in the Sub of Saturn. Jupiter appears in 1
but does not appear in 8
(3) Saturn the Sub lord of Jupiter does not appear in 2,
7 and 8. Saturn only appears in 9 (Badhaka house).
Thus we see that Jupiter as per its PS does not
satisfy the necessary condition.
(4) Jupiter is in Venus Star. Venus does not appear in 1
or 8. Thus Jupiter does not satisfy the necessary
condition even as per its Stellar Status.
C: Saturn as SSL of Ascendant:
(1) Saturn has no PS in this chart. Saturn is in Venus
Star who does not appear in 1 or 8.Thus Saturn does
not meet the necessary condition.
Conclusion for Ascendant: SSL as Jupiter or Saturn shows
poor promise for committing suicide. However, Ascendant
SSL as Ketu shows strong promise, hence will take
precedence.
4 Study of SSL of 8th Cusp:
A: The SSL of 8th cusp is Mercury who is in Rahu Star
and Jupiter Sub.

Rahu orKetuAs Sub-Sub Lord of a Cusp
(1) Mercury has PS because Mercury is in Rahu Star;
Rahu represents Mercury and Sun (as Sign lord
and Star Lord respectively).
(2) Rahu is the Sub lord of Ascendant. Thus we say
that 8th cusp involves 1 and 8. (Rahu in 1 and
Mercury in 8).
(3) Jupiter the Sub lord of Mercury appears in 2 and 7,
but not in the Badhaka house 9.
(4) Rahu as Sun. Sun does not signify either 1 or 8.
(5) Thus we see that Mercury the SSL of 8th cusp
does not meet the necessary condition
Conclusion for 8th Cusp: SSL of 8th cusp does not promise
that the native will commit suicide.
Final conclusion: In the ultimate analysis we may say that
the Ascendant does promise that the native may commit
suicide, hut as the 8th cusp does not promise the event of
suicide, it is not promised in this chart.
Practice Exercise: Lesson 9- Refer Fig 9 and answer the
questions given below. Please give astrological reasons for your
answers.
Question 1:
a. Do you think that the chart promises committing suicide?
b. Do you think that the native is likely to commit suicide? If
so Why?
Question 2:
a. Does the chart promise love marriage? (You can refer
Pages 220 and 226 of the Book.
b. Do you think that the native will have a love marriage? If
so Wiry?

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION

Rahu or Ketu As Sub-Sub Lord of a Cusp
RASHI CHART

Lesson 10
Vimsottari Dasa and its Application
The horoscope of each individual is unique. It has a specific
degree that rises on the Ascendant and corresponding specific
degrees rise on other cusps. Planets are positioned in specific
zodiacal positions. The Planetary positions and cuspal positions in
the chart correspond to the native's Karmic code.
We have already stated that a horoscope is analysed to
determine the following:
What is the native's destiny? ie. what is promised to the native
for all aspects of human life.
Timing Specific Events in the Native's life.
If an event is promised as indicated by the study of the dynamic
significations of the SSL of the Ascendant and SSL of the Primary
cusp, it will happen only at a specific Date and Time. This Date
and Time is controlled by Dasa period lords.
In Sub-Sub and CIL we use Vimsottari Dasa System which is
based on the progression of Moon in Stars, Sub, Sub-Sub, SubSub-Sub and Sub-Sub-Sub-Sub from its position at birth.
The Star lord of Moon at the time of birth or at any time in life
is called the Dasa lord, Sub lord of Moon is called Bhukti lord,
Sub-Sub lord is called Antara Lord, Sub-Sub-Sub lord is called
Sookshama lord, and Sub-Sub-Sub-Sub lord is called Prana lord.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
1 Timing Events:
A: A promised event happens in the joint period of
fruitful significators* of houses that take part in
enacting an event provided Transit agrees.
This statement specifically states that an event happens
when the following three things agree;
(1) Event should be promised
(2) It happens only in the joint period of Planets that
signify Primary and supporting cusps
(3) Transit agrees
In this Lesson we will discuss role of the various levels of
Dasa period lords.
Note: Please read chapter 14 pages 297 onwards, of my
book, for calculation of Dasa periods.
* For definition of 'fruitful significators’ seeKCIT (Rev) page
2. Philosophy behind Application of Vimsottari Dasa:
A: Major Events: Role of Dasa Lord
Each Planet in a horoscope signifies certain houses as
per its PS and Stellar Status. If a Planet has no PS it
provides the results of the houses it signifies as per its
Stellar Status. The result of the houses signified by the
Planet is qualified and specified by the Sub lord of the
Planet.
Dasa lord as per its significations fixes the houses for
the significant events to happen during its period. Unless
Dasa lord is linked with the Primary cusp for an aspect
of life, that event may not happen during its period.
Remember Dasa lord can be linked to Primary cusp

Vimsottari Dasa and its Application
directly or indirectly. Let me explain this through
examples:
(1) Purchase of Property: Dasa lord may not signify
house 4 either by PS or by Stellar Status. But if
Dasa Lord involves 9th house ( 1 2th to 10 - others
property) and commits to 4 by its Sub lord, then
Dasa lord will permit the event to happen in
appropriate Bhukti, Antara etc.
(2) Marriage: For marriage, Dasa lord may be a
significator of 7th cusp because it signifies 7th
house by its PS or by its Stellar Status and commits
to 5 or 11 by its Sub lord, or to cusps which are not
negating the significations of 7th cusp.
Or Dasa lord may involve 5th or 1 1th cusp by its
Star lord or PS and commits to 7th cusp by its Sub
lord. Such Dasa lord will permit the event of
marriage to take place in appropriate Bhukti, Antara
etc.
(3) Higher Education: If the chart promises native to
undergo higher education then Dasa lord should
pennit this event. It can do so if it is significator of
Or if Dasa lord involves 4th or 11th house and
commits to 9 by its Sub lord.
(4) Death of Native or his/her Relation: Death takes
place only in a particular Dasa whose lord is linked
simultaneously to Ascendant and 8th house for the
native and the relevant 8th house for the relative.
Simultaneous linkage is possible in following ways:
a: Dasa lord by its PS is appearing in 1 and 8.
Sub lord of Dasa lord appears in Maraka or

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
badhaka house. Sub-Sub lord of Dasa lord has
to be in 8 or Maraka or Badhaka house.
b: Dasa lord involves Ascendant by its Star lord
or PS and commits to 8th cusp by its Sub lord.
Sub-Sub lord of Dasa lord has to be in 8 or
Maraka or Badhaka house.
c: Dasa lord involves 8th cusp by its Star lord or
PS and commits to Ascendant by its Sub lord.
Sub-Sub lord of Dasa lord has to be in 8 or
Maraka or Badhaka house.
d: Dasa lord involves Ascendant and 8th cusp
and commits to Maraka and Badhaka house.
Sub-Sub lord of Dasa lord has to be in 8 or
Maraka or Badhaka house. Note Maraka and
Badhaka houses are discussed on pages 46
&47 of KCIL Rev
e: If the Dasa lord is one of the ruling planets in
Ascendant or 8th cusp and is significator of
Maraka and Badhaka houses then this Dasa
lord can also cause the death of the relevant
relative. Sub lord and SSL ofDasa Lord have
to be in 8 or Maraka or Badhaka. (Reference
Page 50 of the Book).
Dasa lord can allow happening of significant events in its
own Bhukti and even its own Antara if it is significator of
Primary and supporting cusps that take part in enacting the
event. Sub-Sub lord of the Dasa lord should appear in relevant
cusps.
I do not agree with those who say that Dasa lord does not
provide significant events in its own Bhukti.
B: Major Event: Role of Bhukti Lord

Vimsottari Dasa and its Application
(1) Bhiikti lord can provide only which the Dasa lord
permits. In other words Bhukti lord may cause the
event to happen only if Dasa lord is not linked to
those houses which negate the happening of that
event.
a: For example. Marriage can not take place in a
Dasa whose lord is linked only to 4, 6 and 12
or involves 7 and commits to 6 without being
committed to 5 or 11.
(2) Bhukti lord should be significator of Primary cusp
directly or indirectly.
a: For example marriage takes place only in that
Bhukti which is linked to 7th cusp directly or
indirectly.
b: Death takes place only in a Bhukti which
signifies 8 or Maraka and Badhaka house.
(3) Bhukti lord can allow an event to happen in its own
Antara if Bhukti lord signifies Primary and
supporting cusps.
C: Major Event: Role of Antara Lord
(1) Antara lord can allow only those events which Dasa
and Bhukti lords permit.
(2) Antara lord has to be a significator of the Primary
and or supporting cusps.
D: Major Event: Role of Sookshama and Prana Lords
Sookshama and Prana lords should be linked with
Primary and at least one supporting cusp for the event,
which may happen in a particular Dasa, Bhukti and
Antara.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
E: Timing Minor Events:
(1) All principles stated above for Major Events apply.
However emphasis is laid onAntara, Sookshma and
Prana lords.
(2) For example a person makes a short visit abroad. It
can happen in Dasa and Bhukti whose lords may
be only significator of 3 or 9 or 12.
a: Antara lord may be significator of 9 (long
journey) or 12 (new environment or foreign
land).
b: Sookshama and Prana lord has to be strongly
linked with 3, 9 and 12.
The best way to learn the application of Dasa period lords is
to study some charts for past events. We will discuss Timing
future events in a separate lesson.
3. Examplel: Refer Fig 9 of Fesson 9
We have seen in Fesson 9 Practice Exercise that this chart
promises that the native may commit suicide. The native in
fact committed suicide on 15 October 1994 at about 08.00
hrs. The native on that day was running Dasa period of JupiterMercury-Jupiter-Satum-Mercury. Fet us see whether Dasa
period lords justify happening of the event.
A: Dasa Lord Jupiter:
(1) In this chart Tr. Jupiter is in Jupiter Star and Sim
Sub.
(2) Jupiter appears in cuspal positions 2, 7 and 8 and is
placed in second Bhava. All these are death
inflicting positions.
(3) Sun Sub lord of Jupiter appears as the Star lord of
Ascendant (only relevant cusps shown). Thus

Vimsottari Dasa and its Application
Jupiter meets the necessary condition to cause
death of the native.
(4) Tr. Jupiter is in the Sub-Sub of Mercury who
appears in 2, 7 and 8. Thus Dasa lord Jupiter also
satisfies the essential condition.
B: Bhukti Lord Mercury:
(1) Here we find that Tr. Mercury is in Saturn Star and
Rahu Sub.
(2) Saturn appears in 2, 7 and 8 (only relev ant positions
shown).
(3) Sub lord Rahu represents Mercury as Sign lord and
Moon as Star lord. Notice both Mercury and Moon
appears in the Ascendant. Mercury also appears in
2, 7 and 8. Mercury is in the Sub Sub of Rahu. Thus
we find that the Bhukti lord Mercury has the
potential to cause death of the native.
C: Antara Lord Jupiter:
We have discussed above that Jupiter has the potential
to cause death.
D: Sookshama Lord Saturn: Tr. Saturn in this chart is in
Ketu Star and Saturn Sub. Ketu represents Jupiter as Sign
lord and Saturn as Star lord.
(1) Tr.Saturn in Ketu Star:
Ketu is placed in 7 (Maraka and Badhaka ). Only
relevant cuspal or Bhava positions shown.
(2) Tr. Saturn in Jupiter Star:
Jupiter appears in 2, 7 and 8.
(3) Tr. Saturn in Saturn Star:
Saturn appears in 2, 7 and 8.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
(4) Saturn is in Saturn Sub and thus is linked to relevant
cusps 2, 7 and 8.
(5) Saturn is in the Sub-Sub of Mercury which appears
Thus we find that Sookshama lord can cause death
of the Native.
E: Prana Lord Mercury:
We have discussed above that Mercury has the potential
to cause death. Mercury is Sign as well as Sub lord of
Ascendant (self) and clearly indicates that the native
himself took his own life.
4 Example 2: Refer Fig 8.2
The native got first male child on 26.12.1999 at 23 .45 hrs. He
was mnning at that time Dasa period of Mars-Jup-Mars-JupMars. In lesson 8 we have seen that this chart promises birth
of child.
Let us see whether Planets Mars and Jupiter which are Dasa
period lords justify birth of first child or not. Birth of first
child takes place in the joint period of Planets that are fruitful
significators of 2, 5 and 11.
A: Tr. Planet Mars:
(1) Mars is in Venus Star and Jupiter Sub. Venus
appears in 2 and Jupiter appears in 5 and 11.
Tlius Planet Mars is capable to cause birth of first
child.
a: Mars is in Mars Sub-Sub who appears in
relevant cuspal positions 2 and 11.
b: Mars as SSL confirms birth of child.

Vimsottari Dasa and its Application
(2) Tr. Jupiter:
a: In this chart Tr. Jupiter is in Ketu Star and
Tr.Ketu is in Jupiter Star. Thus we may say
that Tr. Jupiter is in Jupiter Star who appears
b: Tr. Jupiter is in Mars Sub who appears in 2
c: Jupiter is in the Sub-Sub of Ketu. Now Ketu
as Moon and Jupiter appears in relevant cusps.
Thus we say that native got first child in Dasa period
of Planets that signify 2, 5 an dll.
Notel: I have chosen only those examples where event has
happened in Dasa period of Planets where Rahu or Ketu has
not appeared as any Dasa period lord. In next lesson we will
explain application of Rahu or Ketu as Dasa period lords.
Note2: Some times we notice that a Planet involves the
Primary cusp for an event and simultaneously commits to
favourable and unfavourable cusps. We will discuss the
significations of such Planets and their role in enacting
favourable and unfavourable events in lliture lessons.
Practice Exercise: Lesson 10.
Refer Fig lO.The following two significant events happened
in the life of this native.
1. Native lost his mother on 10 June 1994 when he was
running Dasa period Ven-Jup-Ven-Sat-Moon. Please
justify that the event has happened in the joint period of
Planets that signify the event. Please take 4th cusp as
Ascendant for mother.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
Native purchased land in Dec 1988 to build house. He
was running Dasa period Ven-Mars-Jup- Venus. Please
justify happening of the event. For purchase of land we
need those Planets to take part who signify 4, 1 1 and 12.
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Figure 10

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory

Lesson 11
Transit and its Application
1. In Lesson 10 we stated that a promised event happens in the
joint period of fruitful significators of houses that take part in
enacting an event, provided Transit agrees. This statement
specifically states that an event happens when the following
three tilings agree;
A: Event should be promised and
B: It happens only in the joint period of Planets that signify
Primary and supporting cusps and
C: Transit agrees
In Lesson 8 we discussed how to determine promise of specific
events. In Lesson 10 we discussed role of Dasa period lords.
In this Lesson we will discuss Theory of Transit as is applied
in CIL.
2. Concept of Transit
Each Planet occupies a particular position in the natal chart.
We said that these positions of Planets correspond to the
native's Karmic Code. We used suffix Tr to represent natal
Planets. Tr Planets acquire capability to provide specific results
to the native as per their PS and Stellar Status.
However the capability of Tr Planets for causing specific event
to happen is conditioned by the position of Planets at the
expected event time and date. For Event position of Planets
we will use the suffix ETr.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
It may be stated categorically that ETr Planets can at best
either support the happening of the event during specific
period of fruitful significators of that event or it may
disallow the Tr Planets to cause that event. ETr Planets
can not of their own cause an event.
ETr positions of Planets are called Transits.
3. Theory of Transit as applied in CIL
Theory of Transit is based on the concepts of Theory of Transit
as applied by Nadi Astrologers. It stands established through
the study of Nadi literature that there is positive co-relationship
between Tr Planets and ETr Planets at the time of happening
of specific Major or Minor events.
The co-relationship that ETr Planets establish with Tr Planets
at the time of an event is studied on the basis of the following
rules.
A: ETr Planet excites the cuspal positions where its transit
Sign lord appears as Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub lords
in natal chart. Transit Sign lord in the natal chart may or
may not have PS.
B: ETr Planet excites the lord of the Sign in the natal chart
in which it transits. This Sign lord in the natal chart should
be significator of relevant cusps for the event in the natal
chart (either by PS or by Stellar Status).
C: If ETr Planet transits in a Sign that satisfies the above
two conditions then ETr Planet in that Sign should
transit in a Star, lord of which:
(1) appears in relevant cusps for the event in the natal
chart (Star lord may or may not have PS in the natal
chart ) or
(2) Star lord should be significator of relevant cusps in
the natal chart (either by PS or by Stellar Status)

Transit and its Application
D: If ETr Planet transits in a Sign and Star that satisfies
above conditions then ETr Planet should transit in a Sub
lord of which:
(1) appears in relevant cusp for the event in the natal
chart or
(2) Sub lord should be significator of relevant cusps in
the natal chart (either by PS or by Stellar Status).
E: If ETr Planet transits in a Sign, Star and Sub, lords of
which satisfies above conditions then ETr Planet should
transit in Sub Sub the lord of which:
(1) appears in relevant cusp for that event in the natal
chart or
(2) SSL should be significator of relevant cusps in the
natal chart (either by PS or by Stellar Status).
In the light of the above we can say that the Planet which
has to cause the event to happen should in transit be also
linked with the relevant cusps.
It should be noted that if the Sign lord of the Planet in
transit does not favour the event then even if its Star lord
favours the event, the event does not happen.
The above rules need be applied to Dasa period lords. It may
be emphasised that no event happens in the life of a native
unless ETr Sun and ETr Moon occupies the desired positions
in transit.
By desired positions we mean that for an event to happen
Sim and Moon must transit in a Sign. Star, Sub and Sub-Sub
lords of which satisfies above conditions.
4. For specific events ETr Sun and ETr Moon transits in the
Stars the lords of which in the natal chart are linked with
the Primary cusp directly or indirectly.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
For some events we define what should be ETr MOON'S
STAR LORD for that event.
For example Moon's Star lord on the day of Death is fixed by
the SSL of the 8th cusp in the Natal Chart.
A: Moon's Star lord on the day of death can be:
(1) the same Planet which is the SSL of the 8th cusp.
(2) the same Planet which is the Star lord of the SSL
of the 8th cusp.
(3) any Planet whose Star lord is the same Planet who
is the Star lord of the SSL of the 8th cusp.
For example let Saturn be the SSL of the 8th cusp in a natal
chart. Let Saturn be in the Star of Jupiter. On the day of death
Moon's Star lord can be:
(1) Saturn, (2) Jupiter, and (3). Any Planet (in the natal chart)
who is in the Star of Jupiter.
Note: In some cases Moon Star on the day of death may be
other than that stated above. But that Star lord has to be a
Planet that links with 1 and 8 cusps or Maraka and Badhaka
houses.

Transit and its Application
5. Transit of Jupiter:
Jupiter represents the year ofhappening of significant events.
ETr Jupiter must transit on the day ofhappening of a significant
event (malefic or benefice) in Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub
the lords of which satisfies above conditions stated under the
title Theory of Transit.
6. Transit of Saturn:
For events like death of the native or his/her relations Saturn
must transit in a Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub the lords of
which satisfies above conditions stated under the title Theory
of Transit.
7. Let us explain the application of the Theory of Transit
through an example. Refer Fig 9 of Lesson 9.
In Lesson 9 we came to the conclusion that the Chart promises
that the native may commit suicide.
The native in fact committed suicide on 15 October 1994 at
about 08.00 hrs. The native on that day was running Dasa
period of Jupiter-Mercury-Jupiter-Satum-Mercury. In Lesson
10 we discussed that the Dasa period lords had the potential
to allow the event to happen.
Let us study the event chart to see whether transit allows the
event to happen or not. Fig 11.1 is the event chart.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION

Transit and its Application
RASH* CHART

Transit and its Application
8. Transit Of Dasa Lord and Antara lord Jupiter
A: ETr Jupiter transits in Libra Sign ruled by Venus.
(1) Venus appears as SSL of 7th cusp in the natal chart
Fig 9, both Maraka and Badhaka house.
(2) Venus in the natal chart is in Ketu Star. Ketu is
placed in 7th Bhava.
Ketu represents Jupiter and Saturn. Jupiter is placed in 2
and appears in 2, 7 and 8.
Similarly Saturn appears in 2, 7 and 8.
We may say that ETr Jupiter transits in a sign the
lord of which satisfies the necessary conditions.
B: ETr Jupiter transits in Jupiter Star.
(1) Jupiter in the natal chart is placed in 2-Maraka
house.
(2) Jupiter appears in 2, 1 and 8.
ETr Jupiter thus satisfies necessary conditions.
C: ETr Jupiter transits in Mercury Sub.
(1) Mercury appears in 1, 2, 1 and 8.A11 these cusps
are relevant for the event of suicide. More over
(2) Mercury in the natal chart is in Saturn Star who
appears in 2, 7 and 8. Mercury is in the Sub of Raliu
who represents Mercury and Moon. Both these
Planets appear in 1 .
Thus ETr Jupiter's transit in Mercury Sub satisfies
all the necessary conditions.
D: ETr Jupiter transits in Ketu Sub-Sub. Ketu in the
natal chart represents Jupiter and Saturn.
(1) Ketu in the natal chart has PS because Ketu is in
Sat Star and Sat is in Ketu Star.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
(2) Ketu is placed in 7-Both Maraka and Badhaka
house.
(3) Ketu as Jupiter and Saturn appears in 2, 7 and 8.
Thus ETr Jupiter's transit in Sub-Sub of Ketu
satisfies the essential condition.
9. Transit of Bhukti Lord and Prana Lord Mercury
A: ETr Mercury transits in Sign Libra ruled by Venus.
We have already discussed in 8 A: (1) that Venus satisfies
all the necessary conditions.
B: ETr Mercury transits in Rahu Star.
(1) Rahu is placed in 1 in the natal chart.
(2) Rahu represents Mercury in the natal chart.
(3) Mercury appears in 1, 2, 7 and 8 All these are
relevant cusps for the event of suicide.
Thus ETr Mercury's transit in Rahu Star satisfies all
necessary conditions.
C: ETr Mercury transits in Jupiter Sub.
We have already discussed above in 8 A: (2) that Jupiter
is placed in 2 and appears in 2, 7 and 8.
Thus ETr Mercury's transit in Jupiter's Sub satisfies
necessary conditions.
D: ETr Mercury Transits in Rahu Sub-Sub.
We have already discussed in 9 B that ETr Mercury's
transit in Rahu zone satisfies necessary conditions.
10. Transit of Sookshama Lord Saturn
A: ETr Saturn transits in Sign Aquarius ruled by Saturn.
(1) Sat appears in 2, 7 and 8 in the natal chart. All these
cusps are relevant cusps for the event. More over

Transit and its Application
(2) Saturn in the natal chart is in Ketu Star. Ketu is
placed in 7-Maraka and Badhaka house.
(3) Ketu represents Jupiter and Saturn. Thus Sat in Ketu
Star is as good as in Jupiter as well as in
Saturn Star. Both Jupiter and Saturn appear in 2, 7
and 8.
We thus conclude that ETr Saturn's transit in
Aquarius Sign satisfies necessary conditions.
B: ETr Saturn transits in Rahu Star Sat Sub and Jupiter SubSub.
We have discussed above that Planets Rahu, Sat and
Jupiter in the Natal chart Satisfies necessary
conditions to allow the event to happen.
11. Transit of Sun
A: ETr Sun transits in Virgo ruled by Mercury.
(1) Mercury appears in 1, 2, 1 and 8, all relevant cusps
for the event. More over
(2) Mercury in the natal chart is in Sat Star who appears
in 2, 7 and 8. And Mercury is in the Sub of Rahu
that represents Mercury and Moon Both these
Planets appear in 1 .
Thus we say ETr Sun's transit in Virgo satisfies
necessary conditions.
B: ETr Sun transits in Mars Star.
(1) Mars in the natal chart is in Mercury Star who
appears in 1, 2, 7 and 8.
(2) Mars is in the Sub of Jupiter who appears in 2, 7
and 8.
Thus we find that ETr Sun's transit in Mars Star
satisfies necessary conditions.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
C: ETr Sun Transits in Sat Sub and Sat Sub-Sub.
Sat appears in 2, 7 and 8.
Thus we conclude that the transit of ETr Sun allows
the event to happen.
12. Transit of Moon
Moon transits in Sign Aquarius ruled by Sat in Raliu Star and
Jupiter Sub and Rahu Sub-Sub. We have discussed above that
Planets Sat, Rahu, and Jupiter satisfies necessary conditions.
Conclusion: ETr Dasa period Lords and ETr Sun and ETr
Moon allow the event to happen.
Practice Exercise: Lesson 11
Refer Fig 8.2 of Lesson 8.
A: Tire native of this chart got first male child on 26.12.1999
at 23.45 hrs. He was running at that time Dasa period of
Mars-Jup-Mars-Jup-Mars. In lesson 8 we have seen that
this chart promises birth of child. In Lesson 10 we saw
that Planets Mars and Jupiter which are Dasa period lords
justify birth of first child.
B: Fig 11.2 is the event (ETr) chart of birth of first male
child. Please justify that the transit of Dasa period lords,
Sun and Moon allows the event to happen.

Transit and its Application
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION

Transit and its Application

Lesson 12
Rahu and Ketu as Dasa Period Lords
We have studied that Rahu and Ketu act as three Planets. In
other words we may say diat Rahu and Ketu in their dasa periods
(Dasa or Bhukti or Antara or Sookshma or Prana) offer the results
as follows:
Rahu and Ketu as per their PS and Stellar Status.
Results which Sign lord of Rahu and Ketu has to offer as per
its PS and Stellar Status.
Results which Star lord of Rahu and Ketu has to offer as per
its PS and Stellar Status.
These results operate simultaneously. Therefore, it is quite
possible that result for a particular house as offered by Rahu
and Ketu and their Sign and Star lords may be contradictory
in nature.
For example we may find that in a particular chart Rahu as
Rahu may involve 7th cusp and commit to 6. Sign lord of Rahu
may involve 7th cusp and commit to 5 and 1 1 . Star lord of Rahu
may involve 7th cusp and commit to 6 and 11.
Here we find that Rahu as Rahu does not allow the event of
marriage. Sign lord of Rahu allows the event of marriage. Star lord
of Rahu allows the event of marriage as well as promises separation.
Similar situations may arise in the case of Ketu
So the question before us is how to decide what results the
native will enjoy in the period of Rahu and Ketu, especially when

Rahu and Ketu as Dasa Period Lords
there is contradiction between the results offered by Rahu as Rahu,
and the results offered by Sign or Star lord of Rahu. The same
applies for Ketu.
We have also seen in earlier lessons that Rahu and Ketu
ffequendy offer the result of almost all the houses. It is a complex
problem. Let us try to make it as simple as possible.
We will take the example of Rahu. We will use the same
technique for Ketu.
First check Rahu as Rahu. Then check if the planets
represented by Rahu contradict Rahu.
If not proceed as normal. If the planets represented by Rahu
do contradict, then proceed as follows.
Note in the following case studies we dissect the dasa periods
for instructive purposes. In practice we would consider all dasa
lords in continuing sequence.
1: Procedure to decide Results that will be offered by Rahu.
Refer Fig 1 of Lesson 2. Here Rahu is in Virgo Sign ruled by
Mercury. Rahu is in the Star of Sun. Thus Rahu represents
Mercury and Sun.
A Case 1: Dasa Period Rahu-Rahu i.e. Rahu Dasa Rahu
Bhukti.
(1) During Rahu Dasa Rahu Bhukti native will enjoy
the results as per its Antara lord.
(2) During Rahu Dasa Rahu Bhukti and Antara of Rahu
the native will enjoy the results which Rahu has to
offer as Rahu for those houses where there is
contradiction between Rahu and the Planets Rahu
represents.
(3) However during the Sookshma of Mercury the
native will enjoy the result as offered by Mercury.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
We may say that the native is practically running
the period of Mer-Mer-Mer-Mer.
(4) Similarly dining the Sookshma of Sim the native
will enjoy the results which Sun has to offer. We
may read the Dasa period as Sun-Sun-Sun-Sun.
Let us see if during Rahu Dasa Rahu Bhukti and Raliu
Antara native could marry. Rahu is in Sun Star and Venus
Sub. Sun appears in relevant cusp 7 as Star lord of 7th
cusp. Sub lord Venus appears in 2 (8th to 7), and 7.Thus
we say that possibility of marriage during Rahu Antara
is remote.
Can Rahu-Rahu-Mercury give marriage? Now we have
to read Dasa period as Mer-Mer-Mer. Mercury in this
chart is in Rahu Star and Jupiter Sub. Rahu appears in
11 and Jupiter appears in 5 and 7.Mercury is in the SS of
Rahu that appears in 11. Thus we may say that native
could marry during this period if marriage is promised
in the chart.
During Rahu Dasa Rahu Bhukti and Antara of Planets
other than Rahu, Sun and Mercury the native will get
results of those houses which Antara lord signify.
B Case 2: Rahu as Bhukti Lord in the Dasa of Planets
that Rahu Represents
(1) During Sun Dasa Rahu Bhukti native will get the
results as if he/she is running Sun Dasa Sun Bhukti.
Remember that Bhukti lord can only provide what
Dasa lord permits.
(2) During Mercury Dasa Rahu Bhukti native will get
the results as if he/she is running Mer Dasa Mercury
Bhukti.
C Case 3: Rahu as Bhukti Lord in the Dasa of other
Planets

Rahu and Ketu as Dasa Period Lords
(1) Let us take the case of Mars Dasa Rahu Bhukti.
Mars in this chart has PS. Mars is in Sun Star and
Mars Sub. During this period native had a break in
education.
(2) Break in education takes place during the period of
Planets that signify 3 and 8.
(3) Mars is Star lord of 8th cusp and since it has PS it
will signify 8. Mars is in Sun star who is the Star
lord of 3rd cusp. Thus Mars signifies 3rd house.
Mars is in Mars Sub. Thus we see that Mars involves
3 and commits to 8.
(4) Rahu as Rahu in this chart signifies 3 but not 8. But
Rahu as Mercury signifies 3 and 8 because Mercury
has PS and appears in 3 and 8.
(5) Thus we find that Bhukti lord Rahu offers the result
as per the dictates of Dasa Lord.
(6) During this period the native also suffered from
health problems. Mars signifies 6 and 8. However
Rahu as Rahu does not signify 6 or 8. But Rahu as
Mercury signifies 1 and 8 and Rahu as Sun signifies
We may therefore say that Rahu as Bhukti lord offers
those results which are in consonance with the Dasa lord.
Similarly Rahu as Antara Lord provides those results
which Dasa and Bhukti lord allow.
D Case 4: Rahu Dasa and Bhukti of Planets other than
those Planets that Rahu Represents
(1) Where there is contradiction between the results of
Rahu as Rahu, OR Rahu as the Planets Rahu
represents, the Bhukti lord will offer the result
which is in consonance with the results of Rahu as
Rahu, OR Rahu as the Planets Rahu represents.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
(2) For example let us say that in a chart Ralm offers
the following results for house 7.
a. Rahu as Rahu which does not allow marriage.
b. Rahu as Sign Lord of Rahu which allows
Marriage.
c. Rahu as Star Lord of Rahu which does not
allow marriage.
d. In this case if the Bhukti lord allows marriage
then the marriage will take place. Here we will
read the Dasa period as Dasa of Sign Lord of
Rahu.
2: Example: Let us try to explain the above concepts through
an example. Refer Fig 1 of Lesson 2.
The native lost his mother when he was running Saturn Dasa,
Ketu Bhukti and Venus Antara. We need to find reasons why
Ketu Bhukti Ketu Antara did not cause the event of death of
mother to take place.
A Operation of Bhukti Lord Ketu:
Ketu in this chart represents Jupiter and Saturn.
(1) Ketu as Ketu:
a. Ketu has PS. It is placed in 4 (Ascendant for
mother). Thus Ketu signifies Ascendant of
mother.
b. Ketu is in the Sub of Venus who does not
appear in 2, 7 and 8 from 4. It only appears in
Badhaka house for 4.
c. Thus Ketu as per PS does not have the
capability to cause death of mother.
d. Ketu is in Saturn Star who appears only in 1,
2 and 7 from 4. Ketu is in the Sub of Venus

Rahu and Ketu as Dasa Period Lords
who appears in Badhaka house from 4. Thus
Ketu as Ketu as per Stellar Status also is not a
strong Planet to cause death of mother.
We have stated above that Ketu as Bhukti lord in
its own Antara will offer results which Ketu has to
offer as Ketu as Ketu. Thus during Ketu Antara the
event of death of mother did not take place, ie 8th
house of mother is not involved. Bhukti Lord in its
own Antara can cause an event only if it is linked
with all the relevant cusps.
Note: In this lesson we have stated that we could read Saturn
Dasa Ketu Bhukti as if it is Saturn Dasa Saturn Bhukti because
Ketu represents Saturn but only for the results of those houses where
there is contradiction. Here there is no contradiction as far as the
8th house from 4 is concerned. Ketu does not signify 8th house. So
the question of contradiction does not arise. Ketu in Ketu Antara
will therefore act as Ketu as Ketu.
(2) Ketu as Saturn:
a. Saturn is in Venus Star who is placed in 4
(Ascendant for mother) and Rahu Sub who
appears in 1 1 (8th from 4).
b. Saturn is in the SS of Me-cury who appears in
c. Thus we find that Ketu as Saturn Satisfies the
necessary as well as essential condition to
cause the event of death.
(3) Ketu as Jupiter:
a. Jupiter has PS because it is in Venus Star and
Venus is in Jupiter Star.
b. Jupiter appears in 1 1 (8th from 4). Jupiter is in
the Sub of Saturn that appears in 1, 2 and 7
from 4.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
c. Tims Jupiter involves 8th house from 4 and
commits to 1 as well as Maraka houses.
d. Jupiter is in the SS of Saturn that appears in 2
and 7 from 4.
e. We say that Ketu as Jupiter also has the
capability to cause death of mother.
3: Why Venus Antara caused death of mother?
A Venus has PS. It is placed in 4 and thus signifies
Ascendant of mother.
(1) Venus is in the Sub of Moon that appears in 1 1 (8th
from 4) and 3 (12th from 4). Thus Venus involves
ascendant of mother and commits to 8th from
mother's Ascendant.
(2) Venus is in the SS of Venus that appears in 12
(Badhaka house for 4).
(3) Venus thus satisfies the necessary and essential
conditions to cause the event of death of mother.
Venus here acts in consonance with the Bhukti Lord
Ketu as Saturn or as Jupiter.
Practice Exercise: Lesson 12
Please refer Fig 12.1 and answer the following questions:
Question 1 : The native of this chart got married when he was
running Dasa of Mars and Bhukti of Ketu. Please select the Antara
Lord in which the marriage would have taken place. Provide reasons
for your assessment.
Question 2: The native sold his house when he was running
the period of Rahu-Jup-Sat-Ketu. Please indicate the Prana in which
the event would have happened and give reasons.

Rahu and Ketu as Dasa Period Lords
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION

RASH! CHART
BHAVA CHART

Rahu and Ketu as Dasa Period Lords

Lesson 13
CIL and Birth Time Rectification
Philosophy behind Theory of Rectification
Human birth is said to take place at a particular moment when
soul takes possession of the body. According to doctrine of
reincarnation and law of karma this moment occurs when the
incarnated soul gets the spiritual impulse towards fresh
experience and unfoldment. In Astrology we say that this
moment is defined by a particular position of Sun (soul or
Purusha) and Moon (mind or Prakriti). Purusha and Prakriti
are concepts of Samkhya Philosophy.
• At that moment a particular zodiacal position rises in
the eastern horizon at that place. We call this the
Ascendant.
• Corresponding to this Ascendant position using the
Placidus house system and Khullar Ayanamsa we
calculate other cuspal positions.
• The Ascendant and other cuspal positions need to
correspond with the Karmic code of the incarnating soul.
• Similarly Planetary positions in the zodiac and in Bhavas
need to correspond to the Karmic code of the incarnating
soul
Each incarnated soul has its own secret. It stands revealed
only by the minute divisions of the Zodiac that rise on each of
the twelve cuspal positions and the minute divisions of the
Zodiac , which influence each planet. The horoscope cast and

CIL and Birth Time Rectification
analysed on cuspal interlinks basis will simulate and reveal
conditions to represent the unique life pattern of the individual.
2. Necessary Conditions for a Correct Ascendant
• The planets co-ruling the Ascendant should have linkages
with the houses 1 or 7or 10 i.e. 5 or 1 1 or 2 from the 9th
cusp, the house that represents the father of the native in
the horoscope.
• The Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant should establish
relationship widi Moon's Star lord.
(This will be explained in a separate paragraph).
• The Sub-Sub arc, and the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant
should reveal the sex of the native.
• The planets co-ruling the Moon's position should be
linked with the houses 1 or 7 or 10.
The position of Moon is its transit position at the time of
birth of the native. Therefore the Moon's Sign lord. Star
lord, Sub lord, Sub-Sub lord and Sub Sub Sub lord should
either appear in cusps lor 7 or 10, or be significator of
these houses in the native's chart.
The moment at which the event happens, is controlled
by the Prana lord running at that time. So at the moment
of birth, the Prana lord should be Significator of 10, 1,7
houses; (at least two of these houses). Or the Prana lord
itself should appear in these cusps irrespective of the
fact that it has the positional status or not.
3. Philosophy behind fixing the Ascendant:
• An event happens at a moment when the Ascendant i.e.
the degree-minute-seconds rising on the Eastern horizon
at the place of happening is co-ruledby the planets that
are significators of the cusps that are taking part in the
event.

120 Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
• The birth of a native means addition to the family of
father (2nd house) by way of child (5th house) and
fulfillment of ambition (11th house).
• Since in the native's chart 9th house represents the
Ascendant of the father, houses 10, 1,7 will take part in
enacting the event.
• Tlius all the planets co-ruling the Ascendant should be
linked to 10 or 1 or 7 through their Star lords or should
have positional status to become significator of
Ascendant etc. Since the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant
closely represents the moment of birth, it should be
significator of invariably all the three houses, but
certainly be linked with the 1 0th (i.e. 2nd from 9th) house
directly i.e Star lord of SSL of Ascendant in 10 or the
Star lord in 1 or 7 and its Sub lord in 10.
• If the SSL of the Ascendant has the positional status and
it appears as Sign or Star or Sub or Sub-Sub lord of the
10th cusp then also the condition is satisfied.
4. Conditions for other Cuspal Positions
A Genetical Connections; By genetical connections we
mean that the SSLs of relevant cusps that represent the
native's father, mother, younger and elder co-bom, and
children should establish relationship with the Moon's
Star lord of respective relation.
B Promise for various Aspects of Life; We know that each
house represents specific significations. SSL of each cusp
should match with the promise of various aspects of
native's life.
To conclude we may say that we need to ensure that
SSLs of all cusps should satisfy above conditions.

CIL and Birth Time Rectification
C Justification for Past Events:
(1) Each event happens in the joint period of Planets
that are fruitful significators of the event. The
Sookshama and Prana lords should be strongly
linked with Primary and Supporting cusps. We may
need to adjust time of birth to match the Dasa period
lords operating at the time and Date of happening
of the event.
(2) The transit position of Planets that take part in
enacting the event and also the transit of Sun and
Moon should support the event. This may
necessitate adjustment of some cuspal positions.
How SSL of Ascendant Establishes Relationship with
Moon's Star Lord
A The S-S lord of the Ascendant itself may be the Moon's
Star lord. The S-S lord may or may not have positional
status.
B The Star lord, the Sub lord or the S-S lord of the S-S lord
of the Ascendant can be the Star lord of Moon. That is
the SSL of the Ascendant may be a Planet whose Star
lord or Sub lord or SS lord is the same planet as the star
lordofMoon. IfMoon comes as the SSLofthe Ascendant
it always establishes relationship.
C The Star lord of Moon can be in the Star or Sub or S-S
which may be the S-S lord of the Ascendant. Let us
explain this with an example: Let X be the Star Lord of
Moon and Y be the SSL of Ascendant. If X is in the Star
of Y or Sub of Y or in SS ofY we say that the relationship
is established.
D Similarly we need to fix the SSLs of 3rd cusp (immediate
younger co bom, 4th cusp (mother), 5th cusp (first child)

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
, 7th cusp (first marriage partner) , 9th cusp (father) ,
and 1 Ith cusp (immediate elder co bom) to ensure that
they establish relationship with Moon's Star lord of
respective relation.
6 How to fix the Ascendant Sub-Sub for Male and Female
Horoscope:
• There is no single fool proof method that can be used.
• After an in-depth study I have come to the conclusion
that:
• The SSL of the SSL of the Ascendant represents the sex
of the child as per its placement in the male or female
sign and
• The SS arc of the Ascendant indicates the sex of the
child as per its placement in the relevant half.
However, the application of these concepts demands
attention to the various possibilities that may occur in
a chart.
For example:
All the Planets in the chart may be in Male or in Female signs.
OR
All the Planets are in the Sub-Sub, the lords of which may be
in male or in female signs only.
In the above cases the placement of the Sub-Sub arc of the
Ascendant in the relevant half has to be given preference to
decide the sex of the child. Placed below is summation of the
above concepts for Male and Female Horoscope.
Male Horoscope
• If the Ascendant rises in Male Sign the SS arc* should be set
in the first half of the SS arc.

CIL and Birth Time Rectification
• If the Ascendant rises in the Female sign tine SS arc should be
set in the second half of die SS arc.
• If in a horoscope all the Planets are in the SS the lords of
which are in Male signs then the above rules of setting the arc
may be ignored. In other words arc can be set in first or second
half.
• If the SS lord of the chosen SS is in female sign then it is
essential that the SS arc should be in the first half for Ascendant
rising in male sign and in second half for Ascendant rising in
female sign. Suppose SSL of Ascendant's SSL is Jupiter who
is in female Sign. If Ascendant rises in female Sign then it is
essential diat the SS arc of SSL of Ascendant should be fixed
in second half. If the Ascendant rises in male Sign then it is
essential that the SS arc of SSL of Ascendant should be fixed
in first half.
Female Horoscope
• If the Ascendant rises in Female Sign the SS arc* should be
set in the first half of Sub Sub arc of SSL.
• If the Ascendant rises in the Male sign the SS arc should be
set in the second half of Sub Sub arc of SSL.
• If in a horoscope all the Planets are in the SS die lords of
which are in female signs then the above rules of seding the
arc may be ignored. In other words arc can be set in first or
second half.
• If the SS lord of the chosen SS is in male sign then it is essential
that the SS arc should be in the first half for Ascendant rising
in female sign and in second half for Ascendant rising in male
sign. Suppose SSL of Ascendant's SSL is Jupiter who is in
male Sign. If Ascendant rises in female Sign then it is essential
that the SS arc of SSL of Ascendant should be fixed in first
half. If the Ascendant rises in male Sign dien it is essential

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
that the SS arc of SSL of Ascendant should be fixed in second
half
Note: It is rarely that we take into consideration the principle
that the SSL of the SSL of the Ascendant represents the sex of
the child as per its placement in the male or female sign.
However it comes into play when all Planets in a chart are
placed in the SS the lords of which are either in the male or
female signs.
*Sub-Sub arc is the space allotted to each Sub-Sub in each
Sub. Refer Appendix C. True Astrology and TP Jyotish
Softwares have the provision to show the percentage at which
the SS arc of any cusp is fixed. Zero to 50 percent refers to
first half and 50 to 100 percent refers to second half.
From the above it can be concluded that rectification of a
chart means fixing the correct Ascendant and other cuspal
positions to satisfy various requirements stated in above
paragraphs. Corresponding time of birth will set the
beginning and ending dates of various Dasa periods.
Practical Approach to Rectification: We will first consider
rectification of those charts where the client provides the time,
Date and place of birth. No authenticated data for genetical
connections or past events is provided. An astrologer should
consider himself lucky if he is able to get a correct horoscope
with the given time, Date and place of birth. It is indeed a rare
occasion.
Step 1 : Cast the horoscope as per given data.

CIL and Birth Time Rectification
Step 2: Check whether the Planets co ruling the Ascendant
satisfy the necessary conditions as stated above.
Step 3: If the conditions are not met we need to adjust the
horoscope and fix the Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub. For noted
time of birth we generally expect that the rectified time should
be within plus-minus 10 minutes.
Step 4: Choose the Sub and Sub-Sub lords which establishes
relationship with Moon's Star lord.
Step 5: Set the SS arc for male and female horoscope as per
above suggested method.
Remember that fixing the Ascendant with chosen Planets
and setting the SS arc in the relevant half can at best
only gives us an approximately correct horoscope.
Reasons for that are:
If you change the percentage of SS arc within the relevant
half you will notice that SSLs of other cuspal positions
change.
You may need to change the Sub or the SSL to ensure
proper SSLs of other cuspal positions.
Example 1: Let us try to explain this through an example.
Following are the birth details of a female.
Female; DOB: 28 Sep 1934; 1.15pm; BST -1.00; Paris,
Step 1: Fig 13.1 is the chart cast as per given data.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory

CIL and Birth Time Rectification
Step 2: Mars, Mercury, Moon and Jupiter co-rule the
Ascendant. These Planets need to signify 1 or 7 or 10.
Mars is in Mercury Star and Mercury is in Mars Star.
Thus both Mars and Mercury have PS.
Mercury is placed in 10 and appears in 1. Only relevant
cusps are shown.
Mars appears in 1 (and qualifies by PS). Thus we see
that Mars and Mercury satisfy necessary condition.
Moon in this chart has PS. It appears in relevant cusps 1,
Jupiter has PS and is placed in 10 and appears in 1. Jupiter
is in Mars Star and Venus Sub. Mars appears in 1 and
Venus appears in 7 and 10. Thus Jupiter signifies relevant
cusps.
Step 3: Let us check the condition for female horoscope.
SSL of Ascendant is Jupiter whose SSL is Saturn.
Saturn is placed in the chart in Capricorn i.e. a female
sign.
SS arc of Ascendant is 36.66 percent being in the first
half (i.e. the position of SSL Jupiter is at 36.66 percent
of the SSL's arc). We therefore say that it meets all the
conditions for female horoscope.
Step 4: Let us now see whether the SSL of Ascendant
establishes relationship with Moon's Star lord or not.
Jupiter is in Mars Star, Venus Sub and Sat SS. Thus
Jupiter is not related to Moon's Star.
Moon is in Moon Star, Mercury sub and Rahu SS. Rahu
does not represent Jupiter. Thus Moon is not related to
Jupiter. Conclusion: Jupiter cannot be the right planet
to appear as SSL of the Ascendant

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
Step 5: To choose the right Planet that can be fixed as the
SSL of Ascendant we need to scrutinize the Planetary Table
to find out which Planets are related to Moon's Star lord.
Only Sim, Moon, Raliu, Saturn and Ketu are related to
Moon. Here Moon's Star lord is Moon.
Since Rahu SS precedes Jupiter SS (See Vimsottari Dasa
order on Page 297 of KCIL revised edition) the first
choice is that we fix Rahu as SS of the Ascendant. We
also need to set the time so that SS arc is in first half for
female horoscope. If we set the time of birth as 13.14.07
hrs we get Rahu as SS of Ascendant and SS arc of Rahu
is 25 percent.
The cuspal positions for this time of birth are shown in
CUSPAL POSITION

CIL and Birth Time Rectification
Tti is is the first possibility of an approximately correct
Horoscope for the given data. Other possibilities are
keeping the SS of Ascendant as Moon, Ketu, Sat or Sun.
Step 6: We now have to check whether Rahu satisfies the
other condition that it should signify 1, 7 and 10.
In this chart Rahu represents Moon as its Star lord. We
have seen above that Moon signifies 1, 7 and 10.
Thus we say that Rahu satisfies all conditions.
Step7: We now check whether Moon's position at birth
satisfies necessary conditions. At the time of birth Moon
transits in Venus Sign, Moon Star, Mercury Sub and Rahu
SS. These Planets should either appear in 1 or 7 or 10 or be
significators of these cusps in the chart.
We find Venus appears in 7, Moon appears in 1, 7 and
10. Mercury appears in 1, 7 and 10 and Rahu appears in
Rahu in the chart represents Moon who appears in 1, 7
and 10.
Thus Moon's position at the time of birth satisfies
necessary conditions.
Note: If we compare the cuspal positions of Fig 13.1 and
Fig 13.2 we notice that the SSLs of certain cusps have changed.
For an accurate horoscope the SSLs of various cuspal positions
need to satisfy genetical connections, and also promise of various
cusps. We can vary the time of birth from 13.13.55 to 13.14.20
hrs so that the SS arc of Rahu remains between 0 to 50 percent.
The exact time of birth thus can be fixed only if we know
details about genetical connections or some past events.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
Example 2: How to fix correct chart when data is provided.
In example I we have seen that we can at best only construct an
approximately correct chart if no data for genetical connections or
past events is provided. Now if the following data is provided for
the above example let us see how we can fix the correct horoscope.
A. Data for Genetical Connections
Birth of Father: 8 May 1896
Birth of Mother: 1 Feb 1912
Birth ofYounger Sister: 5 May 1938
B. Data for Significant Events
10 Jun 2004 Conviction and fine
5 Nov 1975 Death of Father
1 Aug 1978 Death of Mother
21 Dec 1952 First Marriage
6 Dec 1957 Divorced
C. Procedure to Fix the Horoscope for Genetical
Connections
Step 1: Find the Moon's Star lords of Father, Mother
and younger sister.
Those who hove True Astrology software they may
use the facility of Transit. Those who have other
Software may do this with the help of Ephemeris.
Look for the Moon position for the date of birth of
Father, Mother and younger sister.
Moon Star of Father: Rahu or Jupiter
Moon Star of Mother: Jupiter or Saturn
Moon Star of younger sister: Jupiter or Saturn

CIL and Birth Time Rectification
Step 2: Check the SSLs of 3rd for younger sister, 4th for
mother and 9th for father. These SSLs have to establish
relationship with Moons Star lords of respective relations.
Keeping the SS arc of Ascendant at 25 percent we
find that SSL of 3rd cusp is Saturn, 4th cusp SSL is
Jupiter and 9th cusp SSL is Rahu. It appears that
the chart establishes genetical connections.
The Moon Star of younger sister bom on 05 .05 . 1 93 8
could be either Jupiter or Saturn. Now SSL of 3rd
cusp is Saturn. Also in the chart Jupiter is in the SS
of Sat. Thus we say SSL of 3rd cusp establishes
relationship with Moon's Star of younger sister.
Moon Star of Mother is Jupiter (born on
01.02.1912). 4th SSL is Jupiter. Tlius we say that
the SSL of 4th cusp establishes relationship with
the Moon's Star of Mother
Father's Moon Star could be Jupiter or Saturn (bom
on 08.05.1896). 9th SSL is Rahu .It is as good as
saying that SSL of 9th cusp is Saturn. Since Jupiter
is in the SS of Saturn we can say that 9th SSL
establishes relationship with father's Moon Star.
Step 3: It is indicated that the younger co bom is female.
This requires that the SS arc of the 3rd cusp should be
set in the second half as male sign rises on the 3rd cusp.
We notice that with time of birth 13.14.07 hrs the SS arc
of 3rd cusp is about 76 percent.
From above it appears that the above time of birth
should give ns a correct horoscope

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
D. Setting Chart for Promise of Various Aspects of Life
Promise of Marriage:
Ascendant SSL is Rahu who has PS and appears in 11.
Rahu is in Moon Star who appears in 7. Thus we can say
that Ascendant promises marriage.
SSL of 7th cusp is Mercury who has PS because Mercury
is in Mars Star and Mars is in Mercury Star. Thus Mercury
signifies 7.
Mercury is in Mars Star that appears in 5. Mercury is in
the Sub of Venus that appears in relevant cusps 7 and 1 1 .
We therefore conclude that the native is promised
marriage.
Promise of Divorce:
SSL of Ascendant is Rahu who is in Moon Star. Moon
appears in 7.
Rahu is in the Sub of Jupiter that does not appear in any
relevant cusp for marriage or divorce.
Rahu represents Moon. Moon is in Moon Star (7) and
Mercury Sub. Mercury' appears in 7 (marriage) and also
in 6 and 12 (separation).
SSL of 7th cusp is Mercury who has PS. Mercury is in
the Sub of Venus who appears in 7 anil (marriage) and
also in 6 (separation).
Mercury is in Mars Star who appears in 5 (relevant for
marriage) and 12 (relevant for separation). Separation is
supported by Venus the Sub of Mercury which appears
E. Promise for Loss of Reputation:
Ascendant indicates Status and 12th cusp indicates loss
of Status or reputation and imprisonment. 8th cusp

CIL and Birth Time Rectification
indicates punishment.
SSL of 8th cusp is Jupiter with the time of birth as
13.14.07. Jupiter has PS and thus signifies 8. Jupiter is
in Mars Star who appears in 1 (reputation). Jupiter is in
the Sub of Venus that does not appear in 12 (loss of
reputation).
This means that Jupiter can not be right SSL of the 8th
cusp. If we change die time to 13.14.10 we get Saturn as
the SSL of the 8di cusp.
Saturn is in Mars Star who appears in 1. Saturn is in the
Sub of Saturn who appears in 8 and 1 2. Thus we see that
Sat SSL of the 8di cusp promises loss of reputation.
Fig 13.3 indicates the cuspal positions for time of birth
CUSPAL POSITION
Comparing Fig 13.2 with Fig 13.3 we can notice that
there is no change in the SSL of any cusp other than 8.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
We may say that this time of birth should be the correct
time of birth. Wait and have patience.
F. Procedure to fix horoscope to Match Dasa Potential
for Specific Events
Marriage: On 21.12.1952 the native was running the
Dasa period of Rahu-Mercury-Mercury-Venus-Rahu.
With time of birth as 13. 14. 10 Raliu Prana lasts till about
19.30 hrs. This Prana lord does not have the capability
to enact marriage.
Rahu as Rahu: Rahu is in Moon Star who appears in
Primary cusp 7. Rahu is in Sub of Jupiter who does not
appear in 5 or 1 1 . Rahu as Rahu does not allow marriage
to take place.
Rahu as Moon: Moon is in Moon Star and Mercury
Sub. Mercury appears in 6 and 12 and also in 7. Rahu as
Moon also does not allow marriage.
Rahu as Saturn: Saturn is in Mars Star and Saturn Sub.
Mars appears in 5 but Saturn does not appear in 7. Rahu
as Saturn also does not allow marriage.
Marriage should have taken place in Jupiter Prana
because Jupiter is in Mars Star and Venus Sub. Mars
appears in 5 and Venus appears in 7 and 1 1 .
We, therefore, need to adjust time of birth so as to ensure
that Jupiter Prana begins around 12 hrs on 21.12.1952.
We get this condition if we fix the time as 13.14.17.
Tire Sub -Sub Lords of all cusps at this time remain the
same as in Fig 13.3.
Death of Father: Native's father died on 05.11.1975
when she was running the Dasa period of Jup-Mars-JupVen-Ven.

CIL and Birth Time Rectification
Death of Mother: Native's mother died on 01.08.1978
when she was running Dasa period of Jup-Rahu-MoonMoon-Mars/Rahu.
In Lesson 10 we discussed how to verify the event of
death. Considering Fig 13.3 for Cuspal Positions and
Fig 13.1 for Bhava Chart, please verify and satisfy
yourself that the death of parents are justified by Dasa
Period Lords.
Practice Exercise: Lesson 13
1. Rectify the following chart of King Edward VII from the
Genetical and family connections, and given events:
King Edward VII
DOB 9 Nov 1841 NS
10:48 am LMT (Given Time)
Buckingham Palace, London, UK
Genetical connections:
Father: DOB 26 Aug 181906.00 am Rosenau, Gennany.
Moon Star is Rahu
Mother: DOB 24 May 1901 04.15 am Isle of Wight,
England. Moon Star is Moon.
Wife: DOB 1 Dec 1844 6.30 am. Copenhagen. Denmark.
Moon Star is Mercury
Sister: Alice. DOB 25 Apr 1843 4.05am London. Moon
Star is Jupiter

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
Timeline
10 July 1860 (morning): Left Plymouth on frigate 'Hero'
for state visit to Canada. Arrived St John's New Found
land on 24 July 1860
14 Dec 1861 approx 09.30 am. Father died of typhoid
at Windsor Castle, England
10 Mar 1863 Marries Alix
22 Jan 1901 (6.30pm.). Mother Queen Victoria dies.
Becomes King.
5 Aug 1901 (6, 15pm) Elder sister Victoria died
Friedrechshof, Near Kronberg, Taunus.
24 Jun 1902. Operation to remove appendix
6 May 1910: After several heart attacks he died at 11.45
pm (London).

Lesson 14
Timing Future Events
1. In earlier Lessons we have discussed how to
• Check the promise of a particular aspect
• Decide the houses that will take part in enacting an event
using the Primary and Supporting Cusps Tables.
• Verily the correctness of chart by genetical connections
and Dasa potential for various past events.
Let us now discuss how to make predictions from an accurate horoscope for various events that are likely to happen in future in the life of a native.
2. Philosophy of Timing Events:
It is said, "A promised event happens in the joint period of
Planets that are fruitful significators of those cusps that
take part in enacting an event provided transit agrees".
However, the clause "in the joint period of Planets that are
fruitful significators of those cusps that take part in enacting
an event", is not the whole story. We also need to take into
account, the significance ofVimsottari Dasa principles, and
assessment of time when a particular promised event can
happen in the life of a native.
3. Salient Features ofVimsottari Dasa System:
• In Vimsottari Dasa system there is always a specific Dasa
period that mns at a specific date and time in the life of
a native. This Dasa period is defined as Dasa Lord -

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
Bhukti Lord - Antara Lord -Sookshama Lord - Prana
Lord.
Vimsottari Dasa is sequential in nature. This sequential
nature has a hidden meaning that each succeeding period
can only enact an event if it's preceding Dasa period
Lord permits that event. The word "permit" here is used
as an opposite of the word "deny". Let us try to explain
it through an example.
Suppose in a horoscope Dasa Lord involves the 7th house
(either by PS or through Star Lord), and commits to 6th
cusp through Sub lord without simultaneously
committing to 5 or 11. Then this Dasa lord denies
marriage to the native during its period. Any Bhukti Lord
who may be a strong fruitful significator of 7th cusp,
will not be able to cause the event of marriage. However
if Dasa Lord does not deny the event of marriage, but is
linked with 3 or 5 or 9 or 1 1 , it can allow the Bhukti lord
to enact marriage if it is a fruitful significator of 7th cusp.
There is another fundamental concept of Vimsottari Dasa
System which bears a close relationship with timing of
events. Dasa period calculation is based on the
progression of Moon from one Nakshatra (Star) to
another succeeding Nakshatra (Star).
Moon's Star Lord at the time of birth is the Dasa Lord at
the time of birth. Moon's Sub lord is the Bhukti Lord,
and Moon's SS Lord is the Antara Lord etc.
We know that the space allotted to each Star is 13°20'.
But the progression speed of Moon in each Star is
controlled by the Star Lord. Each Star Lord is allotted
different number of years in Vimsottari Dasa System.
Suppose a person is bom in the beginning of Rahu Dasa.
After 18 years he will run Jupiter Dasa. Suppose in the

Timing Future Events
chart of the native Jupiter does not permit marriage. It
would mean that native can't marry till 34 years. This
should correspond to the promise of delayed marriage
in the horoscope. Thus die sequential order of Dasa lord
bears a close relationship with the destiny of the native.
The sequential nature ofVimsottari Dasa System also
bears a close relationship with the nature of event and
its frequency. For example marriage, child birth, purchase
of property etc will happen only in specific Bhukti that
is linked to the Primary cusp directly or indirectly. It
goes without saying that Dasa lord should permit the
event.
A promised event happens as per assessment of time span
from the significations of the SSL of the Primary cusp
for diat event. The above statement does not specify this.
For example death of native happens only in a particular
Dasa the lord of which satisfies necessary and essential
conditions. Now there can be more than one Planet in
the chart that may satisfy the necessary and essential
conditions for causing death of the native. Which one
the Astrologer has to pick depends upon the assessment
of life span of the native calculated from the significations
of SSLs of 1, 3 and 8. Same is the case for other
significant events.
It may, however, be remembered that calculation of life
span of relatives from the natives chart may lead to wrong
assessment. SSLs of 1, 3 and 8 from the concerned
relative's Ascendant may not be the real SSLs of 1, 3
and 8 in the relative's own horoscope. In simple words
predicting death of relatives is not possible simply on
the basis of above statement. We need to use some other
techniques to answer such questions about relatives.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
4. Timing Future Events:
Timing events looks simple, but it is not. It comes with
experience. It depends upon the Astrologer's power of
comprehension and analytical capability. Some believe, it
depends upon the intuitive power of the Astrologer.
Once a student of Astrology went to an experienced
Astrologer to learn the intricacies of timing events. He said
to the Astrologer, "Sir, this is the chart of a beautiful lady
who got married in the joint period of Saturn- JupiterRahu. Why did she not get married in the period of SaturnRahu- Jupiter?" Sudden came the reply from that
experienced Astrologer, "Did she go to the Astrologer at
that time?" The student was equally sharp. He said, "Sir,
I was told that the marriages are arranged in Heaven."
A genuine student of Astrology has the right to know the
reasons for such problems.
5. Scientific and Rational Approach for Timing Events: The
following steps need to be followed in timing an event:
Step 1. Decide the houses that are needed to enact an event.
You may use the Primary and Supporting Cusps Tables.
Step 2. Check the promise of the event from the Sub-Sub lord
of the Ascendant and Sub Sub Lord of the Primary Cusp.
Step 3. If the event is promised, assess the time period in
which the event may happen. Early or delayed happening of
the event is judged from the SSL of the Primary cusp. If the
SSL of the Primary cusp is linked with favourable as well as
unfavourable houses, the event is promised to happen late.
For example if the SSL of the 7th cusp signifies 5 or 7 or 11,
and also 2 or 4 or 6 or 10, then the marriage is promised late,
hi another way if the SSL of 7th cusp involves 7 through PS
or Star and commits to 5 or 11, and also commits to 2 or 4 or
6 or 10 it promises delayed marriage.

Timing Future Events
Step 4. Having assessed the approximate time period, we have
to select the Dasa periods according to tire nature of the event,
and Dasa potential of the period lords that are favourable for
the particular event. For this you may use the following general
guide lines;
• Events, which do not happen so often, have to be
predicted as per Dasa lord Signification. For example,
death of an individual will happen only in a specific Dasa.
For most of the people even purchase of a house may
also be an event, which may not repeat itself in the life
of the native. So Dasa potential has to be favourable for
such events.
• For matters that may repeat but not too often, Bhukti
plays the most Significant role. For example, marriage
will take place only in a specific Bhukti that is strongly
connected with 7th cusp. The Dasa lord may be neutral
or favourable for the event but should not disallow the
event.
• For matters of common or repetitive nature, we have to
concentrate on Antara, Sookshma and Prana lords.
However, the Bhukti should not specifically deny these
events
Note 1: It should be kept in mind that there is no negation
at the Star level. Suppose in a chart a Planet say Sun
signifies houses 2 and 7 either by PS or by Stellar Status.
It means that the Planet is capable to provide results of 2
as well as 7. Since 2 is 8 to 7 it should not be thought of not
allowing marriage. However if the Sub Lord of Sun
appears in 2 then we may say that the Planet Sun is
favourable for 2nd house significations but can't allow
marriage to take place during its Dasa period. And yet if
the Sub Lord of Sun also appears in 5 or 11 along with its

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
appearance in 2 then Sun can allow marriage but with
some problem say delay or marital discord.
Note 2: It may be remembered that each selected period
Lord's SSL should appear at least in one of the relevant
cusps to ensure the enactment of the event in the end. SSL
of the selected period Lord may be appearing in other
cuspal positions which may be unfavourable. This is real
life situation because the selected Planet can cause many
other events for which those cuspal positions of SSL may
be favourable.
Step 5. Having fixed the Dasa, Bhukti and Antara periods,
we should fix the Sookshma and Prana. This is done by taking
into consideration the transit of Dasa, Bhukti, Antara lords,
Sun and Moon.
Transit of period lords should be examined as discussed in
Lesson 1 1 .
It may be remembered that Selection of Sookshama and Prana
Lords largely depends upon the following:
• Sun should transit in a Sign and Star that allows the event
to happen. We know that Sun transits in a Sign
approximately for 30 days and in a Star approximately
for 13 days. Fixing the transit of Sun in relevant Sign
and Star allows us to say that the event will happen during
these 13 days.
• Select the Sookshama Lord that strongly indicates the
happening of the event that will operate during these 13
days.
• Select the Prana Lord in the selected Sookshama Lord
that strongly indicates the happening of the event.

Timing Future Events
• During the selected Sookshama Lord and Prana Lord,
Sun will be transiting in a particular Sub. This Sub Lord
should support the happening of the event. If not move
to another position of Sun and or Prana Lord.
• After fixing the Sub Lord of Sun and Prana Lord, look
for the right position of Moon in a particular Sign, Star,
Sub and Sub Sub.
• Corresponding to this position of Moon and Sun and
Dasa period, a particular Ascendant will be risingrat the
place of happening of the Event.
• Adjust the position of Ascendant of Event Chart so that
Planets that co rule the Ascendant of the Event Chart are
those Planets which in the Natal chart signify relevant
cusps that take part in enacting the event.
Ruling Planets and Selection of Dasa Period Lords
It is believed that the ruling planets at the moment of judgment
are the ruling planets at the fructification of the event in past
or future. Astrologers make use of this dictum to select the
Dasa period for predicting future events.
The Ruling Planets at the time of judgment are defined as
follows;
• RP (Ascendant); Planets that co rule the Ascendant
at the time and place of judgment.
• RP (Moon): Planets that co rule the position of Moon
at the time and place of judgment.
Planets that co rule RP (Ascendant) are used for the
selection of Dasa Period Lords and Planets that co mle
RP (MOON) are used to fix the Ascendant of Event Chart.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
Use of ruling Planets theory for the selection of Dasa
Period lords and fixing Ascendant of Event Chart does
not allow an astrologer to sacrifice any step that has been
stated in Para 5 above. It is to be used as a confimiatory
test.
Dasa period lords selected as per Para 5 above should be
compared with the RP (Ascendant) Planets. If they match,
it confinns that the event will most probably happen as
predicted. If any Planet that appears in the selected Dasa
Period does not appear in the RP (Ascendant) then it
should qualify to be a RP.
A Planet is said to qualify' to be ruling Planet, if in the
Natal Chart it is in the Star or Sub or Sub Sub of any
Planet who is a RP. For example let us say that for a
particular event the Astrologer has selected Mars as
Antara Lord, but Mars does not appear as one of the
Planets that co rule RP (Ascendant) at the time of
judgment. Then if Mars in the Natal Chart is in the Star,
or Sub, or Sub Sub, of any Planet that appears in RP
(Ascendant) then it qualifies to be a RP.
If the selected Dasa period, say Mars, in the above
example does not qualifies to be a ruling planet then the
event may not happen during Antara of Mars. The
astrologer may then try to select another Antara lord.

Timing Future Events
1. Example of Prediction.
I will explain the application of the above principles through
an example. We may remember that the correctness of
prediction depends on the level attained by the astrologer in
the application of the concepts of SS and CIL Theory. Some
of my senior students have been able to make some wonderful
predictions. I am placing one such case which clearly
establishes the validity of above principles.
• A lady was pregnant and expected to deliver her first
child by 20 Sept 2004. This date was given to the lady
by her Doctor. The lady approached Mr. R.S.Chani one
of my senior students. She wanted to know the date of
actual delivery on the basis of her natal chart analysis.
Mr. Chani told the Lady that you will deliver the child
only on 23.09.2004 at 10.30 hrs. The Lady delivered the
child as predicted on 23.09.2004 at 10.30.38 hrs.
Let us see how this Astrologer could give such an
accurate prediction based on SS and CIL theory. Birth
Data of the Lady is given below:
D.O.B: 5 Oct 1978 Rectified T.O.B: 13.49.04 hrs. P.O.B:
Delhi, India (Long 77E15; Lat 28N30'48").
Fig 14.1 is the rectified chart of the Lady.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION

Timing Future Events
Promise of Child Birth:
• SSL of the 5th cusp is Rahu who has no PS. Rahu is in Sun
Star who does not appear in 2 or 5 or 11. However Rahu
represents Mercury and Sim. Mercury has PS and is the SSL
of the 11th cusp. Thus Mercury signifies 11.
• Mercury is in the Sub of Venus that appears in 5 (relevant
cusps) but also in 4. Mercury is in the Star of Moon that appears
in 2 and 5.
The appearance of Mercury's Sub lord in 4 gave a hint to the
Astrologer that there could have been some delay or
miscarriage or abortion. The Lady confirmed that she had a
miscarriage.
• Rahu as Sun also promises birth of child because Sun is in
Moon Star (2 and 5) and in the Sub of Mercury who appears
Fixing Date of Delivery:
• Mr. Chani noted that on 20 Sept 2004 the native will be running
the Dasa period of Satum-Jupiter-Satum-Mercury-Mercury.
The Prana lord Mercury will last up to 20.51 hrs of 22 Sept
• The Sookshama Lord Mercury as stated above signifies 2, 5
and 11, but since Mercury is in the SS of Jupiter who does not
appear in 2 or 5 or 11, Mercury Sookshama in its own Prana
can not cause the delivery of the child.
• The selection of Prana Lord in this case has to be fixed by
taking in to consideration the transit of Sun and Moon, and
also to ensure that the Prana Lord should be significator of 2,
• Next Prana is of Ketu who is in Jupiter Star. Jupiter appears
in 3 and 12. So the Lady moves to the hospital.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
• Ketii as Jupiter signifies 2 and 1 1 as Jupiter's Star Lord Saturn
appears in 2 and 1 1 . Jupiter is in the Sub of Moon that appears
in 2 & 5. And Jupiter is in Sub Sub of Sat who appears in 2 &
• Thus Ketu as Jupiter will cause the birth of the child.
Fixing Time of Delivery:
• Time of delivery has to be fixed taking into consideration the
transit of Sim and Moon.
• The Astrologer noted that the transit of Sun in Mercury Sign
Sun Star Mercury Sub and Jupiter SS during the period of
Prana Lord Ketu favours the event, but the transit of Moon in
Venus Star is not acceptable.
• Venus in the native's chart does not signify 2 or 5 or 1 1 . Venus
is in Jupiter Star. Jupiter does not appear in 2 or 5 or 1 1.
Moon on 23 Sept 2004 enters in Sun Star at about 09.47 hrs at
the expected place of delivery (Noida, UP, India).
• Next the Astrologer checked that when Moon enters Sim Star
at that time the Ascendant at the place of delivery should rise
in a Sign the Lord of which should signify 2 or 5 or 1 1 in the
native's chart.
• The Astrologer found that till 10.19 hrs the Ascendant will be
Libra ruled by Venus who does not signify 2 or 5 or 11.
• The lady, therefore can deliver only after 10.19 hrs when
Scorpio Ascendant rises at the place of delivery.
• In Scorpio Ascendant, and in Star of Jupiter, only three Sub
lords Moon, Mars and Raliu occur.
• Moon Sub gets eliminated because it is not a fruitful
significatorof2, 5 and 11. Mars looks to signify 2, 5 and 11,
but its Sub lord Venus appears in both favourable and
unfavourable positions with respect to 5th house.

Timing Future Events
The Astrologer fixed Rahu as the Sub Lord of the Ascendant
at which time the delivery will take place i.e. between 10. 27
hrs and at 10.35 hrs.
Another reason for choosing Rahu as Sub lord rather than
Mars was based on the fact that Astrologer was sure that the
lady will deliver through a surgical operation. If we see Fig
14.1 we notice that SSL of 8th cusp is Rahu that represents
Mercury. Here in this chart Mercury involves 5 and 2 and
commits to 5 and 11. Mars does not appear in 8 (sourcesurgery).
Selection of SSL of Ascendant in the Sub of Rahu is done to
ensure that the SSL of Ascendant should maintain relationship
with Moon's Star lord in the Event Chart.
Fig 14.2 shows the planetary positions
PLANETARY POSITION
Figl4.2

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
It can be seen from Fig 14.2 that Rahu as Rahu does not
establish relationship with Moon's Star lord Sun. Next SSLs Jupiter
and also Mercury, establish relationship with Sun. Since Jupiter
has appeared as Star Lord of Ascendant the Astrologer chose
Mercury as the SS of Ascendant and declared that the lady would
deliver between 10.30 and 10.31.22 hrs. The delivery was recorded
as happening at 10.30.30 hrs.
The fonnation of the Ascendant of the child is based on the
following conditions:
• The Planets co ruling the Ascendant should signify 2 or 5 or
11 in the mother's as well as the father's chart. (Remember 5
is for the first child. Tire second would be 7, the third 9 and so
on).
• The Ascendant of the child is formed as per the Karmic code
of the child.
• The Planets co ruling the Ascendant of the child should be
significator of 1 or 7 or 10 in the child's chart.
• Fig 14.3 is the chart of child. It can be seen that Rahu Sub
Lord and Mercury SSL are linked with 1, 7 and 10 in the
chart.

Timing Future Events
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION

Timing Future Events

Case Studies
Example 1: Twin Deaths
The following data was provided to the senior students of
Khullar Astrology Institute.
Male
D. O. B: 1 Sept 1951 T.O.B: 15.05.00 ROB: Delhi, India
Marriage: 20 June 1980
Moon Star of first male child: Ketu. The child was bom on 19
Death of Mother: 19/20 Aug 1988.
Students were asked to predict what happened on 30 Jan 2004.
Some students predicted that native himself died. Some predicted
that father of native died. Two students predicted correctly and
said that both native and his father died.
Analysis of Chart
Those who predicted correctly fixed the T.O.B as 15.04.32
using True Astrology Software. This chart is placed Fig CS1

Case Studies
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Fig CS1

Case Studies

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
Accuracy of Ascendant
The Planets Jupiter and Venus co rule the Ascendant. Jupiter
has PS and as such signifies Ascendant. Similarly Venus has PS
because it is in its own Star. Venus is in the Sub of Rahu. Rahu is
the Star lord of 7th cusp. Rahu represents Saturn as Sign Lord.
Saturn appears in 10 as Sub Lord. Thus Venus is linked with 1, 7
and 10.
Venus is the SSL of Ascendant and Venus is the Moon's Star
Lord.
The SS arc of SSL Venus is in the first half. Since Male Sign
rises on the Ascendant this satisfies the condition for the sex of the
native.
Thus we find that Ascendant satisfies the necessary conditions.
Genetical Connection
The native got first male child when Moon was transiting in
Ketu Star. The SSL of the 5th cusp is Mercury who is in Ketu Star.
Sex of the First Child
5th cusp rises in male sign Aries. The SS arc of SSL of 5th
cusp is in first half. This confirms the sex of the first child.
Death of Mother
The native lost his mother on 19/20 Aug 1988 when he was
running the Dasa period of Mars-Rahu-Ketu-Jup-Ven.
Operation of Dasa Lord Mars
Dasa Lord Mars has PS. It appears in 5 (Maraka for mother)
and 10 (Maraka and Badhaka for Mother). Mars is in Jupiter Sub

Case Studies
that appears in 4 (Ascendant of mother) and 11 (8th from 4).
Dasa Lord Mars is in Saturn Star and Jupiter Sub. Saturn
appears in 4 and Jupiter appears in 4 and 1 1 .Thus Mars involves
Mother's Ascendant and commits to 8th cusp.
Mars is in the Sub-Sub of Venus who appears in 5 (Maraka)
and 11 (8th from mother's Ascendant).
Thus we find that Dasa Lord Mars satisfies the necessary and
essential conditions to cause death of mother.
Operation of Bhukti Lord Rahu
We know that any Planet in Rahu Star is as good as in the Star
of the Planet which Rahu represents. Thus Rahu is as good as in
Saturn Star who appears in 4 (Ascdt for mother), and 10 which is
both Maraka and Badhaka for Mother. Rahu is in the Sub of Venus
who appears in 11 (8th from 4). Thus Rahu satisfies the necessary
condition.
Rahu is in the SS of Saturn who appears in 3 ( 1 2th to 4) and
10 (Maraka and Badhaka for mother).
Rahu in this chart represents Saturn as Sign Lord. Saturn is in
Sun Star and Venus Sub.
Sun appears in 4 (Ascendant of mother) and Venus appears in
5 (Maraka for mother) and 11 (8th from mother's Ascendant). Thus
Rahu as Saturn satisfies the necessary condition.
Saturn is in the SS of Rahu. We may say that Saturn is in the
SS of Saturn who appears in 10 (both Maraka and Badhaka for
mother).
The Bhukti lord Rahu as Saturn satisfies the necessary and
essential conditions for causing the death of mother.
Thus we find that Rahu as Rahu and Rahu as Saturn satisfies
the necessary and essential conditions for causing death of mother.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
Operation of Antara Lord Ketu
Ketu in this chart represents Sun as Sign Lord and Venus as
Star Lord.
Venus is in Venus Star and Rahu Sub. Since Rahu represents
Saturn we can say that Venus is in Venus Star and Saturn Sub.
Venus appears in 5 (Maraka for mother) and 11 (8th from mother's
Ascendant). Saturn appears in 4 (Ascendant for mother), 10 Maraka
and Badhaka for mother. Thus Ketu as Venus satisfies the necessary
condition.
Venus is in the SS of Jupiter who appears in 1 1 (8th from
mother's Ascendant). Thus Ketu as Venus satisfies the essential
condition also for causing death to mother.
Operation of Sookshama Lord Jupiter
Jupiter is in Mercury Star and Venus Sub. Mercuiy appears in
1, 2, and 7 from 4.Jupiter's Sub Lord Venus appears in 2 and 8
from 4.Thus Jupiter satisfies the necessary condition.
Jupiter is in the SS of Sun who appears in 7 (both Maraka
and Badhaka for mother) from 4. Thus Jupiter satisfies the
essential condition also.
Operation of Prana Lord Venus
We have already discussed above.
We, therefore conclude that Dasa potential at the time of death
of mother justifies the correctness of horoscope.
Marriage of the Native
Native married on 20 June 1980 when he was running the
period of Moon-Rahu-Mars-Venus-Mars.

Case Studies
Operation of Dasa Lord Moon
Moon has PS and it is the SSL of 7th cusp. Thus Moon signifies
7,Moon is in the Sub and Sub-Sub of Venus who appears in relevant
cusps 5 and 1 1 . No doubt Venus appears in 6 and 1 2 al so. Thi s does
not prevent marriage but shows possible marital discord.
Operation of Bhnkti Lord Rahu
Raliu is in Rahu Star who appears as Star lord of 7.Rahu is in
Venus Sub who appears in relevant cusps 5 and 11. Since Venus
also appears in 6 and 12 Bhukti lord also shows possible marital
discord.
Operation of Antara and Sookshama Lord Mars
Mars has PS. It is placed in 7 and appears in relevant cusp 5.
Mare is in the Sub of Jupiter that appears in relevant cusp 1 1 .
Operation of Sookshama Lord Venus
Venus is in Venus Star and Rahu Sub. Venus appears in relevant
cusps 5 and 11 and Rahu appears in Primary cusp 7.
Thus we find that Dasa potential at the time of marriage
justifies the accuracy of the chart.
Birth of Male Child
The native got his first child on 19 Aug 1982 when he was
running the period of Moon-Sat- Ven-Mer-Jup.
Let us first check whether the chart promises that the native
has the procreative power or not.
SSL of the 5th cusp is Mercury. Mercury is in Ketu Star, hr
this chart, Ketu represents Sun and Venus. So Mercury will be

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
considered in Sun Star. Sun is the SSL of 2nd cusp. Mercury is in
Mercury Sub who appears both in 2 and 5. Thus we say that the
native has the power to produce the child.
A person gets the first child during the joint period of the
Planets that are linked widi 2, 5 and 11.
Dasa lord Moon has PS and is the Star lord of 2nd cusp. Thus
Moon signifies 2nd house. Moon is in the Star of Venus and Sub of
Venus who appears in 5 and 11. Thus Dasa lord is linked with 2, 5
and 11.
Bhukti lord Saturn is in Sun Star who appears in 2.Satum is
in the Sub of Venus who appears in 5 and 11.
Antara Lord Venus is in Venus Star who appears in 5 and
1 1 .Venus is in Rahu Sub. Rahu represents Sat who appears in 2.
Venus is in the SS of Jupiter who appears in 11.
Sookshama Lord Mercury is in Ketu Star and Mercury Sub.
Ketu appears in 5 and Mercury appears both in 2 and 5.
Prana Lord Jupiter is in Mercury Star. Mercury appears in 2
and 5.Jupiteris in the Sub of Venus who appears in 5 and 11.
Thus we find that Dasa potential at the time of birth of first
child justifies the accuracy of the chart.
Death of Father and Native on 30 Jan 2004
Fig CS1 is the chart of the native who on 30.01.2004 lost his
father around 15.45 hrs. The native himself died on the same date
around 18.50 hrs. Fig CS2 is the Death Time chart for Father and
Fig CS3 is the Death Time chart for the native. Father and the
native died at different locations but in the same city. Death of
father took place in Rajinder Nagar, Delhi (Long 77E11', Lat
28N39'). Death ofNative took place in Shalimar Bagh, Delhi (Long

Case Studies
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Fig CS2

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Fig CSS

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory

Case Studies
On 30.01.2004 the native was running the Dasa period of
Rahu-Mercury-Rahu-Sat- Venus covering the period of two death
events.
Death of Father:
Dasa Lord Raliu is in Ralm Star. Since Ralm represents Saturn
we may say that Raliu is as good as in Saturn Star. Now Saturn
appears in 1 and 8 from 9th (Ascendant for Father). Raliu is in the
Sub of Venus who appears in 9th cusp. Tlius Raliu as Raliu satisfies
the necessary condition for causing death of father.
Raliu is in the SS of Saturn who appears in 8th house from
9th. Thus Raliu satisfies the essential condition also.
Dasa lord Raliu also represents Saturn being placed in Saturn's
Sign. Tlius Rahu will also offer the results which Saturn has to
offer to the native.
Now Saturn is in the Star of Sim who is the SSL of 4th cusp
(i.e. 8th from 9th cusp). Saturn is in the Sub of Venus who is the
Star lord of 9th cusp. Thus Saturn involves the 8th cusp from 9 and
commits to Ascdt.
This is the necessary condition for the Dasa lord to cause for
the death of the person.
Saturn is in the SS of Rahu that represents Saturn. Tlius the
SSL of Dasa Lord gets linked to 8, 2, 1 houses from 9.
Similarly we can verify that the Bliukti. Antara, Sookshama
and Prana Lords all have the potential to cause the death of Father.
Death of Native:
Dasa Lord Raliu is in Rahu Star. Since Rahu represents Saturn
we may say that Rahu is as good as in Saturn Star. Now Saturn
appears in 8 from Ascendant. Rahu is in the Sub of Venus who

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
appears in 1st cusp. Tims Raliu as Rahu satisfies the necessary
condition for causing death of native.
Rahu is in the SS of Saturn who appears in 8th house. Tims
Rahu satisfies the essential condition also.
Dasa lord Rahu as Saturn clearly links with 1 and 8. Saturn is
in the Star of Sun who is placed in the 8th Bhava. Saturn is in the
Sub of Venus who is the Star, Sub and Sub-Sub lord of the Ascdt.
SSL of Saturn is placed in 2, 7 and 8. Thus the Dasa lord
satisfies the necessary and essential conditions to cause for the
death of the Native.
Bhukti, Antara, Sookshama and Prana lords also justify death
of the Native.
Death day and Moon’fS Star Lord:
On the Day of death Moon was transiting in Sun Star. Now in
the natal chart 4th cusp i.e. 8th from 9th cusp has Sim as the SS.
The Sub-Sub lord of the 8th cusp from Ascendant is Saturn who is
in Sun Star. Tims the necessary conditions for Moon's Star lord on
the day of death for the native and his father are satisfied.
Transit of Jupiter
A ETr Jupiter transit in Leo ruled by Sun. Sun is the SSL of 4th
cusp i.e. 8th from 9. Sun is placed in 8. Tlius Jupiter's transit
in Leo justifies the condition for transit.
B. ETr Jupiter transits in Venus Star. Venus is placed in 8.Venus
in the Natal chart is in Venus Star and Rahu Sub. Venus appears
in 9 and Rahu as Saturn appears in 2, 7 and 8 from 9.
C. ETr Jupiter transits in the Sub of Saturn who appears in 2, 7
and 8 from 9. Sat appears in 2 and 8 from Ascendant. More

Case Studies
over in the Natal chart Saturn is in Sun Star (who is placed in
8) and in the Sub of Venus who appears in Ascendant. Thus
ETr Jupiter's transit in Saturn Sub justifies the necessary
conditions.
D. ETr Jupiter transits in the SS of Jupiter who in the Natal chart
is in Mercury Star and Venus Sub. Thus Jupiter in the Natal
chart is linked with 1 and 8 both from Ascendant as well as
from 9.
We may therefore conclude that transit of Jupiter justifies the
event of Twin Deaths.
Similarly it can be verified that the Transit of Dasa Lords
and Sun and Moon justify the event of Twin Deaths.
Note: Please read Appendix A for analysis and formation
of death time charts.
Example 2: Serious road accident followed by death the
following day.
The native whose particulars are given below met with an
accident on 10th Oct 1931 and died on 11 Oct 1931.
Male
DOB: 3 Nov 1911
TOB: 11:48am
Ipswich, England
Fig CS4 is the rectified chart. The time of birth has been
fixed as 11.51.34.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Fig CS4

Case Studies
Accuracy of the Ascendant
For a correct horoscope, the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord should
satisfy the following three conditions:
1. It should establish relation with the Moon's Star lord. Here
Rahu is the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant. Rahu represents
Mars being in Aries. Mars is in the Sub of Saturn who is the
Moon Star of the Native.
2. The Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant should reveal the sex of
the native. Rahu is in the Sub-Sub of Ketu who is placed in
male sign Libra. Moreover the longitude of the Sub-Sub arc
of Rahu in Venus Sub is in the first half. Since Male sign rises
on the Ascendant, this also confinns that this is the chart of a
male.
3. The Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant should be linked with
cusps 1,7, 10 (i.e. 2, 5 and 11 from 9th cusp that represents
father).
Here Rahu is in Ketu Star and since Ketu is in Rahu Star,
Rahu will be taken as in its own Star. Rahu is the Star lord of
7th cusp, and Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant. Since Ketu
represents Venus being in Libra, Rahu is as good as in Venus
Star. Venus is the sign lord of the 10th cusp.
Promise of Short Life.
It can be checked that the Sub-Sub lords of 1, 3 and 8th cusp
are linked with Maraka/Badhaka houses.
Promise for Unnatural death.
For unnatural death, the Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant and 8th
cusp should be linked to 8 and 12. Rahu the Sub-Sub lord of
Ascendant is in Ketu star which appears as the star lord of the 8th
cusp. Since Ketu represents Venus, Rahu is as good as in Venus
Star. Venus is the Sub-Sub lord of the 12th cusp.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
The Sub-Sub lord of the 8th cusp is Mercury who has the
positional status and as such gets significations of 8 and 12. More
over Mercury is in Jupiter Star (the Sub lord of the 12th cusp) and
its own Sub.
Mercury is also the Sub lord of the 7th cusp which is both
Maraka and Badhaka.
Accident on 10.10.1931.
For any specific event, the Sookshma and Prana lords have to
be significator of the Primary cusp and supporting cusps that take
part in enacting the event.
On 10.10.1931, the native w;as running the period of MerVenus-Jup-Mar-Mercury. Accident happens on a particular day and
time when Prana lord is linked with 1, 4, 8 and 12 houses. Here
Sookshma lord Mars is linked with 4, 8 and 12 (4 Sign lord, 8 Sub
lord and 12 Sign lord. Mars has the positional status).
Prana lord Mercury also has the positional status. Mercury is
in Jupiter Star. Thus Prana lord is linked with 1, 4, 8 and 12.
The green signal for any event to happen is given by the Transit
of Sun and Moon. These planets should transit in Sign, Star, Sub
and Sub-Sub the lords of which should either
(a) Appear themselves in the Primary and supporting cusps
or

Case Studies
(b) Should be significator of Primary and supporting cusps
in the natal chart.
Since the time of accident is not known let us study the transit
of Sun and Moon in Stars at time 13.05 hrs which looked to be
time of accident.
On 10.10.1931, at 13.05 hrs Sun Transits in Mars Star who is
the Sub lord of the 8th house (accident).
Moon was transiting in Moon Star. In the natal chart Moon
transits in Saturn Star and Mercury Sub. Now Saturn is not only
posited in die 4di house but is also the Sub-Sub lord of the 4th
cusp. Mercury is the Star lord of die 12di cusp and SS of the 8th
cusp.
Deadi could not take place on 10.1 0.193 1 because Moon was
transiting in Moon Star and Moon does not appear in the 8th cusp
and as such does not become the source for death of die native.
When Moon enters in Mars Star, death takes place. Mars is die Sub
lord of the 8th cusp. It has PS and is also the Star lord of 2.
Fig CS5 is event chart for death. Time is taken as 13.05.50
hrs. Death took place at Nottingham (Long 01W10, Lat52N58').
The native was at that time running the Dasa period of Mer-YenJup-Mars-Ven. Prana lord Venus satisfies the necessary and essential
conditions to cause death of the native.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Fig CS5

Case Studies
Example 3: Case of Infant Mortality
Following is the given birth data of a Male child. The child
died on 25 March 2008 at about 20. 17 hrs.
P.O.B: Akron Children's Hospital, Ohio, USA. (Long 08 1W
Admitted to Akron City Hospital 41N05T0", 081W3T40"
1. Rectification of the Chart:
The Astrological birth time is fixed as 00.32.16. Fig CS 6
represents the rectified Chart.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Fig CS 6

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory

Case Studies
2. Accuracy of Chart:
• Mercury, Moon, Jupiter and Rahu co rules the Ascendant.
All these Planets are linked with 1 or 7 or 10.
• Since this is the horoscope of a male it would generally
be considered that the SS arc of the Ascendant which
rises in female Sign should be set in the second half.
However in this chart SSL of Ascendant is in the Star,
Sub, and SS the lords of which are all placed in male
signs: In such cases we can ignore the concept of setting
the arc in first or second half. Thus the SS arc in this
horoscope is in the first half.
• SS lord of the Ascendant is Rahu who is in Mars Star
which is tire Moon's Star lord.
• Thus the fixed Ascendant satisfies the necessary
conditions.
3. Promise of Short Life:
The span of life is detenuined from the significations of the
Sub-Sub lords of the 1, 3 and 8 houses. For very short or
immediate death, the following conditions should exist in the
chart.
1. The Sub-Sub lords of 1, 3 and 8 houses should be fruitful
significators of Maraka, Badhaka and or 8th house
2. If a child is bom in a Dasa, Bhukti, Antara, the lords of
which are the joint co-rulers of the Ascendant or the 8th
cusp and are simultaneously linked through their Star
lords to Maraka and Badhakasthna and or 8th house,
their joint period is very critical for the life of the native.
The Sub lords of the Dasa periods should support their
Star lord significations and SS lords should appear in
Maraka or Badhaka or 8th cusp.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
In this chart SSL of 1 and 3 is Ralm who is in Mars
Star and Sun Sub. Both Mars and Sun appears in 8.
Rahu has PS and appears in 1 and 2.
Tims Rahu as Rahu promises very short life.
Rahu in this chart represents Saturn as Sign Lord
and Mars as Star lord.
Saturn has PS and appears in 2 and 7 (both Maraka
and Badhaka). Saturn is in the Sub of Venus that
appears in 2. Saturn is in the SS of Rahu who
appears in 2, 7 and 8 (including Sat and Mars).
• Mars is in Mars Star who appears in 8.Mars is in
the Sub of Moon w;ho appears in l.Thus Mars is
linked with 1 and 8.1t indicates life is very short.
Conclusion: Tire SSL of 1 and 3 promises very short life.
• SSL of 8th cusp is Sun who has PS and as such signifies
8th and 1 2th house.
• Sun is in Sub of Sun and SS of Venus who appears in 2
and 12.
• 8th SS also does not promise much life to the native.
However since SS of the 8th cusp is not linked with 7th
cusp it does allow the native to live for some period.
Significations of Dasa Period Lords at Birth:
• Tire native was bom in the Dasa period of Mars -JupJup-Jup-Ven.

Case Studies
• We thus find that Mars appears in 8 and Jupiter appears
in Ascendant. But the Prana lord Venus does not appear
either in Ascendant or in 8th cusp.
• The native thus could not die immediately after birth
though Mars and Jupiter has the potential to cause death.
• The next question we need to answer is why Bhukti lord
Jupiter did not cause death of the native.
• Jupiter has PS and as such signify 1, 7. Jupiter is in Ketu
Star that appears in 8.Thus we find that Jupiter signify
all relevant houses that can inflict death on the native
except the second house.
• A Planet can cause an event to happen in its own
subsequent period only if it signifies or is linked with
all the houses that take part in enacting the event.
• Thus Jupiter in its own Antara could not cause death of
the native because it is not linked with second house.
The Dasa and Bhukti lord promises short life but not
immediate death.
5. Death of Native:
The native died on 25 Mach 2008 at about 20. 1 7 hrs when he
was running the period Mars-Jup-Sat-Rahu-Mercury. Fig CS7
is the death time chart.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Fig CS7

Case Studies
Operation of Dasa Period Lords:
• Dasa Lord Mars has PS and appears in 8. Mars is in the Sub
of Moon that appears in 1. Mars is in SS of Rahu that represents
Mars and Saturn. Raliu, Mars and Saturn appear in 2, 7 and 8.
• Thus the Dasa Lord satisfies the necessary and essential
conditions to cause death of the native.
• Bhukti lord Jupiter has PS and appears in 1 and 7 (both Maraka
and Badhaka) and 12. Jupiter is in Ketu Star that appears in
8.Jupiter is in the Sub of Jupiter that appears in 1, 7 and 12.
Jupiter is in the SS of Raliu. We have discussed above that it
appears in 2, 7 and 8.
• Thus Jupiter Bhukti lord has the capability to cause death of
the native.
• Antara Lord is Saturn and Sookshama Lord is Rahu who
represents Satum.We may Say that Antara and Sookshama
Lord is Saturn who has PS and appears in 2 and 7 (both Maraka
and Badhaka). Saturn is in the Sub of Venus and SS of Raliu
who appear in relevant cusps Maraka and Badhaka houses.
Rahu as Mars is linked with 1 and 8 as discussed above.
• Thus Antara and Sookshama Lord has the capability to cause
death of the native.
• Death took place in the Prana of Mercury who has PS and
appears in 1, 7 and 8. Mercury is in the Star of Venus who
appears in 2. Thus Mercury signifies 2, 1 and 8.
• Mercuiy is in the Sub of Mercury and SS of Venus. Both these
Planets appear in relevant cusps.
Conclusion: Dasa period at the time of death completely
justifies the Event.
We can see from the Fig CS7 that transit of Dasa period
Lords, Sun and Moon supports the event.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
On the day of death Moon transits in Jupiter Star. In the
Natal chart SSL of 8th cusp is Sun. Jupiter in the Natal chart is
in Ketu Star.Since Ketu Represents Sun in the Natal chart we
may say that in the natal chart Jupiter is in Sun Star. Thus the
Star lord of Moon agrees with the SSL of the 8th cusp.
Example 4: Method of Analyzing Multiple Option Blind
Charts
Step 1: Fix the chart for correct Ascdt and other cuspal
positions from the given time line.
Step 2: Decide the Primary and supporting cusps that should
operate for each of the given option.
Step 3: Note the Dasa period running on the day of happening
of the event.
Step 4: Draw the Transit chart for the day of happening of the
event. The Transit chart should be cast for the place w'here
the event has happened. It is possible only if the data given in
Blind chart has provided this information.
Step 5: Start the process of elimination of those events which
don't correspond with the Dasa and Transit potential.
Sometimes certain events can be eliminated if the chart does
not promise those events."
Let us apply the above concepts for the Analysis of a Blind
Chart.
Following Data was provided for the Blind Chart.
Female
TOB: 5:35pm
TZ: AEDT -11.00
Brisbane Mater Hospital

Case Studies
Asc 28 Can 40' Khullar, 28 Can 39' Lahiri, 22 Leo 23 Trop.
The exercise is to find out what happened on 21st Jun 2006.
Was it?
1. Had an operation on her left eye for a lazy muscle.
2. Notified by school of acceptance to join Education Department
/ Industry apprenticeship as a ladies hairdresser, to commence
in Feb 2007. (This is a scheme where students in their final
year can have part of their schooling as an apprentice to a
trade. It is paid for by the State Government and saves over
$10, 000 compared to a privately paid apprenticeship.
3 . Took an overdose of her mother's sleeping tablets in an attempt
to commit suicide after fight with boy friend. Recovered in
hospital.
4. Left Australia on first overseas trip.
Genetical Connections.
4 Jan 1957 father bom 'just after midnight' Labrador, Australia
8 Feb 1962 mother bom Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 09.13pm
4 Jan 1986 elder sister bom Brisbane, Australia 2:59pm
21 Jan 1988 elder brother bom Brisbane, Australia 10.00 am
by cesarean section.
Analysis of Chart
Step 1: The rectified chart as per the given data is shown in
Fig CS 8.The rectified time of birth is fixed as 17.34.40 hrs.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Fig CS 8

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory

Case Studies
Step 2 : For options 1 (surgery on eye) and 3 (attempt to commit
suicide) the Primary cusp is 8 and supporting cusps arel, 2
and 7. For option 2 the Primary cusp is 3 (infonnation) and
also 6 (service) and supporting cusps are 9 and 1 1 . For option
4 the Primary cusp is 3 and supporting cusps are 9 and 12.But
do remember that Journey abroad means leaving the current
place of residence and as such the Primary cusp 3 could be
interpreted as the negation of the 4th cusp.
Step 3: The native was running the Dasa period ofRahu-SatMars-Sat-Moon/Mars. In this chart Raliu represents Saturn.
Practically we can say that the native was ruiming the Dasa
period of Sat-Sat-Mars-Sat-Moon/Mars.
Mars the Antara lord will only be allowed to offer the result
of those houses which the Dasa and Bhukti lord Saturn permits
as per its significations. The Sookshama lord Sat will then
allow only those events which synchronizes with the Antara
lord Mars. More over the Sookshama and Prana lord always
provide the result of those events for which they are linked
with the Primary and supporting cusps provided the Transit
of Dasa Period lords and Sun and Moon agrees.
Step 4: Check the transit positions of Planets as on 21.06.2006.
Step 5 Process of Elimination: If we look at the Transit chart
we notice that Sun transits in Mars Star. As per the transit
philosophy the native will enjoy the results of Dasa period
lords of those houses which have been excited by Mars as per
its cuspal positions in the natal chart or those cuspal positions
for which Mars is the significator in the natal chart. In the
natal chart Mars neither appears in the 8th cusp nor is it
significator of the 8th house in the natal chart. Tlius options 1
and 3 get eliminated.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
Option 2 gets eliminated because Mars Involves 6th cusp but
commits to 5 i.e. negation of service.
So we are left with option 4.Let us now analyse whether the
Dasa potential and transit allow this event or not. Saturn is the
Dasa lord, Bhukti Lord and Sookshama lord. It is in Sun Star who
is the Sub as well as the Sub-Sub lord of the 4th cusp. Saturn is in
the Sub of Venus which appears in 3 (negation of 4 i.e leaving the
current residence) , 12 (new environment say abroad) , and 11
fulfillment of action. Saturn is the Sub-Sub lord of 9th cusp (long
Joumey).Mars is die lord of the 9th cusp.This means the native
will leave the house for long journey.
Mars die Antra lord also involves die 4th cusp being in its
own star. It is in the Sub of Rahu that represents Saturn and Sun.
Rahu is the star lord of 3. Thus Mars points out that die native can
leave the house. Mars also signifies die houses 9 and 1 1 .Mars is in
the SS of Venus who is the Sub lord of 12.The end result of leaving
the house is visit abroad.
On the day of visit Moon transits in Ketu Star who is die Star
lord of 9 and SS lord of 12.1ndie natal chart Ketu represents Jupiter
who is the significator of the event of leaving the house. Jupiter is
in Sat Star (4th star lord) and Sub of Venus the Sign and SS lord of
On 21.06.2006 Moon is the Prana lord up to 16.15 hrs. The
native should have left the home country only after 16.15 i.e. in the
Prana of Mars.
Let us apply the above concepts for the Analysis of another
Blind Chart
Following data was given for this Blind Chart
Female

Case Studies
Atlanta, Crawford Long Hospital, GA, USA
Asc 04Can25'10" Khullar ayanamsa, 27Can49' Tropical.
Genetical connections:
25 Dec 1933 Father bom
13 Aug 1934 Mother bom
18 Apr 1956 Brother bom
1 Jan 1965 Sister bom
28 Nov 2004 Twins bom 1:21am and 1:22am California.
18 Jur 2007 Sou Bom
Timeline
25 Jun 1993 Married 1st time (husband bom 11 Jan 1956)
22 Mar 1995 Divorced
4 Jul 2002 Married 2nd time (husband bom 31 Jan 1969)
The aim is to find out what happened on 3 December 1977:
1. Won medal in junior athletics championships.
2. Broke her right ami when pushed in playground incident
3. Abducted and hidden by neighbour. Found unharmed
on 3rd day.
4. Father died.
Analysis of Chart
Step 1: The rectified chart as per the given data is shown in
Fig CS 9. The rectified time of birth is fixed as 0.16.19 hrs.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION
Fig CS 9

Case Studies
RASH! CHART

Case Studies
Step 2: Primary and supporting cusps for options are listed
below:
a. Winning Medal in Sports: 1, 6, 10 and 11. Sports is
signified by 5th house. Thus 5th SSL should be linked
b. Broke her right ann. 1,3,8 and 12. Third cusp SSL should
be linked through its Star lord with 8 to indicate that the
native can have injury on right ann.
c. Abduction: Abduction means the criminal act of
capturing and carrying away by force. This almost
amounts to virtual imprisonment. The abducted person
leaves his/her residence (3rd house or involving 4th and
committing to 3rd), Mental agony (8th) and placing the
native in a new enviromnent (12th).
So, the houses that take part in abduction are 3, 8 and
12. If at the time of abduction the native runs the
Sookshama and Prana lord who are linked with these
houses then we can say that the person has been abducted.
Prana Lord May involve 3 and commit to 8 and 12 or it
may involve 4 and commit to 3, 8, and 12 or it may
involve 12 and commit to 3 and 12.
d. Death of Father 1, 8, 2, 7 and Badhaka houses with
respect to 9th house.
Step 3: On 3 Dec 1977 the native was running the Dasa period
of Ven-Sun-Sat-Mer-Mer.
Step 4 : Sookshama and Prana Lord does not support the events
of abduction, winning medal and injury due to supports
activity.
Step 5: Dasa period lords satisfies the necessary and essential
conditions to cause death of father. Transit supports the event.

Answers of Practice Exercises
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 1
Table 1:
Planets Moon, Jupiter, and Venus have Positional Status. These
Planets do not appear in any row in second column. In other words
there is no Planet who is in the Star of these Planets.
Table 2:
Planet Moon has the positional status because Moon is in Ketu
Star and Ketu is in Moon Star.Planet Mars has positional status
because the Planet is in its own Star. Remember that even if any
other Planet is also in Mars Star even then the Planet enjoys
positional status.
Planet Jupiter has no positional status. If you scan the second
column you will notice that Jupiter appears in the row of the Planet
Venus. In other words the Planet Venus is in the Star of Jupiter.
Thus the Planet Jupiter loses its positional status.
Planet Ketu has positional status because Ketu is in Moon
Star and Moon is in Ketu Star. No doubt there are other Planets
who are in Ketu Star yet the Planet will not lose its positional status.
This has been stated above.
Table 3:
Planets Rahu and Ketu have positional status because there is
exchange of Stars. Planet Sun has positional status because Sun
does not appear in any row in second column. In other words there
is no Planet in the Star of Sun.

Answers of Practice Exercises
Planet Saturn has no positional status because Saturn appears
in the second column against the Mars row. In other words Mars is
in the Star of Saturn and thus die Planet loses its positional status.
Answer Practice Exercise: Lesson 2
In this chart only Planets Mercury and Moon have no
positional status. All odier Planets have positional status.
Planet Sim occupies the 8th house and appears in cuspal
positions 7 and 1 1 .Thus the Planet will offer the results of houses
Planet Mars is placed in the 6th house and appears in cuspal
positions 2, 9 and 12. Mars will offer die results of houses 2, 6, 9
and 12.
Planet Venus occupies the lOdi house and appears in cuspal
positions 2, 3, 5, and 8.Venus will thus offer the results of houses
Planet Jupiter is placed in 1 ldi house and appears in cuspal
positions 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10, and ll.Thus Planet Jupiter will offerthe
Planet Saturn occupies the 6di house and appears in cuspal
positions 1, 2, 9, Hand 12.Planet Saturn will therefore olfer the
results of houses 1, 2, 6, 9, 11 and 12.
About Rahu and Ketu we will discuss afterwards.
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 3
Tr. Planet Jupiter: As we discussed in Lesson 2, the Planet
Jupiter has PS and will offer the results ofhouses 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10
and 11 as per its positional status. Let us now determine the stellar
status of Jupiter. Jupiter is in Sun Star which is placed in 8th Bhava
and appears in cuspal positions 7 and 1 1 .Thus, as per its stellar
status Jupiter will offer the results ofhouses 7, 8 and 11. Merging

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
the PS and Stellar status, we may say that Jupiter will offer the
Planet Mercury has no PS in this chart and therefore can not
offer the result of those houses where it appears in cuspal
positions. It is also not able to offer the result of the house it
occupies. It will offer tire result as per its stellar status only. Mercury
is in Jupiter Star which is placed in llthhouse and appears in cuspal
positions 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, lOand 11. Mercury will thus ofiferthe result
Planet Moon also has no PS in this chart. It will therefore
offer result as per its stellar status alone. Moon is in Sun Star which
occupies 8th house. Sun appears in cuspal positions 7 and 1 1. Moon
will thus ofiferthe results ofhouses 7, 8 and 11.
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 4
If we scan the second column of the Planetary Table in Fig 5
we notice that Rahu does not appear in any of the rows. We therefore
conclude that Rahu has PS in this chart.
Rahu as Rahu will therefore offer results both as per its PS
and stellar status.
PS Result: Tr. Rahu is placed in 6th house and appears in
cuspal positions 2, 3, 4 and 8. Therefore, Rahu will ofiferthe results
Stellar Status Result: Tr. Rahu is in the Star of Jupiter which
is placed in 2nd house. Jupiter also appears in cuspal positions 4,
6, 7, 10 and 12. Therefore, Rahu will ofiferthe result of the 2, 4, 6,
7, 10 and 12 houses.
In summation, Tr. Rahu will offer the result of the 2, 3, 4, 6, 7,
8, 10 and 12 houses.
Planets Rahu Represents: In this chart Tr. Rahu is in Saturn
Sign and Jupiter Star. Thus Tr.Rahu will also ofiferthe result which

Answers of Practice Exercises
Tr.Planets Saturn and Jupiter have to offer as per their PS and Stellar
Status.
Rahu as Tr. Jupiter: Tr. Jupiter has no PS. It is in Saturn
Star. Saturn is placed in 11th house. It appears in cuspal positions
5, 6, 9, 10, 11 and 12. Tr.Rahu as Tr. Jupiter will offer the result of
Rahu as Tr. Saturn: Tr. Saturn has no PS in this chart. Tr.
Saturn is in Ketu Star who is placed in 12th house. Ketu appears in
cuspal positions 2 and 9.Thus Rahu as Saturn will offer the result
ofhouses 2, 9 and 12.
Note: We have yet not discussed the behaviour of a Planet
when it is in Rahu or Ketu Star. We will do it in next lesson. Till
then this may be taken as the possible answer.
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 5
Please refer to Figure 6:1. Here we have the complication of
having Rahu in its own Star. So we must realise that BOTH Tr
Rahu and Star Lord Rahu (STL) represents the Sign Lord (RL), as
well as itself.
As Tr Rahu represents Mercury we have to perform two
assessments one as Tr Rahu itself and another as the planet it
represents i.e. Tr Mercury.
1. TRANSIT RAHU AS ITSELF.
(a) Tr Rahu has positional Status (PS) as it is in its own Star
which appears in 1,5,7 and 1 1 cusps and is placed in 11.
(b) Like Tr Rahu, STL Rahu also represents Mercury so Tr
Rahu can be considered as being in Mercury Star.
(c) Tr.Mercury has PS because it is in the Star of Ketu which
represents Jupiter, and Jupiter is in the Star of Mercury
- so there is an exchange of star lords. Mercury is situated
in the 5th house and gives the results of 1, 3, 5, 9 and 12.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
2. TRANSIT RAHU AS MERCURY
(a) Tr. Mercury is in Ketu Star which represents Jupiter as
sign lord and Venus as Star Lord.
(b) Tr Mercury in Ketu Star: Ketu is placed in 5 and gives
the results of 6 and 12 cusps.
(c) Tr Mercury in Jupiter Star. Jupiter is placed in 8 and
gives the results of 2, 4, 6, 8, 9 and 12 cusps.
(d) Tr Mercury in Venus Star. Venus is placed in 7 and
appears in all cuspal positions except 8 and 12.
FINAL RESULT
From the foregoing it will be noted that Rahu in this chart is
capable of providing results for all twelve houses.
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 6
Questionl: The birth of first child takes place in the joint
period of Planets who are significators of 2, 5 and 11. There are
certain conditions that need be satisfied for Planets to appear in a
proper sequence. This will be discussed in future lesson.
The objective of this lesson is to allow you to make a decision
whether a Planet can take part in enacting an event or not.
A Planet is considered capable to take part if it signifies at
least one of the houses that take part in enacting the event.
Signification of a Planet for a house means that its Star lord
appears in that house. If a Planet has PS it may be taken in its own
Star. Thus first condition for a Planet to take part in an event is that
it should signify at least one of the houses.
For the Planet to be a fruitful significator of a particular event
the Sub lord should appear in favourable position from the house
signified by the Planet.

Answers of Practice Exercises
Let me explain through example of event of marriage. Here
we take 7th house as the Primary house and houses 5 and 11 are
supporting houses. If a Planet has to take part in enacting marriage
it should signify 5 or 7 or 11. If a Planet only commits to 7 through
Sub Lord but does not signify 5 or 7 or 11 (either by PS or
through its Star Lord) it can not take part in enacting the event.
In the chart of Fig 7 Bhukti lord Sun is in Sun Star. It is placed in
second Bhava and also appears in 5 as SSL lord of 5th cusp. Sun is
thus capable of providing results of relevant houses for the event
of child birth.
Sun is in the Sub of Venus who is the SSL of 2nd cusp. Venus
also appears in 1, 3, 7, 8, 9 and 12. Thus we notice that the Sub
lord of Sun (Venus) supports as well as negates the significations
of 2 and 5. i.e. supports by being in 2, and 3 (11th to 5) , and
negates by 1 being 12th to 2, and 8th (7th to 2nd and 4th to 5th).
There are other connections here, but these examples demonstrate
how to assess the effect of the Sub Lord.
This means Tr. Sun is capable of giving favourable as well as
unfavourable results of houses 2 and 5.
Antara Lord Saturn has PS. It is the Star lord of 5th cusp.
Therefore we say Saturn is capable of providing a result for the
relevant 5th house.
Sat is in the Sub of Sun who has PS and is placed in second
Bhava which is another relevant cusp for child birth. Saturn is thus
fully competent to cause the birth of the first child.
Sookshama lord Moon has PS and is Sub Lord of the 2nd
cusp and Star lord of 11. Moon therefore has the capability of
providing second and 11 house results.
Moon is in the Sub of Jupiter who appears in 2, 5 and 1 1 .These
houses (2, 5 and 11) are relevant cusps for the event of first child
birth.
Moon is thus fully competent to cause the birth of first child.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
Conclusion: The native could get first child during the period
of Sun-Sat and Moon.
Question2: Financial Status of a person improves during the
period of a Planet that signifies 2, 6 and 1 1 .
In this chart Mars has no PS. It is in Venus Star who appears
as SSL of second cusp. We say Mars can provide results of the
second house.
Mars is in Mars Sub who appears in 1, 6 and 8. Commitment
of Mars to cusps 1 and 8 is not good for second house because 1 is
12th to 2, and 8 is 7th to 2. Houses 1 and 8 are not relevant houses.
However Mars is also committed to 6di cusp which is very
favourable for the enhancement of financial status.
Conclusion: Mars will give mixed results for financial
matters. This is because Mars through its Sub lord is committed to
6 (favourable position with respect to 2) and 1 and 8 (unfavourable
positions with respect to 2). Overall there is unlikely to be any
significant improvement.'
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 7
1. Increase in Financial Status is shown by considering houses
Increase is attained during the period of a Planet
A: that signifies second house (either by PS or by Stellar
Status) and the Sub lord of the Planet appears in cuspal
positions favourable to second house and also to the
Ascendant.
B: that signifies 6 or 11 (either by PS or by Stellar Status)
and Sub lord appears in second cusp. If the Sub lord of
the Planet occupies second house then it should have
PS.

Answers of Practice Exercises
In the light of above let us try to analyse the Antara lords in
A, B and C in practice exercise.
2. Check Signification of Antara Lord Saturn.
A: Saturn with PS:
(1) is resident in 8th Bhava.
(2) appears in cuspal positions 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, and 12
(3) Saturn as per its PS does not signify 2, but it does
signify 6.
(4) Therefore Saturn in its period does have the
potential to increase financial status of the native
subject to confirmation from its Sub and Sub Sub
Lords.
B: Saturn as per its Stellar Status.
(1) Saturn is in MARS Star
(2) who is resident in the 6th Bhava
(3) and appears in 1,6, and 8.
(4) Here again Saturn signifies the relevant 6th Bhava
and qualifies to have the potential to increase the
financial status of the native subject to confinnation
by Sub lord.
C: Check Qualification by Sub Lord.
(1) Saturn is in the Sub of Sun who is resident in the
2nd Bhava and has PS
(2) And appears in 3, 5, 7, and 10th cusps.
(3) 3, 7 and 10 are all favourable positions to the 6th
Bhava
(4) This means that Saturn has the capability to bring
changes in Significations of the 6th Cusp i.e. loss

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
to others or getting a loan (Note: here, Sun
favourably qualifies the Signification of Saturn
shown above.
(6) The commitment of Sub Lord Sun to the 2nd offers
Saturn the capability of enhancing financial status
subject to confinnation by its Sub- Sub Lord.
D: Check Confirmation or Rejection by Sub-Sub Lord
(SSL).
(1) Saturn is in the Sub- Sub ofVENUS:
(a) who is resident in the 3rd Bhava
(2) The 2nd is the Prime Bhava for financial increase.
So SSL Venus does offer confinnation of increase
in financial status, but there are also potential
problems due to Venus' position in other cusps.
CONCLUSION:
The Antara Lord Saturn is conducive to the native
receiving some financial increase during its Period; but it is
likely there will also be problems because its Sub Sub lord Venus
3. Check Signification of Antara Lord Ketu.
Ketu has no PS. We have to consider its results as per its
Stellar Status
Ketu represents Mercury as Sign Lord and Mars as Star Lord.
A: Ketu as Ketu: Ketu is in Mars Star who is placed in 6.
Mars appears in 1, 6 and 8.
(1) Ketu is in the Sub of Sim. Sun has PS and is placed
in 2 and appears in 3, 5, 7 and 10 Cusps.

Answers of Practice Exercises
(2) With confirmation from Sun related to the 2nd we
see that Ketu has the potential to create
improvement in the native's financial status.
Note: Here Ketu as Ketu signifies houses 1, 6 and 8. Its
Sub lord Sun appears in 2, 3, 5, 7 and 10. In this exercise we are
to focus on the aspect of financial status of the native. A Planet
can contribute to increase in financial status of the native if it
signifies 6 (loss to other) and commits to the Primary cusp 2
money matters).
Now the same Planet may also be committing to other cusps
than 2. Those positions of Sub lord are to be used to interpret other
results of 6th house.
For example in this case Ketu as Ketu involves 6th house and
commits to 10th cusp through its Sub lord Sun. This would mean
that Ketu is also capable to provide Job to the native.
Sub lord only qualifies Star lord position. Sub lord does
not qualify its other positions.
B: Ketu as Mercury
(1) Mercury has PS because it does not appear as Star
Lord for another Planet.
(2) is resident of the 3rd Bhava and
(4) 1 1 is a relevant house, but Mercury is in the SUB
OF SATURN which does not appear in 2
Therefore Mercury as per its PS cannot enhance
Financial Status. Let us see what Mercury has to offer
as per its Stellar Status.
(5) a: Mercury is in Moon Star.
b: Moon is placed in 2 and appears in 2, 7, 9 and

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
c: Mercury is in the Sub of Saturn who is placed
in 8 and has PS and appears in 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
d: Positions 3, 4, 6 and 7 are favourable with
respect to 2 and others are unfavourable
positions with respect to 2.
Thus Mercury as per its Stellar Status has the
capability to enhance the native's financial status
but also has the capability to cause depletion of
financial status.
C: Ketu as Mars
(1) Mars has no PS. Therefore does not signify any
house by PS.
(2) Mars is in VENUS STAR, who is resident of 3
So Ketu via Mars does Signify 2, relevant house
for Financial Status
(4) Mars is in the Sub of MARS
a: who is resident in the 6th Bhava
b: and appears in 1, 6, and 8.
c: Sub lord's positions in 1 and 8 are not good
for 2nd house Significations being 12th and
8th to 2.
d: Appearance of Sub lord in 6 favours second
house significations.
However, we may say that Mars is not capable
of bringing any significant improvement in the
financial status of the native

Answers of Practice Exercises
CONCLUSION
Ketu Antara can at best show moderate improvement in
the financial status of the native.
4 Check Signification of Antara Lord Moon.
A: Moon with PS
(1) Moon has PS because Moon is in Venus Star and
Venus is in Moon Star.
(2) is resident in 2nd Bhava
B: Moon as per its Stellar Status
(1) is in Venus Star
(2) who is resident in the 3nd Bhava
C: Moon is in the Sub of Jupiter
(1) Jupiter is placed in 3 with PS and
Sub lord's appearance in 2, 3, 6 and 11 supports the
significations of 2 but appearance in 5 is adverse for 2.
D: Moon as financial indicator.
Moon signifies 2 both as per PS and as per Stellar Status.
Sub lord of Moon supports quite strongly the
significations of 2 but also indicates adverse results for
How ever the end result has to be confirmed by the SubSub lord of Moon.
Moon is in the SS of Venus that appears both in
favourable as well as unfavourable houses with respect

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
CONCLUSION
The Antara Lord Moon in its Period is likely to offer scope
for increase in financial prospects but may also cause some financial
losses.
None of the Antara Lords offer very good opportunities
for smooth increase in financial gain. This is real life situation.
We will be able to appreciate it when we discuss in Lesson 10
the operation of Vimsottari Dasa System.
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 8
1. Question 1: Promise of Child Birth.
A: Study of Ascendant.
(1) SSL of Ascendant is Sun who is in Venus Star.
(3) Sun is in the Sub of Jupiter who has PS.
(4) Jupiter is placed in 8 and appears in cusps 4, 5, 7,
(5) Thus we notice that Ascendant SSL involves
second house and commits to 5 and 11. This
promises that native can get a child.
* We will use this study for answering other questions
also.
B: Study of 5th Cusp.
(1) SSL of 5th cusp is Jupiter who has PS.
(2) Jupiter is in the Sub of Mars who appears in relevant
cuspal positions 2 and 1 1 .
(3) More over Jupiter is in Ketu Star. Ketu represents
Moon as Sign lord. Thus Jupiter is as good as in
Moon Star. Moon appears in 2 and 5.

Answers of Practice Exercises
(4) Thus 5th cusp promises birth of child to the
native.
2. Question 2: Gain through Property.
A: We notice that SSL of Ascendant involves second house
(money) and
B: commits to 4th cusp (property), 11 (desire fulfillment),
and 12 (investment).
Study of 4th cusp: One gains through the significations of
4th house (property is one of the significations of 4th house)
when the SSL of 4th cusp is linked with second house directly
(through Star lord) or indirectly (Star in 11 and Sub in 2).
(1) In this chart SSL of 4th cusp is Mercury who has
PS. Mercury appears in 3, 4 and 5.
(2) Mercury is in Ketu Star who appears in 1, 4 and 9.
Since Ketu represents Moon as Sign lord and Jupiter
as Star lord, Mercury will be considered to be in
the Star of Moon as well as Jupiter.
(3) Mercury is in Moon Star, and Sat Sub. Moon
appears in 2, and Saturn appears in 1, 8, 11 and 12.
Saturn is placed in 2, but has no PS. Mercury thus
involves second cusp and commits to 11. This
means gain through property.
(4) Mercury involving second cusp and committing to
8 and 12 means expenditure, investment or loss in
property. Thus we may say that the native can
gain in property and also invest in property.
(5) The end result is indicated by the SSL of
Mercury. Mercury is in the SS of Sun who
appears in 3, 6 and 10. All these cuspal positions
are favourable for second house. Thus the native
will in the end gain in property.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
Mercury in Jupiter Star, and Saturn Sub: Jupiter
appears in 11 but Saturn does not appear in 2. Thus
we say Mercury is not linked to second house and
as such is not relevant for defining the promise of
gain in property.
3. Question 3. Proneness to Sickness.
A: Refer Pages 45, 135 and 136 of my book and read under
die title status of health.
(1) In this chart Ascendant SSL is linked with 6 and 12
through its Star lord.
(2) We say that the native is prone to sickness.
4. Question 4. Promise of Earning by way of Service.
A: You may read Pages 182 and 247 of my book.
(1) In this chart SSL of the 6th cusp is Venus who is in
Saturn Star. Saturn is placed in 2 (house of earning).
(2) We therefore say that native is promised earning
by way of service.
Answers Practice Exercise Lesson 9
1: Question 1: Study of SSL of Ascendant:
A: SSL of Ascendant is Moon who has PS and is in Moon
Star and Mercury Sub.
(1) Moon signifies 1 as it has PS and
(2) Mercury appears in 1, 2, 1 (Maraka and Badhaka)
and 8.
(3) Thus SSL of Ascendant satisfies the necessary
condition via Mercury Sub.

Answers of Practice Exercises
This indicates that the native may commit suicide.
(4) Moon is in the Sub Sub of Ketu.
a. Ketu has PS because Ketu is in Sat Star and
Sat is in Ketu Star.
b. Ketu is placed in 7 which is both Maraka and
Badhaka.
c. Ketu represents Jupiter and Saturn. Both
Jupiter and Sat appear in 2, 7 and 8.
Thus SSL of Ascendant meets the essential
condition.
Conclusion of promise of SSL of Ascendant: The
native will commit suicide because SSL of Ascendant
meets both the necessary as well as essential condition.
B: Study of SSL of 8th Cusp:
(1) SSL of 8th cusp is Jupiter who has PS as it is in Jupiter
Star. Jupiter is in Sun Sub.
(2) Jupiter appears in 2, 7 and 8. Sun appears in 1.
(3) Thus SSL of 8th cusp satisfies the necessary condition
via Sun Sub.
This indicates that the native may commit suicide.
(4) Jupiter is in the Sub- Sub of Mercury who appears in 1,
Thus 8th SSL meets the essential condition also via Mercury
as Sub- Sub
Conclusion: Both SSL of Ascendant and SSL of 8th cusp
meet the necessary as well as the essential condition and
as such the native will commit suicide.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
2. Question 2:
A: Study of SSL of Ascendant.
(1) SSL of Ascendant is Moon who has PS as it is in
Moon Star and Mercury Sub.
(2) Moon appears in 5 and 1 1 and Mercury appears in
(3) Moon is in the Sub Sub of Ketu that represents
Saturn as Star lord (Ketu is resident of 7).
a: Saturn has PS and appears in 5, 7 and 11
(relevant cusps only indicated) and is in its
own Sub.
b: SSL of Ascendant meets the necessary as well
as the essential conditions for love marriage.
Conclusion: The SSL of the Ascendant promises love
marriage for the native.
B: Study of SSL of 7th Cusp:
(1) SSL of 7th cusp is Venus who has PS. Venus is
placed in 11th Bhava and is the SSL of 7th cusp.
Venus thus becomes significator of 7 and 11 as per
its PS.
(2) Venus is in Ketu Star who represents Saturn. Saturn
is in 5, 7, and 11, and is in its own Sub.
(3) Venus is in the Sub Sub of Saturn who appears in
Conclusion: The SSL of the 7th cusp also promises love
marriage
C: Study of SSL of 5th Cusp:
(1) SSL of 5th Cusp is Mercury who is in Saturn Star
and Rahu Sub.

Answers of Practice Exercises
(2) Saturn appears in 5, 7 and 1 1 .
(3) Raliu represents Mercury who appears in 5 & 7 and
Moon who appear in 5, and 11.
(4) Mercury is in the Sub Sub of Raliu which as we see
confinns the relevant houses.
Conclusion: The SSL of the 5th cusp also promises
love marriage.
In summation we can see that all the relevant cusps
promise love marriage and native will have love
marriage.
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 10
1. Question 1:
A: Death of Mother
(1) Death of mother happens in a Dasa
a: The lord of which is simultaneously linked
with 4 (mother) and 11 (8th from 4).
b: Or if the Dasa lord appears as the lord of Sign
or Star or Sub or Sub-Sub of the 11th cusp,
and involves the 4th cusp through its Star lord
or having PS .
c: and commits to Maraka /Badhaka houses.
d: SSL of Dasa lord should be in 2 or 7 or
Badhaka or 8 from 4.
e: If the Dasa lord is one of the ruling planets in
Ascendant or 8th cusp and is significator of
Maraka and Badhaka houses then this Dasa
lord can also cause the death of the relevant
relative. Sub lord and SSL of Dasa Lord have

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
to be in 8 or Maraka and Badhaka. (Reference:
Page 50 of the Book). Or if tire Dasa Lord
involves the Ascendant and commits to
Maraka and Badhaka it can cause death.
(2) Bhukti lord
a: should be significator of 8 or linked with
Maraka and Badhaka.
b: SSL of Bhukti lord should appear in 2 or 7 or
Badhaka or 8 from 4.
(3) Antara lord
a: should be significator of Maraka and Badhaka
b: or linked with Maraka and Badhaka or linked
with 1 and 8 from 4.
(4) Sookshama and Prana lord - like Dasa lord
a: is linked with 1 and 8 from 4
b: Or if their lords appear as the lord of Sign or
Star or Sub or Sub-Sub of the 1 1th cusp i.e.
8th from 4 and involves the 4th cusp through
its Star lord
c: and commits to Maraka /Badhaka houses
Note: SSLs of Dasa period lords should appear in
Death inflicting houses Maraka or Badhaka or 8).
SSLs may also be appearing in other cuspal
positions. We will talk about the role of SSL when
it appears in both desired as well as undesired
houses in a separate Lesson.
On 10.06.1994 native was running the Dasa period
of Venus-Jupiter-Venus-Satum-Moon. The Prana
lord Moon lasts only up to 19.00.58 hrs.

Answers of Practice Exercises
B: Operation of Dasa Lord Venus
(1) In this chart Venus has PS. Venus is placed in 5 and
is SSL of 10.
(2) 5th house is second to 4, and 10 is 7th to 4. Since
4th cusp rises in dual sign Virgo, 10th house which
is 7th from 4 is both Maraka as well as Badhaka.
(3) Tlius we find that as per its PS Venus signifies 2
and 7 from 4. (Only relevant cusps shown)
(4) Venus is in Jupiter Star who appears in 4, 5 and
(5) Venus is in the Sub of Venus who is placed in 5
and appears in 10.
(6) Venus is in the SS of Sun who has PS and is placed
in 5. (Maraka house for 4).
Thus Dasa lord Venus involves Ascendant for Mother
ie. 4 and commits to Maraka and Badhaka houses
and has the potential to cause death of Mother.
C: Operation of Bhukti Lord Jupiter
(1) Jupiter has no PS. Thus it will offer results only
as per its Stellar Status.
(2) Jupiter is in Ketu Star. Ketu represents Mars as
Star lord and Venus as Sign lord.
a: Ketu appears in 3 and 1 1 . Mars appears in 4
and 11
b: Thus Jupiter involves 1, 8 and 12 houses with
respect to 4.
(3) Jupiter is in Sub of Moon who appears as SSL of
5th cusp that is Maraka house for 4.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
(4) Jupiter is in the Sub-Sub of Venus that also appears
We, therefore conclude that Jupiter can cause death
of Mother of the native
D: Operation of Antara Lord Venus
We have already discussed the role of Venus in 3 above.
E: Operation of Sookshama Lord Saturn
(1) Saturn has no PS. It will therefore, provide results
as per its Stellar Status alone. Saturn is in Jupiter
Star. Jupiter appears in 4, 5 and 10 (only relevant
cusps shown).Thus Saturn signifies 1, 2 and 7 from
(2) Saturn is in the Sub of Venus who is placed in 5
and has PS. Venus appears in 5 and 10.
(3) Saturn is in the SS of Mercury who appears in 4
and 11, that is in 1 and 8 with respect to 4.
Thus we find that Saturn satisfies all the conditions,
and has the capability to cause death of Mother of
the native.
F: Operation of Prana Lord Moon
(1) Moon has no PS. It will, therefore, provide only its
Stellar Status results.
(2) Moon is in the Star of Saturn who is placed in 5.
Saturn appears in 1 1 . 5 is 2 from 4 and 1 1 is 8 from
(3) Moon is in the Sub of Raliu that represents Mars as
Sign lord and Mercury as Star lord.
a: Rahu appears in 5 and 10.

Answers of Practice Exercises
b: Mercury appears in 4 and 11 i.e. 1 and 8 from
c: Mars appears in 4 and 1 1 i.e.l and 8 from 4.
Thus we find that Prana Lord Moon is linked
with 1, 2, 7 and 8 from 4.
(10) Moon is in the Sub-Sub of Moon who is placed in
10 but has no PS. Moon does not appear in 2 or 7
or 8 from 4. This means that Moon Prana Lord fails
to satisfy the essential condition.
Thus we come to the conclusion that the death of the
Mother of the native should have taken place in the
Prana of Mars.
G: Operation of Prana Lord Mars
(1) Mars has no PS.
(2) Mars is in Moon Star who is placed in 10 (Both
Maraka and Badhaka for 4).
(3) Mars is in the Sub of Saturn who appears in 11 i.e.
8th from 4.
(4) Mars is in the SS of Sun who appears in 5 i.e.
Maraka house for 4.
Mars satisfies all conditions and should have caused
death of Mother of the Native. Therefore in
summation we can say that all the Dasa levels
promised death of mother after 19:00:58 hrs on the
10th June 1994
Question 2: Answer
A: Purchase of Land Dec 1988
(1) Native purchases property in the joint period of
Planets that signify 4 (property), 1 1 (fulfillment of
desire) and 12 (expenditure).

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
(2) Native takes possession of property in the joint
period of Planets that signify 4, 9 (12th to 10 which
represents others property) and 11.
(3) In Dec 1988 the native was running the Dasa period
of Venus-Mars-Jupiter. Antara lord Jupiter runs
through the whole month of Dec 1988.
B: Operation of Dasa Lord Venus
(1) Venus has PS and is in 12th cusp that signifies
expenditure.
(2) Venus is in Jupiter Star who is placed in 2 (money).
Jupiter appears in 4. Venus thus signifies 2 and 4
(only relevant cusps shown).
(3) Venus is in the Sub of Venus who appears in 12.
(4) Venus is in tire Sub Sub of Sun who appears in 4
(property), and 9 (loss of property to others).
Thus we see that Venus involves 2 (Money) and commits
to 12 Expenditure. Venus involves 4 (Property) and
commits to 12 (Expenditure).
We therefore conclude that Dasa lord has the potential
to cause the native to invest in property.
C: Operation of Bhukti Lord Mars
(1) Mars has no PS.
(2) Mars is in Moon Star who appears in 2 and 12.
(3) Mars is in the Sub of Saturn that appears in 11.
a: Thus we find that Mars who is the Sub-Sub
lord of 4th cusp (Source Property) involves
the second house (money) and 12th house
(expenditure). This is interpreted as follows:

Answers of Practice Exercises
For the 4th house matters (here property) the native
will spend his money.
(4) Mars is in the Sub Sub of Sun who appears in
relevant cusps 4 and 9 as explained above.
We therefore conclude that Mars Bhukti has the
capability to allow the native to invest in property.
D: Operation of Antara lord Jupiter
(1) Jupiter has no PS.
(2) Jupiter is in Ketu Star that represents Venus as Sign
lord, and Mars as Star lord. Jupiter will therefore
be considered in Ketu Star, Venus Star and Mars
Star.
(3) Ketu is the Star lord of 1 1 . Venus is Sub lord of 1 2,
and Mars appears in 4.
a: Jupiter thus signifies 4, 11 and 12.
(4) Jupiter is in the Sub of Moon that appears in 8 (gain
of money to other).
Moon also appears in 6 (loss to other and
multiplication of property of the native - being 3rd
from 4th)
(5) Jupiter is in the Sub Sub of Venus that appears in
12 the house of expenditure. Jupiter also appears
in 5 which is the house of gain to the opponent.
Thus we see that Jupiter Antara has the capability to
enact the event of purchase of property.
Since the date of purchase is not known we do not know
in which Sookshama and Prana lord the event has
happened. However Sookshama and Prana Lord are
invariably linked with Primary and Supporting cusps.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
In summation we can say that all the Dasa levels
offered the opportunity and capability to purchase
property in December 1988
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 11
1. The native got first male child on 26. 12. 1999 at 23.45 hrs. He
was running at that time Dasa period of Mars-Jup-Mars-JupMars. In lesson 8 we have seen that this chart promises birth
of child. In Lesson 10 we discussed that the Dasa period lords
at the time of birth of child justifies the event. We are now to
examine the Transit of Dasa Period lords, Sun and Moon to
see tiiat it supports the event or not.
2. Transit of Dasa Lord, Antara Lord and Sookshama Lord
Mars
A. ETr Mars transits in Capricorn Sign ruled by Saturn
i. Saturn in the Natal chart has no PS but appears in
relevant cusp 1 1 as Sign lord.
ii. Saturn in the Natal chart is in Mars Star. Mars
appears in 2 and 11 and is placed in 5.
iii. Saturn is in the Sub of Jupiter who appears in 5 and
iv. Thus we find that Saturn is linked with 2, 5 and 11.
v. Saturn is in the SS of Saturn that appears in 11.
Thus we find that ETr Mars's transit in Capricorn
Sign satisfies necessary conditions.
B. ETr Mars transits in Mars Star
i. Mars is placed in 5 and appears in relevant cusps 2
and 11
ii. Mars in the Natal chart is in Venus Star and Jupiter
Sub.

Answers of Practice Exercises
iii. Venus appears in 2 and Jupiter appears in 5 and 11.
iv. Thus we find that Mars is linked with 2, 5 and 11.
v. Mars is in the SS of Mars which appears in relevant
cusps 2 and 5.
We can therefore say that Mars transit in Mars Star
justifies necessary conditions.
C. ETr Mars transits in Saturn Sub
i. Saturn appears in relevant cusp 1 1
ii. Saturn in the Natal chart is in Mars Star who is
placed in 5
iii. Mars appears in 2 and 11.
iv. Saturn in the Natal chart is in Jupiter Sub that
appears in relevant cusps 5 and 11
v. Saturn is in the SS of Saturn that appears in 11.
Thus ETr Mars's transit in Sat Sub justifies necessary
conditions.
D. ETr Mars transit in SS of Rahu
i. Rahu appears in relevant cusps 2 and 5
ii. Rahu in the Natal chart is in Sun Star who is placed
in 5
iii. Rahu is in the Sub of Jupiter who appears in 5 and
iv. Rahu is in the SS of Sat who appears in 1 1
We find that ETr Mars transit in Rahu SS satisfies
necessary conditions.
3. Transit of Bhukti Lord and Sookshama Lord Jupiter
A. ETr Jupiter transits in Aries ruled by Mars

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
i. We have seen above that Mars signifies 2, 5 and 1 1
B. ETr Jupiter transits in Ketu Star
ii. In the Natal chart Ketu represents Moon as Sign
Lord.
iii. Moon appears in relevant cusps 2 and 5.
iv. We have seen above in Paragraph 2 that Moon is
linked in the Natal chart with relevant cusps 2, 5
and 11.
Thus transit of ETr in Ketu Star justifies necessary
conditions.
C. ETr Jupiter transits in Venus Sub and Sun SS
i. We have seen above that both Venus and Sun signify
relevant cusps 2, 5 and 1 1 .
Thus we find transit of Jupiter in Sign, Star, Sub and
SS justifies the event.
4. T ransit of Sun: ETr Sun transits in Sagittarius ruled by Jupiter.
ETr Sun transits in Ketu Star, Sat Sub and Moon SS.
We have seen above that Jupiter, Ketu, Sat and Moon are
related to relevant cusps 2, 5 and 11.
5. Transit of Moon: ETr Moon transits in Leo ruled by Sun.
ETr Moon transits in Ketu Star, Rahu Sub. and Jupiter SS.
Rahu in the Natal chart represents Sat and Sun. Thus we
find that Etr Moon transits in the Sign, Star, Sub, and SS
the lord of which are all related to relevant cusp.
We need to notice that the SSL of 5th cusp in the Natal
chart is Jupiter who is in Ketu Star. Thus transit of Moon in
Ketu Star fixes the Moon Star of the child as per SSL of the 5th
cusp.

Answers of Practice Exercises
Answers: Lesson 12
1. Question 1: Marriage
A: Operation of Dasa Lord Mars
(1) In this chart Mars has no PS. It is in Venus Star and
Mars Sub
(2) Venus appears in 7 (Primary cusp).
(3) Sub Lord Mars appears in 7 and 1 1 (both relevant
cusps for marriage) and also in 6 (12th to 7).
(4) Thus we say that Mars has the potential to allow
the event of marriage to take place but also hints at
possible marital discord.
(5) Mars is in the SS of Mercury that appears in relevant
cusps 5 and 11.
Conclusion: Despite possible problems, Mars Dasa
can allow Marriage.
B: Operation of Bhukti Lord Ketu
(1) Ketu has no PS. It represents Mercury as its Sign
Lord and Mars as its Star Lord.
(2) Ketu as Ketu:
a: Ketu is in Mars Star and Sun Sub.
b: Mars appears in 7 and 11 and Mars is placed
in 5. Thus Ketu signifies 5, 7 and 11.
c: Ketu's Sub lord appears in 2 (8th from 7) and
11 (relevant cusp).
d: Ketu is in the SS of Sun that appears in: 2, 10
and 11.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
Conclusion: It looks difficult for Ketu as Ketu
to allow marriage to take place.
(3) Ketu as Mercury:
a: Mercury has PS. It appears in relevant cusps
b: Mercury is in the Sub of Saturn who appears
in 5 and is placed in 7 with PS
c: Mercury is in the SS of Ketu who represents
Mercury and Mars
d: Both Mercury and Mars appear in relevant
cusps.
Conclusion: Ketu as Mercury has the potential
to cause marriage
(4) Ketu as Mars:
We have discussed in Para 1 that Mars has the
potential to cause marriage and also promises
marital discord.
C: Selection of Antara:
(1) Ketu Bhukti Ketu Antara:
a: As stated above Ketu involves the Primary
cusp through its Star lord Mars but commits
to 2nd cusp through its Sub and Sub-Sub lord
Sun. 8th cusp to any cusp always offers
negative results.
b: Ketu Antara in Ketu Bhukti will offer results
only of Ketu as Ketu.

Answers of Practice Exercises
Conclusion: Ketu Antara is not suitable for
marriage event.
(2) Ketu Bhukti Venus Antara:
a: Venus has PS because Venus is in Moon Star
and Moon is in Venus Star.
b: Venus appears in Primary cusp 7 and thus
signifies 7.
c: Venus is in the Sub of Mars that appears in 6,
d: Venus is in the SS of Raliu that appears in 6
and 12. Rahu no doubt appears in 7 also but
since Venus is not promising marriage we
need not take Rahu's appearance in 7 into
consideration.
Conclusion: Venus Antara in the end will not
allow marriage to take place. Venus here is in
accord with the results of Ketu as Ketu.
(3) Ketu Bhukti Sun Antara:
a: Sun is in Sun Star and Venus Sub.
b: Sun appears in relevant cusp 1 1 and Venus
appears in the Primary cusp 7.but also in
2.This would allow the marriage to take place
but there will be some marital discord also.
c: Thus we find that Sun involves the supporting
cusp and commits to the Primary cusp.
d: Sun is in the SS of Venus that appears in the
Primary cusp.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
FINAL CONCLUSION: Marriage should have
taken place in Sun Antara. Here Sun is offering
results which Bhukti lord Ketu as Mercury
allows.
• The native actually married in Sun Antara.
2. Question 2: Sale of Property
We should keep in mind that sale of property is as good as
purchase of native's property7 by the other represented by 7th
house. The native thus can sell the property during the
Sookshama and Prana the Lords of which signify or as we
say establish links as follows:
a: Involves 4th cusp and commits to 3 and 2 or 1 1 . 3
is 12th to 4 and indicate loss of 4th house
significations. 2 is gain of money, and 11 is
fulfillment of desire.
b: Involves 3 and commits to 10 or/and 5. 3 is 12th to
4, 10 is 4th from 7 (property of other), 5 is 11 from
7 (fulfillment of other's desire).
A: Operartion of Sookshama Lord Ketu
(1) Ketu as Ketu
a: Ketu is in Mars Star. Mars does not appear in
Conclusion: Ketu as Ketu is not capable to cause
results relating sale of property.
(2) Ketu as Mercury:
a: Mercury is in Moon Star and Saturn Sub.
b: Moon appears in 3 and Saturn appears in

Answers of Practice Exercises
relevant cusps 3 and 5.
c: Mercury is in the SS of Ketu that represents
Mars. Mars appears in 10 (property of other)
and 11 (gain to the native).
Conclusion: Ketu as Mercury allows the event
of sale of property.
(3) Ketu as Mars:
a: Mars is in Venus Star that appears as the SS
lord of the relevant cusp3. Mars is in Mars
Sub that appears in relevant cusp 1 0 and 1 1 .
b: Mars is in the SS of Mercury that appears in
relevant cusps 5, 2 and 11.
Conclusion: Ketu as Mars has the capability to
allow the sale of the properly.
B: Selection of Prana Lord
(1) Ketu Sookshama Ketu Prana:
a: Ketu in Ketu Sookshama Ketu Prana will offer
the results of Ketu as Ketu
Conclusion: The native can't sell property
during this Sookshama.
(2) Ketu Sookshama Venus Prana:
a: Venus has PS and appears in relevant cusps 2
(Money) , 3 (loss of property) , and 10
(.transfer of property to other).
b: Venus is in Mars Sub who appears in relevant

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
cusps 10 and 11.
c: Venus is in the SS of Rahu who represents
Jupiter, Ketu, Mercury and Mars. Both
Mercury and Mars appear in relevant cusps.
Conclusion: Sookshama lord Venus allows the
native to sell the property. Here Venus is acting
in consonance with Ketu as Mars.
Note: There can be more than one Antara Lord signifying
relevant cusps for causing an event to happen. We need to select
the Antara lord following the sequential order in which the
selected Antaras appear, ensuring that the Transit of Dasa,
Bhukti and selected Antara and also of Sun supports the event
Same procedure is to be followed for the selection of
Sookshama and Prana Lords. These Lords have to signify relevant cusps. For Sooksama and Prana lords transit of Sun and Moon plays very significant role.
Answers Practice Exercise: Lesson 13
1. Rectified Birth Time:
The rectified birth time is fixed as 10.46.47 hrs LMT. This
gives an Ascendant of 05 Sag 55' 56". Fig 13.4 represents the
rectified chart.

Answers of Practice Exercises
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
RASHI CHART

Answers of Practice Exercises
OB* Pi SF

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
2. Accuracy of Ascendant:
• Jupiter, Ketu, Raliu and Jupiter are the Planets that co
rule the Ascendant. It can be seen that all these Planets
signify 1 or 7 or 10.
Let us take the case of SSL Jupiter who has no PS. Jupiter
is in Mercury Star and Saturn Sub. Mercury appears in 7
and Saturn appears in 10 and is placed in 1 with PS.
Thus we see that Jupiter is linked with 1, 7 and 10.
• Moon Star of the Native is Sun who is in the Star of
Jupiter (SSL of Ascendant).
• Ascendant rises in male sign. For Male horoscope the
SS arc of the Ascendant has to be in first half. Here the
SS arc is 28.72%.
We therefore conclude that the Ascendant satisfies the
necessary conditions.
3. Genetical Connections:
• Mother's Moon Star is Moon. Here we find that the SSL
of 4th cusp is Moon.
• Father's Moon Star is Raliu. In the chart Rahu is in the
Sub of Mars who is the SSL of 9th cusp.
• Wife's Moon Star is Mercury. The SSL of 7th cusp is
Jupiter who is in Mercury Star.
• Younger sister's Moon Star is Jupiter. SSL of 3rd cusp is
Sun who is in Jupiter Star.
We find that the chart establishes all genetical connections.
4. Verification of Events:
A. Visit Abroad:
• He left for oversea trip on 10 July 1860 when he
was running the period of Rah-Rah-Jupiter-Moon-

Answers of Practice Exercises
Jupiter.
• Antra and Prana Lord Jupiter is in Mercury Star
which appears in relevant cusps 9 and 12. Jupiter is
in the Sub of Saturn which appears in the relevant
Cusp 3.
Jupiter is in the SS of Jupiter which appears in 3.
• Sookslnna Lord Moon is in Sun Star and Venus Sub
and SS.
Sun appears in relevant cusps 3 and 9.Venus appears
in relevant cusps 3, 9 and 12.
• Thus the Dasa potential justifies the event
Let us verify whether the transit of Jupiter, Sun and
Moon justifies the event.
Transit of Jupiter:
ETr Jupiter on 10 July 1860 at 09.00 hrs transits in
Moon Sign, Sat Star, Sun Sub and Moon SS.
We have seen above that Moon in the chart signifies
relevant cusps 3, 9 and 12.
• Saturn appears in 3, Sun appears in 3 and 9
• Thus we find that ETr Jupiter allows the event to
take place.
Transit of Sun:
• ETr Sun transits in Mercury Sign, Jupiter Star, Ketu
Sub and Sat SS.
Mercury appears in 9 and 12 in the natal chart.
• Star Lord Jupiter in tire Natal chart signifies relevant
cusps3, 9 and 12.
• Ketu in the natal chart represents Moon who in the
natal chart signifies 3, 9 and 12.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
Saturn appears in 3rd cusp in the natal chart.
Thus we find that ETr Sun allows the event to take
place.
Transit of Moon:
• ETr Moon transits in Jupiter Sign and Mercury Star.
Both these Planets are related to the desired cusps
3, 9 and 12 as discussed above.
Conclusion: Dasa Potential as well as Transit justifies
the Event of visit abroad.
B. Death of Father:
• The native lost his father on 14 Dec 1861 (approx
09.30 hrs) when he was running the Dasa period of
Rahu-Rahu-Venus-Mercury-Mercury.
Dasa and Bhukti lord Rahu is in Moon Star and
Mars Sub.
Moon appears in 4 (8th from 9) and Mars appears
in 4 and 9 (Ascendant for Father).
Thus we find that Dasa and Bhukti lord satisfies
the necessary condition.
Rahu is in the SS of Venus who appears in both
Maraka and Badhaka houses with respect to 9.
We, therefore, say that Rahu also satisfies the
essential condition.

Answers of Practice Exercises
Antara lord Venus has PS and as stated above it
appears in both Maraka and Badhaka houses from
Venus is in Mars Star, Mars appears in 1 and 8 from
Venus is in the Sub of Jupiter who appears in 3
(both Maraka and Badhaka for 9).
Venus is in the SS of Mars that appears in 1 and 8
from 9.
Thus we say that Venus satisfies the necessary as
well as essential condition to cause death of Father.
Sookshama and Prana lord Mercury is in Saturn
Star who appears in 2, 7 and 8 from 9.
Mercury is in the Sub of Venus who appears in 2
and 7 from 9.
Mercury is in the SS of Mercury who appears in 12
from 9.
Thus Mercury satisfies the necessary and essential
condition to cause death of Father.
Let us verify the transit of Dasa Period Lords, and
Jupiter, Saturn, Sun and Moon on the day of Death.
Fig 13.5 shows the event chart (14 Dec 1861 at

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION

/Answers of Practice Exercises
RASH! CHART

Answers of Practice Exercises
T ransit of Dasa and Bhukti Lord Rahu :
• ETr Rahu transits in Sign of Jupiter who appears in
3 (both Maraka and Badhaka for 9).
Jupiter in the Natal chart is in Mercury Star who
appears in 9 (Ascendant for Father) and in the Sub
of Saturn who appears in 2, 7 and 8 from 9.
• ETr Rahu transits in the Star of Ketu which in the
Natal chart represents Moon and Saturn. Moon
appears in 8 from 9 and Saturn appears in 2, 7 and
8 from 9.
• ETr Rahu transits in Sub of Mercury who appears
in 12 from 9.Mercury in the Natal chart is in Saturn
Star and Venus Sub. Saturn appears in 2, 7 and 8
from 9 and Venus appears in 2 and 7 from 9.
• ETr Rahu transits in SS of Mars who appears in 1
and 8 from 9.
In Natal chart Mars is in Venus Star and Saturn Sub.
As stated above, both Venus and Saturn appear in
relevant cusps.
• Thus we find that ETr Rahu fully supports the event
of death of Father.
Transit of Antara Lord Venus:
ETr Venus on the day of death transits in the Sign of
Saturn, Star of Moon, Sub and Sub-Sub of Mercury. As
stated above Saturn, Moon and Mercury either appear
in relevant cusps or are significators of relevant cusps.
Transit of Sookshama and Prana Lord Mercury:
ETr Mercury transits in the Sign of Mars, Star of Saturn,
Sub and Sub-Sub of Jupiter. As stated above all these
Planets either appear in relevant cusps or are significators
of relevant cusps in the Natal chart.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
Transit of Jupiter:
For significant events ETr Jupiter needs to transit in the
Sign, Star, Sub and SS the lords of which should appear
in relevant cuspal positions in the Natal chart or be
significators of relevant cusps in the Natal chart.
On the day of death of native's father ETr Jupiter transits
in Mercury Sign, Sun Star, Saturn Sub and Moon SS.
We have discussed above that Planets Mercury, Saturn
and Moon either appear in relevant cusps in the Natal
chart or are significators of relevant cusps that can inflict
death of fadier.
Sun in the Natal chart is in Jupiter Star that appears in 3
(both Maraka and Badhaka for 9).Sun is in the Sub of
Mercury that appears in 1 and 12 from 9.
Thus we find that ETr Jupiter supports the Event.
Transit of Saturn:
Death usually takes place when ETr Saturn transits in
the Sign, Star, Sub, and SS the lords of which appear in
2, 7, Badhaka and 8th house from the Ascendant or are
significators of these houses in the Natal chart.
On the day of death of native’s father ETr Saturn was
transiting in Mercury Sign, Sun Star. Rahu Sub and Ketu
SS. We have discussed above that all these Planets either
appear in death inflicting houses of Father or are
significators of these houses in the Natal chart.
Transit of Sun:
• ETr Sun transits in Jupiter Sign, Ketu Star, Ketu
Sub and Jupiter SS. We have discussed above that
both Jupiter and Ketu are related to the relevant
cusps.

Answers of Practice Exercises
• ETr Sun transits in Ketu Star who in tine N atal chart
represents Moon the SS of 4th cusp (8th from 9).
• Thus we find that ETr Sun allows the event of death
of Father.
Transit of Moon:
• ETr Moon transits in Mars Sign, Sun Star, Moon
Sub and Venus SS. All these Planets signify relevant
cusps or appear in relevant cusps.
• SSL of 4th cusp (8th from 9) is Moon, who in the
Natal chart is in Sun Star. ETr Moon also transits
in Sim Star.
• We conclude that the transit of Moon justifies the
event.
C: Marriage:
• Marriage is promised to the native because the SSL
of Ascendant and SSL of 7th cusp is Jupiter who is in
Mercury Star that appears in 7.
• The native got married on 10 Mar 1863 when he was
running the Dasa period of Rahu- Jupiter- Satum-RahuVenus.
• Dasa and Sookshama Lord Rahu is in Moon Star and
Mars Sub. Moon appears in the Primary cusp 7 and Mars
appears in 7 as well as in 11. Rahu is in the SS of Venus
that appears in the relevant cusp 5.
• Bhukti Lord Jupiter is in Mercury Star who appears in
relevant cusps 7 and 11. Jupiter is in the Sub of Saturn
who appears in 1 (Bhava with PS) , 2, 3, 4, 8, and 10.
Cusp 2 and 10 are not favourable to 7.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
You may think that Jupiter Bhukti is not very favourable
to enact the event of marriage since the Sub lord of Jupiter
does not appear in supporting cusps. But in this case we
would be missing a very important point. Ketu who
represents Saturn is placed in 7th Bhava. Ketu is not
appearing in 7th cuspal position but it is Planet Ketu that
is placed in 7th Bhava. Placement of Rahu or Ketu in a
Bhava is as good as the placements of the Planets that Rahu
or Ketu represents. However the appearance of Rahu or
Ketu in cuspal positions can not be replaced by the Planets
that Rahu or Ketu represents. Those positions specify
zodiacal positions. Since Saturn in this chart has PS and
Ketu as Saturn is placed in 7 it allows Jupiter Bhukti to
enact marriage.
• Thus Jupiter has the capability of enacting marriage.
• Antara Lord Saturn is in Ketu Star who is placed in 7th
Bhava. Saturn is in the Sub of Jupiter who appears in 5,
7 and 1 1 . Saturn is in the SS of Venus who appeal's in the
relevant cusp 5.
• Prana Lord Venus is in Mai's Star who appeal's in 7 and
11. Venus is in the Sub of Jupiter who appeal's in 5, 7
and 11. Venus is in the SS of Mars (7 and 11).
Thus we find that the Dasa period justifies the event of
marriage. Let us see if transit on the day of marriage
supports the event or not. Fig 13.6 is the event chart for
marriage.

Answers of Practice Exercises
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspai Interlinks Theory
RASH! CHART
BHAVA CHART

Answers of Practice Exercises
W VI «'
M BDI

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
Transit of Dasa Lord and Sookshama Lord Rahu:
• ETr Rahu on the day of marriage transits in Mars
Sign, Mercury Star, Mercury Sub and Saturn SS.
Both Mars and Mercury appear in relevant cusps 7
and 1 1 in tire natal chart.
Saturn in the Natal chart is in Ketu Star and Jupiter
Sub. Ketu is placed in 7 and Jupiter appears in 5, 7
and 1 1 in the natal chart.
• Tlius ETr Rahu supports the Event of marriage.
Transit of Bhukti Lord Jupiter:
• ETr Jupiter transits in Venus Sign, Mars Star, Venus
Sub and Saturn SS.
• We have seen above that marriage took place in the
Prana of Venus because it signifies relevant cusps.
• Mars appears in 7 and 1 1 in the natal chart.
• Saturn signifies relevant cusps as seen above.
• Thus ETr Jupiter supports the event of marriage.
Transit of Antara Lord Saturn:
• ETr Saturn transits in Mercury Sign, Moon Star,
Mars Sub and Rahu SS.
• We have discussed above that Mercury and Mars
appear in relevant cusps 5 and 1 1 . Moon is the Sub
lord of the 7th cusp in the natal chart.
• Rahu in the natal chart is in Moon Star and Mars
Sub.
• Tlrus we find that ETr Saturn supports the event of
marriage.

Answers of Practice Exercises
Transit of Prana Lord Venus:
• ETr Venus transits in Jupiter Sign, Mercury Star,
Ketu Sub and Moon SS.
• We have discussed above that all these Planets either
appear in the revant cuspal positions in the natal
chart or signify the relevant cuspal positions in the
natal chart.
• Tlius ETr Venus supports the event of marriage.
Transit of Sun:
• ETr Sun transits in Saturn Sign, Jupiter Star, Venus
Sub and Rahu SS.
• All these Planets either appear in relevant cuspal
positions or signify relevant cusps in the natal chart.
• Thus ETr Sun justifies the event of marriage.
Transit of Moon:
• ETr Moon transits in Venus Sign, Jupiter Star, Venus
Sub and Rahu SS.
• Thus we see that ETr Moon also justifies the event
of marriage.
Conclusion: Both the Dasa period Lords and transit
agree and justifies the event of marriage.
D: Operation to remove Appendix:
Anatomical location of Appendix is represented by 6th
house. If the native has to undergo surgical operation on
any part represented by 6th house then the SSL of 6th
cusp should be linked through its Star lord (or by PS) with
the 8th cusp and the SSL of the 8th cusp should be linked
through its Star lord (or by PS) with 6th cusp.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
• In the natal chart Fig 13.4 Ketu is the SS of the 6th cusp.
• Ketu is in Saturn Star who is the SSL of 8th cusp.
Saturn is the SSL of 8th cusp who is in Ketu Star. Ketu
is the Sub as well as the SS of the 6th cusp.
• Thus we find that chart promises surgical operation on
the parts of the body represented by 6th house.
The event of surgical operation happens during the
Sookshama and Prana the lords of which signify 1, house
where surgery is to be performed, and 8.
• On 24 Jun 1902 the native was running the Sookshama
of Ketu and Prana of Mercury.
• Ketu has PS and as such signifies 6 and 1 (Star lord of
Ascendant Sub & Sub Sub of 6).
Ketu is in the Star of Saturn who is SSL of 8 (surgery).
Ketu is in the Sub of Moon who appears in 6 (Appendix).
Ketu is in the SS of Mercury who appears in 8 (surgery)
and 12 (Hospitalisation). Mercury also appears in
relevant cusp 11 for recovery.
• Prana Lord Mercury is in Saturn Star who is the SSL of
8th cusp (surgery). Mercury is in the Sub of Venus who
appears in 6 (Appendix).
• Mercury is in the SS of Mercury who appears in 8, 12,
and 11.
• SSL of Mercury appearing in 8 and 12 along with 11
promises delayed recovery.
Transit of Sun:
• ETr Sun transits in Mercury Sign and Rahu Star.

Answers of Practice Exercises
• Mercury appears in 8 and it is the Prana Lord at the
time of event.
• Rahu appears in l.Rahu represents Moon and
Saturn. Moon appears in 6 and 8. Saturn appears in
• Thus ETr Sun justifies the event.
Transit of Moon:
• ETr Moon transits in Saturn Sign and Moon Star.
• Saturn is the SSL of 8th cusp (surgery).
• Moon is the Star lord of 6th cusp and is placed in
8th Bhava.
• Thus ETr Moon justifies the event of surgical
operation.
E: Death of Mother, and the Native Becomes King
The native lost his mother on 22 Jan 1901 at 18.30 hrs. He
was running the Dasa period of Sat-Ven-Ven-Sat-Mars.
Operation of Dasa and Sookshama Lord Saturn:
• Saturn is in Ketu Star and Jupiter Sub.
Ketu appears in 4 (Ascendant for mother) and
Jupiter appears in 1 1 (8th from 4).
• Saturn is in the SS of Venus who appears in 2, 7
and Badhaka houses from Ascendant of mother.
• Thus Saturn satisfies the necessary and essential
condition for causing death of mother.
Operation of Bhukti and Antara Lord Venus:
• Venus has PS and appears in 2, 7 and Badhaka
houses from the Ascendant of mother.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
• Venus is in Mars Star who appears in 1 and 8 from
mother's Ascendant.
• Venus is in the Sub of Jupiter who appears in 2, 8
and 12 from mother's Ascendant.
• Venus is in the SS of Mars who appears in 8 from
mother's Ascendant
• Thus Venus justifies the necessary and essential
condition for causing death of mother.
Operation of Prana Lord Mars:
• Mars has PS. It appears in 1 and from mother's
Ascendant.
• Mars is in the Sub of Saturn who appears in 7, 12
and Badhaka house from mother's Ascendant.
• Mars is in the SS of Rahu who appears in 7 & 8
from mother's Ascendant.
• Thus Mars satisfies the necessary and essential
condition.
• Conclusion: Dasa period Lords justify the death
of mother.
Native Becomes King:
On the day of death of mother he was running the Dasa
period Sat-Ven-Ven-Sat-Mars and on that day he
becomes the King.
A person occupies status as high as that of the head
of a country during the period of Planets that are
linked with 1, 2, 6, 10 and 11

Answers of Practice Exercises
• Saturn has PS and as such it signifies 1, 2 and 10.
Saturn is in the Star of Ketu who appears in 1 and
6. Saturn is in die Sub of Jupiter who appears in 1 1
Thus Dasa and Sookshama lord Saturn is linked
widi 1, 2, 6, 10 and 1 1 . Saturn is in the SS of Venus
who appears in relevant cusps 2, 6 and 10.
• Bhukti and Antara Lord Venus has PS and as such
signifies relevant cusps 2, 6 and 10. Venus is in
Mars Star who appears in 1 and 1 1 .
Venus is in the Sub of Jupiter who appears in
relevant cusps 1 and 11.
Venus is in the SS of Mars who appears in relevant
cusp 11. Thus we find that Bhukti and Antara Lord
justify the event.
• Prana Lord Mars has PS and appears in 1 1. Mars
is in Venus Star who appears in relevant cusps'2, 6
and 10.
Mars is in the Sub of Saturn who appears in 1, 2
and 10.
Mars is in the SS ofRahu who appears in 11.
Conclusion: Thus we find Dasa period lords justify the
Event.
Fig 13.7 is the event chart for death of mother and Native
becoming the King. Readers may check diat transit of Dasa period
lords, Sun and Moon supports the Event.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION

Answers of Practice Exercises
RASH1 CHART

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory

Answers of Practice Exercises
Death of Native
The native died on 06 May 1910 at about 23.45 hrs when
he was running the Dasa period Sat-Jup-Jup-Jup-Ven. Fig
13.8 is the event chart of death of the native.
PLANETARY POSITION
CUSPAL POSITION

Answers of Practice Exercises

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
Operation of Dasa Period Lords:
• Dasa Lord Saturn has PS and appears in 1,2 and
8. Saturn is in Ketu Star that appears in l.Ketu
represents Moon who appears in 2, 7 (both Maraka
and Badhaka) and 8. Thus Saturn signifies 1, 2, 7
and 8. Saturn is in the Sub of Jupiter who appears
in 1 and 7. Saturn is in SS of Venus who appears in
Thus Saturn is fully competent to cause death of
the native.
• Bhukti, Antara and Sookshama Lord Jupiter has
no PS. Jupiter is in the Star of Mercury who appears
in 7 and 8 Jupiter is in the Sub of Saturn who has
PS & appears in 1, 2 and 8. Jupiter is in the SS of
Jupiter who appears in relevant cusp 7 (both Maraka
and Badhaka).
Thus we find that Jupiter is linked with all the
relevant death inflicting houses.
• Prana Lord Venus has PS and appears in 2 and
8.Venus is in Mars Star who is placed in 1 and
appears in 7. Thus Venus signifies all the death
inflicting houses. Venus is in the Sub of Jupiter and
SS of Mars. Both these Planets appear in relevant
cusps.
Conclusion: Dasa period lords clearly justify the event
of death.
Readers may see from Fig 13.8 that transit of Dasa period
lords supports the event.

Answers of Practice Exercises
Death of the native took place on the day when Moon was
transiting in Mercury Star who incidentally is also the Prana
lord at the time of death, hi the natal chart SSL of 8th cusp is
Saturn. In the natal chart Mercury is in Saturn Star. Thus the
Moon Star lord on the day of death is as per the SSL of the 8th
cusp.

Appendix A
Concept of Zero Longevity
The timing of an event is done using the following principles:
1 . The Planets co-ruling the Ascdt at the moment an event
happens have to be linked with the relevant cusps that
take part in enacting an event.
2. The Sub and Sub-Sub lord of the Ascdt should establish
relationship with the Moon's Star lord at that moment.
3. The Planets co-ruling the Moon's position in the event
chart (Dasa Period Lords) should be linked with the
Primary and supporting cusps.
Horoscope and Human Birth:
It is believed that the birth of hiunan beings take place in
accordance with the theory of Reincarnation. It states that the hiunan
beings take birth in accordance with his/her past karmas and future
dispositions.
The Astrological Birth time is taken to be that moment when
the individual soul takes possession of the body which the soul
itself has got created. At this particular moment a particular degree
rises on the Ascdt at the place of birth. Each Planet occupies a
particular Zodiacal position and a particular house position. The
Planets co-ruling the Ascdt and other cuspal positions together with
the Planets Zodiacal and house positions bear correspondence with
the native's past kannas and future dispositions.
No event takes place without the interplay of Sim and Moon.
On the basis of these concepts we fix the Ascdt for the native for a

Appendix A: Concept of Zero Longevity
correct horoscope. Since the birth of a child takes place when the
father of the child runs the joint period of Planets that are fruitful
significators of 2, 5 and 1 1 we say that the Ascdt of the child should
be co-mled by Planets that are linked to 10, 5 and 7 houses (i.e 2,
Fixing Zero Longevity Chart:
Using the above concepts we can fix the chart for the time of
death of the native or any of his relation that bears genitical
connection with the native. Since it is the chart of the moment
when the soul leaves the body it has to be the chart of zero longevity
i.e zero life.
Conditions for the formation of the Death Time Ascdt:
A. The Ascdt at the time of death is fonned by the Planets
drat co-rule the 8dr cusp or the Ascdt in the natal chart of
the native and are linked through their Star and Sub or
by positional status with the 8th cusp.
B. The Planets placed in the 8th cusp and linked with the
8th cusp and the Ascdt in the natal chart.
C. Strong significators of 8th cusp, Maraka houses and
Badhaka house.
Significations of Death Chart:
1. The Planets co-ruling the Death Time Ascdt (fonned as per
conditions stated above in A, B and C) have to be linked witii
houses 1, 8, 2, 7 and Badhaka.
2. Dasa Period Lords in the Deatii Time Chart have also to be
linked with 1, 8, 2, 7 and Badhaka.
SSL of the 8th cusp in the Deatii Time Chart has to be linked
with the Moon's star lord at that time.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
4. Moon's Star lord on the day of Death is fixed by the SSL of
the 8th cusp in the Natal Chart.
Moon's Star lord on the day of death can be:
a. The same Planet which is the SSL of the 8th cusp.
b. The same Planet which is the Star lord of the SSL of the
8th cusp.
c. Any Planet whose Star lord is the same Planet who is
the Star lord of the SSL of the 8th cusp.
For example let Saturn be the SSL of the 8th cusp in a natal
chart. Let Saturn be in the Star of Jupiter. On the day of death
Moon's Star lord can be:
A. Saturn B. Jupiter and C. Any Planet in the natal chart
who is in tire Star of Jupiter.
Note: In some cases Moon Star on the day of death may be
other than that stated above. But that Star lord has to be a
Planet that links with 1 and 8 cusps or signify Maraka and
Badhaka houses and should bear relationship with the Moon's
Star lord as fixed by the natal chart.
Let us try to explain this through an example.
Refer Case Study 1 . We have explained how the natal chart
justifies Twin Deaths.We will here analyse the death time charts
for father and the native.
Fig CS1 is the natal chart of the native. Fig CS2 is the death
time chart of father and Fig CS3 is the death time chart of native.
Analysis Chart of Fig CS2-Father's Death Time Chart:
In the Natal chart (Fig CS1) the 4th cusp i.e. 8th from 9th is
co-raled by Planets Ju-Mer-Sat-Sun. The Ascdt in death time chart
(Fig CS2) is co-ruled by Planets Mer-Rahu-Sun-Sat. Remember in

Appendix A: Concept of Zero Longevity
Chart (Fig CS1) Raliu represents Sat. These Planets are linked to
houses 1, 8 and also to Maraka or Badhaka houses in chart Fig CS 1
as well as in chart Fig CS2. The Ascdt Sub lord Sun and Sub-Sub
lord Sat are linked to Moon's Star lord Sun on the day of death in
chart Fig CS2. The Dasa period lords in chart Fig CS2 are all linked
to 1, 8 and also to Maraka and Badhaka houses.
Analysis Chart Fig CS3-Native's death Time Chart: The
Ascdt in this chart is co-mled by Planets Moon-Mer-Sat-Sat. In
the Natal chart Fig CS 1 these Planets appear in 8th cusp. Remember
Rahu in the Natal Chart represents Sat. All these Planets in the
Natal Chart Fig CS 1 are linked with cusps 1 and 8. In Death Time
chart Fig CS3 also these Planets are linked with 1 and 8. Sub and
Sub-Sub lord of Ascdt in Chart Fig CS3 establishes relationship
with Moon Star lord Sun because Sun in this Chart is in the Sub of
Sat.
Tire Planets co-ruling the position of Moon in Chart Fig CS3
are all linked with relevant cusps that are 1,8 and Maraka Badhaka
houses. The Sookshama lord at the time of death in chart Fig CS3
is Sun and the Prana lord is Mercury. Both these Planets are linked
with 1 and 8.
Moon's Star lord on the day of death is Sun who is the Star
lord of the SSL of the 8th cusp in chart Fig CS3 and also the Star
lord of SSL of the 8th cusp in chart Fig CS1.

Appendix B:
Primary and Supporting Cusps
You may find in the attachment Tables which may help you
in deciding Primary and Supporting Cusps or houses for specific
events. These Tables have been slightly modified from the Tables
which appear in Appendix A of Horary Book to suit technique used
to analyse Natal Chart.
Concept of Primary cusp
We know each house is assigned specific significations. When
we analyse a horoscope for a specific event we look into the
significations of houses and conclude that this event refers to a
specific signification of a specific house. We then say that this is
the Primary house or cusp for this event.
Supporting Cusps or Houses
These are those cusps which take part in enacting the
event. Selection of these houses depends upon the nature of the
event.
Note: You may note that under the column Supporting cusps
some houses are shown in brackets. These houses play a significant
role in detennining the promise of tire event along with the Primary
cusp. We will discuss its philosophy in future lesson.

Appendix B: Primary and Supporting Cusps
Primary and Supporting Cusps for Specific events
1. Events relating First House.
2. Events relating Second House.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
3. Events relating Third House.
4. Events relating Fourth House.

Appendix B: Primary and Supporting Cusps
5. Events relating Fifth House.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspa! Interlinks Theory
6. Events relating Sixth House.
7. Events relating Seventh House.

Appendix B: Primary and Supporting Cusps
8. Events relating Eighth House.

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspat Interlinks Theory
9. Events relating Ninth House.
10. Events relating Tenth House.

Appendix B: Primary and Supporting Cusps
11. Events relating Eleventh House.
12. Events relating Twelfth House.

Appendix C
Sub Sub area in each Sub

Appendix C: Sub Sub area in each Sub
7. Sub Jupil er 8. Sub Saturn 9. Sub Mercury
Stars, Subs and Sub-Subs
1. StarKetu : Aries, Leo, Sagittarius 00° 00' to 13° 20'

Appendix C: Sub Sub area in each Sub
2. Star Venus: Aries, Leo, Sagittarius 13° 20* to 26° 40'

Appendix C: Sub Sub area in each Sub

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
4. Star Moon: Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn 10° 00' to 23° 20'

Appendix C: Sub Sub area in each Sub
7. Sub Ketu
8. Sub Venus
9. Sub Sun
5. Star Mars: Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn 23° 20' to 30° 00'
Gemini, Libra, Aquarius 00° 00' to 06° 40'
1. Sub Mars - 2. Sub Rahu
3. Sub Jupiter

Appendix C: Sub Sub area in each Sub
6. Star Rahu: Gemini, Libra, Aquarius 06° 40' to 20° 00'

Appendix C: Sub Sub area in each Sub

Key to Learn Sub Sub & Cuspal Interlinks Theory
8. Star Saturn: Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces 03° 20' to 16° 40'

Appendix C: Sub Sub area in each Sub
7. Sub Mars 8. Sub Rahul 9. Sub Jupiter
9. Star Mercury: Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces 16° 40' to 30° 00'
