READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_astrologics_of_kaalchakra_baskaran.json
Dataset number: 225 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 711,147 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_Astrologics of kaalchakra_Baskaran
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_Astrologics of kaalchakra_Baskaran
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 427
  • total_words: 113127
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.958
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Baskaran System
Astrologies
ofkaalchakra
A GENERAL STUDY
Author:
Prasanna Jothidamani
K. BASKARAN
Translators:
S. GNANASAMBANDAN
J. RAMA SUBRAMANIAN

CONTENTS
Foreword .V
Note of Translators X
Preface.... XIII
Kaalchakra - The Wheel of Time 1
Fiery, Earthy, Watery and Windy Signs 8
Movable, Fixed and Common Signs. 1 1
Kaalchakra - The Twelve Signs of Zodiac_....20
Kaalchakra - The Planets. 30
Bhava Characteristics of The Planets 33
Kaalchakra - The Bhavas. 52
Aries. 75
Taurus 103
Gemini 128
Cancer 153
Leo 178
Virgo .....203
Libra. 227
Scorpio 251
Sagittarius. 274
Capricorn... 300
Aquarius. 327
Pisces 352
Annexure 377
Kaalchakra - Residential Positions of Planets. 383
Kaalchakra - Dasha, Bhuktis etc 397
Kaalchakra - Transit .404
Scope for further work. .413

Sri Maha Ganapathaye Namaha
Dr. D.G.R.Sharma
Principal Lecturer, COE, UNITEN
7th Km, Jalan Kajang Puchong,
43009, Kajang,
MALAYSIA.
FOREWORD
Astrology has been practiced for several centuries with varying
results. The basis for making predictions in traditional astrology
has been well known - the karakas of planets, the rasis, bhavas,
aspects between planets, ownership etc. In addition to these,
additional specific rules are also to be used and these are well
known by the term yogas - there are several hundreds if not
thousands of the yogas. An expert astrologer can make accurate
predictions but the multiplicity of the rules can confuse the
novice and uninitiated.
The Krishnamurthy Padhdhathi, or KP system as it is popularly
known, developed in the 20th century was a markedly different
system and the late Sri Krishnamoorthy gave a new method of
preparing the chart and a new set of rules for prediction.
However, his rules still made use of the traditional aspects of
planets. This system was further developed by Sri K. Baskaran
of Madurai and his system now referred to as the KB system
uses the calculation procedure of KrishnaMurthy.
However, predictions are made based on the 'theory ofcuspal
interlinks' proposed by Sri Baskaran. This method does not
use the aspects, ownerships, conjunctions, exaltations and
debilitations of planets. The fundamental rules of this system
are still obtained from the traditional system. However, the
explanations given by Sri K.Baskaran on the basis of stars and
elements for the rules of the tradition are very interesting.
The basis of traditional astrology is the Kalapurusha Thathva.
The zodiac is divided into the twelve signs of 30° each and the
starting point of the zodiac is 0°Aries. The signs are given

various characteristics such as moving, fixed and common, odd,
even, fiery, earthy, windy and watery, long and short, and besides
these, the signs represent various things like the type of place,
directions, body part, and many more and ‘includes everything
under the sun’. .
In a similar manner, the zodiac is divided into the 27 Nakshathras
of 13 deg 20 min each. Each Nakshathra has its own
characteristics, and represents different body parts, has a different
ruler and signifies many things similar to that of the signs.
When a native is bom, his ascendant falls in a particular point
in the zodiac and the remaining eleven cusps are calculated using
the Placidus House system. According to the KP system every
point in the zodiac has its own se t of rulers and these are obtained
by dividing each nakshatra or star into subs and subsubs in a
manner similar to that used for finding the dasa, bhukti, antara
and sookshma based on the moon’s position.
The gross position of the twelve cusps i^. just the sign and the
star of each cusp can be used for making predictions i.e. in the
absence of accurate data, predictions can still be made about
the general characteristics of the native. More precise
predictions and timing of events can be made in the native's life
only when the time of birth is accurately known.
Baskaran’s research has been progressing from the specific to
the general. His earlier books were related to the Cuspal
Interlinks and making predictions when the precise positions of
the cusps are known. This present work now takes up the general
predictions relating to the native and he has in his characteristic
way handled the topic extremely well. For example, the physical
characteristics of a native with his ascendant in Aquarius are
described in detail depending on the star in which the ascendant
falls. The ascendant related characteristics like speech, courage
etc are all derived hum the corresponding cuspal positions in
the Kalachakra. for example, it states that “Cancer, the IV sign
of Kalachakra is the VI house to Aquarius. So the Aquarius
bom will have diseases in the chest and in lungs. They will gain
success in their \ \ i: with the confidence gained from their academic

qualifications?” These are the precise combinations -of the
characteristics of the fourth house of the kalapurusha and the sixth
house of the native. A practising astrologer can derive similar
combinations. Such elaborations throughout the book shows the
depth of analysis carried out by the author. By writing this book,
Sri K. Baskaran, who is also my revered teacher of astrology, has
given a new dimension to his writings and has given a new reference
tool to the practising astrologer. However, the novice has to keep
in mind that the actual outcome of predictions would be dependant
on the exact positions of the subs, subsubs and their lords.
I sincerely hope and pray that many such books would spring forth
fan the scientific mind of Sri K. Baskaran and illumine the field
of astrology. May his service continue in the forthcoming decades.
Hari Om.
August 2005 , DrD . G R. Sharma
Malaysia.

Om Mahaganapat^ayeNamaha
Shri A.R.BALAN
Friends,
Namaskarams. We are living in a modem and
complex society with multiple dimensions of facilities and
problems. Nobody in Tamil Nadu would have spelt the word,
- Tsunami - till that fateful day of 26th December 2004. The
earthquake in the deep sea causes Tsunami which is
devastating with high tides while speedily reaching the
seacoast. Capricorn, the sign for coastal region is an earthy
and movable sign. So the natural disaster of Tsunami lies in
this sign and causes danger to those people whose VIII house
is somehow linked to it. Thus, inferences are to be drawn to
suit the present requirements for studying cases like
Tsunami victims.
Japan is a country of frequent natural disasters like
earthquakes, volcanoes and tsunamis. It is a country of small
islands. It was severely affected by the two atomic
bombardments. These properties of Japan lead us to fix it in
the sign Scorpio and especially in Mercury star to mark its
developments in the field of electronics. If one has to visit
this country, his IX or XII house must have a linkage with
Scorpio; or he must be running the combined DBAS periods
of Mars and Mercuiy. So people bom in the ascendant signs
Sagittarius and Pisces will have an edge over others to make
frequent visits to Japan. This is how the principles of
Kaalchakra are to be adapted to our modem requirements.

; This book is an eye opener in the above context. It
teaches us to intrepret the basic significations of planets and
houses. Shri K. Baskaran 's theory of Cuspal Interlinks has
had warm reception. It was acclaimed as one of the
milestones of astrological researches in our country. I must
thank Shri Daya S hanker for having given due credit to Shri
K; Baskaran in his article, “ Sharing with Parasar ", in the Jan
2005 issue of the journal, “ The Times of Astrology " , which
is as follows: “ Shri K. Baskaran of Madurai is doing further
a good work on this to make the scheme of Astrology very
apparent about accurate unique predictions dependence on
preferential treatment of bhavas in comparison to planets as
per general astrology It is further an acknowledgement to
Shri K. Baskaran as few more books on Cuspal Interlinks
have recently been published. Though these books are
incorrect in many senses with pretended cum egoistic
approaches and have not given proper and genuine credit to
Shri K. Baskaran as the founder of the theory of Cuspal
Interlinks, it has proved that people could not bypass the theory
of Cuspal Interlinks any more.
I appreciate the team of young and research minded
astrologers around Shri K. Baskaran for upholding his
theories to newer dimensions. I must also congratulate the
publisher, the cover designer, the translators for bringing up
this book in a good and attractive manna*. I hope readers would
really enjoy the fun of using the principles of Kaalchakra,
after a deep reading of this book.
Good luck.
Madurai A. R. Balan

Note of Translators
Dear friends,
Vanakkam.
This is a new book on astrology and deals with the
traditional concepts on “ Kaalchakra " with a newer
perspective. Author Shri K. Baskaran is well known to you as
a scholar on astrological researches and the founder of the
theory of" Cuspal Interlinks ” Indeed, this book should have
come prior to his earlier works " Principles of Cuspal
Interlinks ” and 44 Application of Cuspal Interlinks
The highlight of this book lies in its classification of
Bhavas and Planets with reference to all the 12 Bhavas. With
this book, even a traditional astrologer can get needed clues
to give a set of reasonably meaningful* and authentic
predictions. Ancient astrologers have left us to derive
accordingly for the remaining 1 1 signs by providing us with a
set of basic concepts for Aries, the first sign of Kaalchakra
alone. Shri K. Baskaran, has explained his derivations from
those concepts for all the 12 signs. He is a master of
classifying principles for Bhavas so that the occult science of
astrology could withstand before the present day
requirements.
The linkage of the Bhavas with other houses is the
vital part of astrology in giving predictions. Every bhava or
House has separate sets of significations for linking and
being linked with every other bhava. A planet by being the
common lord to more than a single ho*^e creates a fcynergir
signification. For example. Mercury, the lord of 1 1 1 and the VI
house to Aries, when linked to the I house, makes a person to
become argumentative and when linked to the 1 1 house, makes

him to earn by way of service in the fields of information and
communication. The art of deriving combinations is the
foremost requirement for understanding and applying KB’s
Cuspal Interlinks theory.
Compared to his previous books , this book would
appear as simple and easier one to understand. Hence, we
request the readers to have a thorough reading of this book to
get memorized with the basic Kaalchakra concepts of
astrology.
Good luck.
S.GNANA SAMBANDAN
J. RAMA SUBRAMANIAN,

Om Mahaganapathaye Namaha
OM Gurubyo Namaha
My sincere thanks and acknowledgements to
Shr T. Ramesh Kumar, Publisher,
Shr A. R. Balan, My Guru,
Shr Prof A.Vaithiyalingam, Salem,
Shr Dr. D.G. R. Sharma,
Shr S. Gnana Sambandan,
Shr J. Rama Subramanian,
Shr K. Rangarajan, Chennai,
Shr M. Pazhanichamy and P. Thimmurthy,
for their Ganapathi art work.
and to all the booksellers, KB students, friends,
relatives and to my family.
Good luck.
Prasanna Jothidamani
KUaskaran
Madurai-16

Preface
Man has been inquisitive about nature right since day one of
mankind. He has been trying hard to solve its mysteries and
studying it quite systematically. He envisaged different branches
of science to study different aspects of nature. For example
Physics deals with the laws of nature, Botany and Zoology deal
with flora and fauna while Geology tries to peep deep down
inside the earth and so on.
Above all, there is yet another subject, which attempts to observe
every thing not only under the Sun but much beyond. It is
Astrology. Astrology is a divine science, which probably handles
every thing without exception, from mini to maxi and from micro
to macro. Obviously a sumptuous subject like this has to be
quite complicated and so it is. Unfortunately, the research in
Astrology could not be continued at the desired pace as it has
been with other branches of science. Some of the so-called
‘intellectuals’ even go to the extent of branding it as superstition.
Since time immemorial our seers and sages have tried to identify
the rhythm of nature and universe and attempted to put them
into the verses (slokas) of Astrology. We are quite fortunate to
have most of them inherited. But side-by-side it also entrusts us
the responsibility of furthering it through research and honest
hard work in order to make the laid down principles of Astrology
more contemporary.
This book is a small step in this direction. Kaalchakra, the Wheel
of Time moves on and on ceaselessly. It is this wheel of time
only which defines hours, months, years and centuries. Seasons
come and go in a cyclic order. So it is perhaps with all the events

and occurrences in the cosmos* Everything has to move, rotate
and revolve as per the dictates of Kaalchakra!
I have endeavoured to delve deeper into the theory of Kaalchakra
and have discovered a definite and orderly flow in it. Its
knowledge may be scientifically and logically applied to read
out the attributes in a horoscope. I am presenting my findings in
this book for the benefit of the readers and all the students of
Astrology.
Needless to add that any mistakes or errors, if pointed out by
the learned readers or any suggestions for the improvement in
the subsequent editions will be very much solicited.

Kaalchakra
-The Wheel of Tune
The Wheel of Time or the Kaalchakra is the very foundation of
Astrology* It is the God of Time, the Kaalpurusha and every
single horoscope cast is based on it.
All events, happenings and incidents in the universe are so
beautifully amalgamated into the Kaalchakra that they fit with
absolute consistency into its map — the horoscopic chart. Aries
is the Ascendant (first house) or the Lagna of the Kaalchakra
with the rest of the matters and items organised systematically
into the scheme of twelve houses.
It is interesting to note as to how everything and anything, we
feel, see or touch, whether living or non-living, whether natural
or artificial are fitted into the system of Kaalchakra.
As per the Hindu philosophy, there are three basic characters
that exist— Rajasam, Sath warn and Thaniasam.
Rajasam denotes a bundle of characters, which include
activeness, short temper, anger, speed, etc. Sathwam is a mixture
of softness, affinity and composure. Thamasam is an
intermediary stage between ‘Sathwam' and ’Rajasam*.
Extending the same analogy to the science of astrology, the
twelve signs from Aries to Pisces have been classified as
Movable , Fixed and Common. Sathwa is the ideal character of
mankind, as defined by Hindu texts. That is why, the fifth sign

of zodiac, the Leo, the house of wisdom and divinity has been
marked as the fixed house or a Housq of Sathwa in nature.
Activeness with burning desires of materialistic life has been
defined as ‘Maya\i.e., ’the Falsehood*. The holy Bhagavat Gita
preaches to observe calmness and to remain composed while
carrying out our social duties, as this only enlightens the way
and the will to approach the salvation. The ideology of
classifications of zodiac also is founded on firm ground of faith
and belief in God. The principles laid down herein are fixed
and never change and should be scientifically and logically
applied while proceeding with astrological analysis.
The Principle of Motion
1. All the living things in the world are always on the move
and therefore they have been placed under the Movable signs of
zodiac, i.e., Aries, Cancer, libra and Capricorn.
2. The trees, plants, mountains, lands, buddings and other
non-living things are all stable in nature, so they have been placed
under the Fixed signs of zodiac, i.e., Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and
Aquarius.
3. The rest of the things are placed in the Common signs
of the zodiac, i.e., Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces.
The first house , the house of selfness, ego and activeness, the
fourth house , the house of materialistic knowledge, the seventh
house, the house of society and the tenth house, the house of
kaima are prone to changes from time to time. These movable
houses explicitly or impliedly effect changes on the remaining
houses. They are bound to be in motion all the time to
consciously result into various modifications in the world.
The second house, house of words and vision, the fifth house,
house of wisdom, the eighth house, the house of life and the
eleventh house, the house of satisfaction are identified as fixed
in character They should remain steady and changeless to make
the human life more meaningful.
The third house is the house of mind. The mind is always full of
changes and jumps from one thing to another. The sixth house
2 Astrologies of Kaalchakra

is a house of physique and is responsible for dual functions of
appreciation (growth) and depreciation. The ninth house , the
house of dharma withdraws both the virtuous and the sinful
deeds of our parents. Finally the twelfth house , the house of
moksha signifies that even the state of eternity is not permanent
and the souls are bound to take birth again and again and change
firm one form to another. All these display the character called
Common.
It is therefore established that everything known to the mankind
is categorised into these three heads— (i) the movable (which
characteristically grow), (ii) the.lixed and (iii) the common
signs.
1 . The animals and reptiles are, by nature, always on the move.
So they have been placed to represent the movable houses/
signs of the Kaalchakra .
2. The trees , plants , mountains , lands , buildings and non-living
things are all basically stable in nature and therefore they
have been placed to represent the fixed houses/signs of the
Kaalchakra .
3 . The remaining items , which also include the birds are given
the place of the remaining houses and are called as the
common houses/signs of the Kaalchakra.
Intelligent living beings have been given place in the movable
signs, while stable-minded animals are in the fixed signs and
those with unsteady minds lay in common signs.
The time of the day also has been divided in the same manner.
The morning time is represented by the movable, the afternoon/
evening time by the fixed and the night time by the common
signs.
Likewise different seasons have also been treated. The beginning
of seasons is taken as the movable, the middle as the fixed and
the final ripe part of seasons are considered as the common
signs.
Kaalchakra - The Wheel of Time

On this basis, the movable signs contain within themselves the
four important climates of the year — summer, windy, rains and
winter. These are experienced in the months of Chitra/Chaitra
(April/May), Aadi/Aashada (July/August), Aippasi/Aasweejam
(October/ November) and Thai/Pushyam (January/February) in
southem/northera part of India. These months represent the
movable signs of Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn
respectively.
All the other items/subjects may also be classified as above.
The Principle of Elements
All the objects and the subjects in the world are composed of
five basic elements-the sky, the fire, the earth, the wind and the
water. This theory, of ‘Pancha Bhootha’, i.e., the five elements
has been profusely used for understanding the nature of all the
visible and invisible entities in the universe in almost all the
schools of philosophy.
The Hindus describe the matter, the ‘Pirakrithi’, as a container
of the five elements, which vary in their respective natures.
The fire, cthe thermo’ devours everything that falls within its
periphery and also increases the temperature, of its surroundings:
Ascendan t, the first house is made up of fire in the body-the fire
to exist and the fire to metabolise. The fifth house is also a fiery
house— the inner fire of the soul and the fire required for
reproduction. The ninth house also has to be fiery so as to let
the virtuous and sinful deeds of the souls to dissolve ultimately
in the fire of almighty. Thus first, fifth, and ninth houses together
are designated as the Triangle of Dharma, the yirtues.
The earth, ‘the primordial matter’ is solid and dense. Compared
to fire, it is extremely slow in reaction. Earth supports everything
that exists like a mother and therefore is aptly symbolised as
patience in Hindu mythology. The second house, the house of
family, the sixth house, the house of physique and the tenth house
the house of karma are earthy signs. Man has an inherent
attachment to these materialistic things. In other words, the
illusion or the Maya induces the human mind to believe that
things like family, body and karma are solid and permanent.
Kaalchakra - The Wheel of Time 5

The set of second, sixth and tenth houses are defined as the
Triangle of Materials, the money matters.
The wind while passing through a garden, carries and spreads
the fragrance of flowers but while passing through a drain carries
the noxious smell alongwith. On its own, it does not have any
property but acquires or withdraws qualities based on
companionships and relationships while passing through the
streets of life. The third house , house of mind, the seventh house ,
the house of atmosphere, the eleventh house, the house of
satisfactions and desires belong to airy element. As per holy
Quran, the mind on its own is a clean slate with no letter inscribed
at the time of birth of a child. But the society paints good or bad
colours during the progression of life. The third, seventh and
eleventh houses are termed as the T riangle of Kama, the desires.
The water has no colour, shape or size of its own but adopts the
features of the container holding it. The water is the source of
emergence for life. It is instrumental in growth of plants,
blossoming of flowers and ripening of fruits. And that is why;
the watery signs are referred to as fruitful signs. The fourth,
eighth and twelfth houses, together represent the Houses of
Moksha, or, in other words, the Houses of Houses. The fourth
house is the residential place and the eighth is the house of uterus
of mothers in different j an mas or births and the twelfth house is
the feet of the almighty, the final conclusion of the countless
series of births.
The sky is the space in which the time or the period of life
traverses in a cyclic order. The sky itself is a big bale of mysteries
and that is why, in Chidambaram, the holy place of Lord Shiva,
the God stays as abstract whereas in other places, idols are
worshipped.
The light is essential for any kind of happening, and it emanates
from heat or fire. The stability of any phenomenon requires a
force called gravitational force, which is provided by the earth.
These two basic elements form the building blocks for living
beings, which further require wind and water to survive, grow
and multiply.
Astrologies ofKaalchakra

oasea on Tour oasic elements or lire, earth, wind and water, tne
seers of astrology have provided the distinct characteristics to
all the twelve bhavas or cusps. A question that arises here is,
why the sky was not included in this classification exercise.
The possible answer is that the sky is of permanent nature . They
delegated the properties of sky to the stars, which are
characteristically perpetual. Our ancestors have stressed upon
the importance of making predictions by analysing the positions
of the planets through the stars.
The twelve signs of the zodiac are thus divided into three equal
parts of 120 degrees each, and the signs of 1, 5 and 9 (Aries,
Leo and Sagittarius) are called as the fiery signs. Next to the
fiery signs, are the earthy signs, 2, 6 and 10 (Taurus, Virgo and
Capricorn), each 120degrees apart. Then, come the windy signs
3, 7 and 1 1 (Gemini, Libra and Aquarius) once again separated
by 120 degrees each. Finally, the watery signs 4, 8 and 12
(Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces).
The twelve signs of zodiac are designated as fiery, earthy, windy
and watery signs in an orderly sequence. The table below depicts
the summary of classification of each sign.
Aries
Leo
Sagittarius
Taurus
Virgo
Capricorn
Gemini
Libra
Aquarius
Cancer
Scorpio
Pisces
Fiery and Movable sign
Fiery and Fixed sign.
Fiery and Common sign..
Earthy and Fixed sign
Earthy and Common sign
Earthy and Movable sign
Windy and Common sign
Windy and Movable sign
Windy and Fixed sign.
Watery and Movable sign
Watery and Fixed sign
Watery and Common sign
All this exercise is quite purposeful as each classification is
identified with certain set of characteristics. A detailed list is
provided below:
Kaalchakra - The Wheel of Time

VARIOUS CUSPAL ATTRIBUTES UNDER DIFFERENT
CLASSIFICATIONS
Cuspal Attributes in Fiery, Earthy, Wateiy and
Windy Signs
Note : The entire zodiac around us inscribes a complete circle .
of 360 degrees , which is divided into twelve signs . Also the
horoscopic charts comprise of 12 houses or bhavas . These
bhavas have been assigned specific attributes by the seers
astrology covering all the aspects of our life and environ . Thesf
twelve cusps fall on different points along the zodiacal circle
and thus lie in different signs , out of which some may be fiery
while others may be earthy, windy or watery. The attributions
of the cusps get modified in the light of the colours of these
signs . A list of logically derived cusp-wise attributes in seriatim
is provided hereunder depending on their falling in fiery, earthy,
windy or watery sign:
(1) Fiery Signs
Cusp Cuspal attributes when falling in fiery Sign
1 Short-tempered, unattached, arrogant, proud, heavy
body structure.
2 Inclined to tell lies , spendthrift, maintains harmful hands.
3 Courage, self-confidence and boldness.
4 Rough in education, working in fire-related professions.
5 Compelling in sexual relationship , rape , involvement in
prostitution and vulgar dancing, having sexually
motivated children.
6 Illnesses caused by excessive body-heatr
7 Immoral wife and opponents.
8 Muscle damages, murder, threatenings, accidents,
suicide, mental .instability.
9 Lack of sharpness despite being educated, religious
fanaticism, multiple affairs, managerial skills.

10 Industry, chief executive responsibilities.
11 Sadistic friends, being greedy and egoistic.
12 Involving in secret and sabotage activities, masochistic.
(2) Earthy signs
Cusp Cuspal attributes when falling in earthy sign
1 Mild natural, stout and soft body, family attachments,
brisk, respectful, open in talks.
2 Creating improvement on anything, safe-keeping.
3 Yielding nature, lack of boldness, cowardliness.
4 Deeply educated, agriculture, rearing domestic animals.
5 Caring sexual relationship, interests in arts.
6 Getting sick due to climatic conditions, allergy, neural
disorders.
7 Morally upright wife, caring opponents.
8 Facing damages due to natural disasters, getting struck
in thunders, gales and heavy winds, losses and
disappointments due to family attachments/
9 Polygamy, relationships with strangers, research abilities,
keeping learned skills within themselves.
10 Medical profession, business interests in the fields of
food, dress materials, vegetables, grains and agriculture.
11 Caring friends, greedy.
12 Research attitude in good and useful fields.
(3) Windy signs
Cusp Cuspal attributes when falling in windy sign
1 Atrocions and playful in nature, acting to be caring, lean
body.
2 Witty and prideful but clear speech.
3 Stressful mind, making many attempts.
Kaalchakra - The Wheel of Time

Expert in mathematics education, ability to write stories,
articles and poems.
5 Comedian, playwright, magic squares and games.
6 Respiratory disorders , work in petrol and gas companies ,
airports, research centres and dye industries.
7 Intelligent wife, partners and opponents.
8 Accidents due to air pressures and natural disasters,
bomb blasts.
9 Skill in research, excelling in higher education, teacher,
professor.
10 Intelligence agencies , woik in planes , work which needs
human intelligence.
11 Carefree and happy disposition, freshness.
12 Secret research activities, gathering intelligence,
archaeology, research education.
(4) Watery signs
Cusp Cuspal attributes when falling in watery sign
1 Calm nature, silent, angelic qualities, unattached
saintliness, fat body, soft speech, never revealing
anything.
2 Speech unclear yet full of wisdom.
3 Impulsive, presence of mind.
4 Adjusting to changing circumstances, doing very well
in education, good in teaching, and interest in agriculture,
careful maintenance of water bodies.
5 Getting religious wisdom, divine powers, great yogi,
expert in arts.
6 Fluid disorders, work in liquid related fields.
7 Devout wife, partners and opponents.
8 Accidents and dangers in lakes and seas, affected by
heavy

rains, problems in urinary track.
9 Excelling in higher education, preacher, deep
involvement in sexual relations, religious-minded,
travelling by sea.
10 Wok in harbour, bridge and dams.
11 Helping tendencies, happy mind and strong friendship:
12 Research in discovering underground water etc.
Cuspal Attributes in Movable, Fixed and Common Signs
The three types of signs , movable, fixed and common have also
been systematically earmarked to the twelve cusps. The basic
characteristics are as follows.
(1) Movable : Height, length, breadth, travel, distance,
routes, paths, markings, places, continuous, endless, target,'
movable in nature, growth, improvement, superior, inferior,
outside etc.
(2) Fixed : Stable, singular m quality, steadiness, constant,
fixed quantity, length, breadth, travel, destination, main street,
fixed place and objects, end, seat, inside, steady growth, stability,
decisions etc.
(3) Common: Unsteady, dual in quality, unstable in nature,
dilemma, inconstant quantity, approximate, returning back, bylanes, temporary places and objects, tenancy on rent* living out
of hometown, unsteady growth, hanging, shaky, decadent,
bending and yielding, unsteady in decisions, lack of proper
completion despite good start etc.,
The logically blended nature of these three types of signs for
the individual cusp is outlined as follows.
If it is a movable sign the following general significations given
for all the 12 houses will be growing in nature.
I f it is a fixed sign, these significations will be constant in nature .
If it is a common sign, these significations will be fluctuating
in nature .
Kaalchakra - The Wheel of Time

imsp m
PhysicaUppearance, memory power, intelligence, anger, natural
characteristics, actions, skills, colour and beauty.
// Cusp
Oratory skills, eyes, acceptance, gold jewellery, gems, money,
expensive objects and documents.
HI Cusp
Courage, self-confidence, body movements, sensory organs, blood
vessels, communications, writings, messages, change of places,
shifting of materials, actions, acumen.
IV Cusp
Production organs, education, house, land, vehicle, machinery
and belongings.
V Cusp
lilood cells, deep knowledge, wisdom, arts, children, love,
religious beliefs.
VI Cusp
Food, dress, medicine, loans, success, litigations, digestion
organs, slavery and diseases.
VII Cusp
Spouse, partner, opponents, persons we meet in normal course
of life, sensory organs in the body and kidney.
VIII Cusp
Longevity, accidents, troubles, sorrow, pains, sufferings,
struggles, reproductive organs, dishonour and disgrace.
IX Cusp
Higher education, travel, foreign life, research, extra-marital
affairs, anus and trustworthiness.
Astrologies of Kaalchakra

XCUSfr
Profession, prestige, status, executive positions, excessive
production disorders in the body and thigh.
XI Cusp
Self-cravings, happiness, expectations, son-in-law, daughter-inlaw, knees and vitamins in the body.
XIICusp
Secret activities, losses, investments, expenses, comforts in
travel, sleep and sex, feet and failure of organs in the body.
On the analogy as mentioned above, the twelve signs of zodiac
have their characteristic properties. It is dealt in detail in the
next chapter.
Kaalchakra - The Wheel of Time

/ Cusp
Movable
Physical appearance, memory power, intelligence, anger, natural
characteristics, actions, skills, colour and beauty are all in growing -
nature.
Fixed
Physical appearance, memory power, intelligence, anger, natural
characteristics, actions, skills, colour and beauty are all constant
in nature.
Immovable
Physical appearance, memory power, intelligence, anger, natural
characteristics, actions, skills, colour and beauty are all
fluctuant ; in nature.
// Cusp
Movable
Oratory skills, eyes, acceptance, gold jewellery, gems, money,
expensive objects and documents are all in growing nature.
Fixed
Oratory skills, eyes, acceptance, gold jewellery, gems, money,
expensive objects and documents are all constant in nature.
Inmiovable
Oratory skills, eyes, acceptance, gold jewellery, gems, money,
expensive objects and documents are all fluctuating in nature.
IIlCusp
Movable : Courage, self-confidence, body movements,
sensory organs, blood vessels, communications, writings,
messages, change of places, shifting of things, actions, acumen
are all in growing nature.
Fixed
Courage, self-confidence, body movements, sensory organs,
blood ^ sse Is, communications, writings, messages, change of
14 Astrologies ofKaalchakra

places, shifting of things, actions, acumen are all constant in
nature.
Immovable: Courage, self- confidence, body movements,
sensory organs, blood vessels, communications, writings,
messages, change of places, shifting of things, actions, acumen
are all fluctuating in nature.
IV Cusp
Movable
Production organs, education, house, land, vehicle, machinery
and belongings are all in growing nature.
Fixed
Production organs, education, house, land, vehicle, machinery
and belongings are all constant in nature.
Immovable : Production organs, education, house, land, vehicle
machinery and belongings are all fluctuating in nature.
V Cusp
Movable
Blood cells, deep knowledge, wisdom, arts, children, love,
religious beliefs are all in growing nature.
Fixed
Blood cells, deep knowledge, wisdom, arts, children, love,
religious beliefs are all constant in nature.
Immovable
Blood cells, deep knowledge, wisdom, arts, children, love,
religious beliefs are all fluctuating in nature.
VI Cusp
Movable
Food, dress, medicine, loans, success, litigations, digestion
organs, slavery and diseases are all in growing nature.
Kaalchakra
The Wheel of Time >5

Fixed
Food, dress, medicine, loans, success, litigations, digestion
organs, slavery and diseases are all constant in nature.
Immovable : Food, dress, medicine, loans, success, litigations,
digestion organs, slavery and diseases are all fluctuating in
nature.
VII Cusp
Movable
Spouse, partner, opponents, persons we meet in the course of
life, sensory organs in the body and kidney are all in growing
nature.
Fixed
Spouse, partner, opponents, persons we meet in the course of
life, sensory organs in the body and kidney are all constant in
nature.
Immovable
Spouse, partner, opponents, persons we meet in the course of
life, sensory organs in the body and kidney are all fluctuating in
nature.
VIII Cusp
Movable
Longevity, accidents, troubles, sorrow, pains, sufferings,
struggles, reproductive organs, dishonour and disgrace are all
in growing nature.
Fixed
Longevity, accidents, troubles, sorrow, pains, sufferings,
struggles, reproductive organs, dishonour and disgrace are all
constant in nature.
Astrologies ofKaalchakra

Immovable
Longevity, accidents, troubles, sorrow, pains, sufferings,
struggles, reproductive organs, dishonour and disgrace are all
fluctuating in nature.
IX Cusp
Movable : Higher education, travel, foreign life, research,
extra-marital affairs, anus and self-confidence are all in growing
nature.
Fixed
Higher education, travel, foreign life, research, extra-marital
affairs, anus and self-confidence are all constant in nature.
Immovable : Higher education, travel, foreign life, research,
extra-marital affairs, anus and self-confidence are all fluctuating
in nature.
XCusp
Movable
Profession, prestige, status, executive positions, excessive
production disorders in the body and thigh are all in growing
nature.
Fixed
Profession, prestige, status, executive positions, excessive
production disorders in the body and thigh are ail constant in
nature.
Immovable
Profession, prestige, status, executive positions, excessive
production disorders in the body and thigh are all fluctuating in
nature.
XI Cusp
Movable
Self-cravings, happiness, expectations, son-in-law, daughter-inlaw, knees and vitamins in the body are all in growing nature.
Kaalchakra - The Wheel of Time 17

Fixed
Self-cravings, happiness, expectations, son-in-law, daughter-inlaw, knees and vitamins in the body are an constant in nature.
Immovable
Self-cravings, happiness, expectations, son-in-law, daughter-inlaw, knees and vitamins in the body are all fluctuating in nature.
XII Cusp
Movable
Secret activities, losses, investments, expenses, comforts in
travel, sleep and sex, feet and failure of organs in the body are
all in growing nature.
Fixed
Secret activities, losses, investments, expenses, comforts in
travel, sleep and sex, feet and failure of organs in the body are
all constant in nature.
Immovable
Secret activities, losses, investments, expenses, comforts in
travel, sleep and sex, feet and failure of organs in the body are
all fluctuating in nature.
On the analogy as mentioned above, the twelve signs of zodiac
have their characteristic properties. It is dealt with in the next
chapter.
Astrologies of Kaalchakra

SIGNIFICATIONS OF ELEMENTS (Table 2)

Kaalchakra - The Twelve
Signs of Zodiac
The twelve signs of zodiac have their own typical characteristics,
properties and attributes. They are hereunder enlisted seriatim.
ARIES
Movable and fiery sign, sterile, four-legged, masculine, lack of
improvement, anger, incomprehension, beastly, lengthy, docile
animal, lanes, morning time, house with compound, front part
of the street, small mountains, sparsely populated areas, place
where thieves live, low-lying areas, industrial area, security
personnel quarters, crumbled house, singu lar sign, east direction,
red colour, forest, Ashwini 1 , 2, 3, 4, Bharani 1 , 2, 3, 4, Krittika
1, the first sign of the zodiac, 0 to 30 degrees, own house of
planet Mars, Chitra/Chaitra month (April/May).
TAURUS
Fixed and earthy sign, neck part, affectionate, submissive, stable,
calm, beastly, lengthy, four-legged, semi-beneficial, feminine
sign, bull sign, main street, mid-day, house with compound,
middle part of the street, banks, secret rooms, treasury rooms,
place where ladies live, dual sign, cast direction, fertile lands,
white colour, make-up room, Krittika 2, 3, 4, Rohini 1, 2, 3, 4,
Mrigashirsham/Mrigashira 1, 2, the second sign of the Zodiac,
30 to 60 degrees, own house of Venus, Vaikasi/Vaisaka month
(May/June).
A stro logics of kaalch akra

GEMINI
Commffli and windy sign, intelligent, shoulders, hands, easy
grasping, instability, human nature, two-legged, narrow sign,
masculine sign, double male figures, final part of the street,
heavy traffic, double-storied house, night time, hilly places, play
grounds, communication office, publication office, research
centres, book shelf, good voice, singular sign, black colour,
south-east direction, Mrigashirsham/Mrigashira 3, 4,
Thiruvadirai/Arudra 1, 2, 3, 4,Punarpoosam/Punarvasu 1,2,3,
the third sign of the Zodiac, 60 to 90 degrees, own house of
Mercury, Aani/Jyeshta month (June/July),
CANCER
Movable and watery sign, lungs, chest, silent, fast understanding,
growthful, fully beneficial sign, calm nature, multi-legged sign,
narrow, staying houses, grain storage yard, education,
educational institutions, building complexes, house with
compound, crab figured, front part of the street, morning time,
Punarpoosam/Punarvasu 4, Poosam 1,2,3, 4,Ayilyam/Aslesha
1,2,3, 4, the fourth sign of the Zodiac, own house of the Moon,
dual sign, white colour, south direction, agricultural fields,
gardens, 90 to 120 degrees, Aadi/Aashada month (July/August).
LEO
Fixed and fiery sign, stability, heart, short-tempered,
incomprehensive, barren and sterile sign, beastly natured,
narrow, four-legged sign, lion figured, hill tops, forests, deserts,
forts, government buildings, music and drama auditoriums,
gambling places, pleasure houses, hidden treasures, labour
wards, masculine sign, house with compound, lodges, beginning
of a street, mid-day time, Makham 1, 2, 3, 4, Pooram/
Purvapalguni 1, 2, 3, 4, Utharam/Uttarapalguni 1, the fifth sign
of the Zodiac, own house of the Sun, singular sign, red in colour,
south direction, 120 to 150 degrees, Avani/Shravana month
(A ugust/September).
Kaalchakra — TheTwelve Signs of Zodiac 21

VIRGO
Common and earthy sign, unstable, stomach, calm, affectionate,
semi-beneficial sign, sterile, human natured, narrow, lonely
house, night time, last part of a street, hospital, pharmacy,
clothes, food articles, potato, expertness, first-aid box, grain
storage yard, libraries, gardens, 150 to 1 80 degrees, the sixth
sign of the Zodiac, Uthara/Uttarapalguni 2, 3, 4,Hastha 1, 2, 3,
4, Chitra 1 , 2, own house of the Mercury, dual sign, black colour,
city, south-west direction, yellow colour, Purattasi/Patrapada
month (September/October).
LIBRA
Movable and windy sign, kidney, uterus, having good voice,
intelligent, quick comprehension, windy and elevated places,
lifeless objects, lengthy, singular sign, semi-beneficial sign,
masculine sign, main street, early morning time, persons with
status, womanisers, arts such as music and drama, research, selfpraises, the seventh sign of the Zodiac, Chitra 3, 4, Swathi l , 2,
3 ,4 , Visakam/Vaishaka 1,2, 3, own house of the Venus, 1 80 to
2 1 0 degrees, golden colour, west in direction, bazaars, Aippasi/
Aasweeja month (October/Novem&er).
SCORPIO
Fixed and watery sign, stable, sexual organs, silent,
knowledgeable, quick in comprehension, ability to explain
clearly what is learnt, power, prestige, sign of living things,
lengthy, useless well, drainage, muddy places, lavatory,
tanneries, slaughter houses, mutton market, operation theatre,
burial ground, iron godowns, chemical laboratory, prison place
where executions take place, multi-legged sign, beneficial sign,
feminine sign, house with compound, mid-day time, the eighth
sign of the Zodiac, Visakam/Vaishaka 4, Anusham/Anuradha l,
2, 3, 4£ettai/Jyeshta 1, 2, 3, 4, own house of the Mars, 210 to
240 degrees, dual sign, black colour, well, west direction,
Karthikai/Karteega month (November/December).
Astrologies of kaalchakra

SAGITTARIUS
Common and fiery sign, dual sigh, immovable sign, anal parts,
difficult to comprehend, multi-storied house, semi-masculine
and semi-feminine sign, semi -beastly and semi-humanly sign,
angry, place full of trees and plants, arms godowns, religious
institutions, schools, colleges, temples, law courts, lanes, night
time, barrai and sterile sign, the ninth sign of the Zodiac, Moola
,1, 2, 3, 4, Pooradam/Poorvashada 1, 2, 3, 4, Utharadam/
Uttarashada 1, own house of the Jupiter, 240 to 270 degrees,
singular sign, red and golden colour, north-west direction, outer
area of the town, war-front, Margazhi/Margashira month
(December/January).
CAPRICORN
Movable and earthy sign, semi-beneficial sign, thigh,
affectionate, quick comprehension, slum area, lonely places,
hospitals, mortuary, cow-shed, caves, crowded places, litter spot,
low buildings, street, feminine sign, sea-horse figured,
cowardliness, self-pride, selfishness, extremely inclined towards
sex, early morning time, the tenth sign of the Zodiac, Uthradam/
Uttarashada 2, 3, 4, Thiruvonam/Shravana 1, 2, 3, 4, Avittam/
Dhanishta 1, 2, own house of Saturn, 270 to 300 degrees, dual
sign, white colour, north direction, marine area, Thai/Pushya
month (January/February).
AQUARIUS
Fixed and windy sign, lifeless sign, knee, having good voice,
quick comprehension, main street, unequal places, corridor,
ditches, hidden places, radio, television, place where we keep
the refrigerator, pot figured, cowardice, be suspicious of,
perseverance, mid-day time, semi-beneficial sign, three legged,
the eleventh sign of the Zodiac, Avittam/Dhanishta 3, 4,
Sathayam/Sathabisha 1, 2, 3, 4, Poorattadhi/Poorvabadra 1, 2,
3, own house of Saturn, 300 to 330 degrees, singular sign, dark
yellow in colour, north direction, water bodies, Masi/Maagha
month (February/March).
Kaalchakra — The Twelve Signs of Zodiac 23

PISCES
Common and watery sign, living sign, leg and feet, silent,
intelligent, growthfu I, seas, ponds, fishing places, tanneries, salt
producing places, prisons, wells, muddy places, oil wells,
harbours, generous, two-legged sign, feminine sign, dual in
nature, double-fish figured, humble, night time, fully beneficial
sign, the twelfth sign of the Zodiac; Poorattadhi/Poorvabadra 4,
Uthrattadhi/Uttarabadra 1 , 2, 3, 4,Revathi 1 , 2, 3, 4, own house
of the Jupiter, 330 to 360 degrees, dual sign, ash colour, northwest direcion, oceans, Panguni/Palguna month (March/April).
These attributes of the different signs of zodiac are very general.
It is important to learn to pick up appropriate ones quite
judiciously, suiting to the particular individual and his query
being examined.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

THE TABLE OF CHARACTERS OF THE XH SIGNS OF ZODIAC ( Table 3 )

THE TABLE OF CHARACTERS OF THE XII SIGNS OF ZODIAC ( Table- 4 )

Side Of Organs
Right eye, foot
R/ear, lung, spinal chord, knee
R/Heart, thighs
R/Hip
R/Ovaries, testicles, kidney
L/Ovaries, testicles, kidney
L/Hip
L/Heart, thigh
L/ear, hand, shoulders
L/eye, foot

THE TABLE OF CHARACTERS OF THE XH SIGNS OF
ZODIAC ( Table 3 )
Notes:
i) All the movable signs denote the begining and the past,
the fixed signs the middle and the present and the
common signs denote the end and the future of any event.
ii) All the movable signs denote the mornings, the fixed signs
the middays and the common signs the evenings of
a day.
iii) All the movable signs denote minerals while the fixed signs
denote origin and the common signs denote the life.
iv) All the movable signs denote streets with heavy traffic
while the fixed signs denote highways and main roads
and the common signs denote the lanes.
v) All the fiery signs denote East in direction, while the earthy
signs are South, the airy signs the West and the
watery signs the North according to a tradtional school
of astrology.
vi) All the fiery signs are barren, while the earthy signs are
semi-fruitful and the airy signs are dry and the watery
signs are fruitful.
vii) All the fiery signs denote short temper, while the earthy
signs patience and the airy signs pride and
the watery signs denote peaceful.
viii) All the fiery signs are arrogant and the earthy signs are
happy and the airy signs are sweety and the watery signs
are calm in sounds.
ix) With the use of number of legs, we could identify the
wheels of the vehicle, house-hold appliances, houses and
animals etc. According to one classical school of astrology,
the signs Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces are multi-legged
signs. Sagittarius has two fore legs and 4 legs in the back
while Capricorn has 4 fore legs and multiple legs in the
back side.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

x) Lungs and heart have been marked respectively in Gemini
and Cancer in a few traditional texts while the
remaining texts marie them in Cancer and Leo. Lung is an
organ of respiration, hence an airy sign Gemini would he
more appropriate. Heart, which has a non-stop functioning
for the flow of blood, the liquid, could be placed in
Cancer, the movable and watery sign. But Sun being the
planet of generosity is the lord of the sign Leo, the
house of romance. That is why some texts mark the heart
in the sign of Leo.
xij All the Masculine signs are cruel signs while all the
feminine signs are peaceful signs as per one of the
traditional school. This gender classification of signs could
he used for the intrepretation of many things such as sex,
beauty, physical strength, courage, potencey,
agriculture etc.
Kaalchakra — Th e
Twelve Signs
of
Zodiac 29

Kaalchakra - The Planets
The propounders of astrology detailed the nature, character and
behaviour of individual planets or grahas.
ATTRIBUTES OF THE PLANETS
Here is an illustrative list of the attributes of the planets.
Sun : Paternal
Father, soul, head, tusk, right eye , stiff hair, bile , body, treatment,
head diseases such as head-ache, fever, sexual relationship with
unhealthy or mentally disordered women, strict vegetarianism,
meditational powers, the ultimate god, alloy of five metals,
invaluable gem, elephant, wheat, pepper, pilgrimage, day time,
light, mountain, forest, village tour etc are some of the attributes
of the Sun.
Moon : Maternal
Mother, the Supreme Goddess, Lord Ganesha, easy life, clothes,
horse, sleep, duration of few days, fluctuating body structure,
madness, tuberculosis, cold and cold-related diseases, left eye,
eye brows, umbrella, job, fame, wavering, pearl jewellery,
bronze, butter, rice, salt, black spots in the body, farmer,
washerman, choultry, flowers with good fragrance, fen, strength,
bathing etc are some of the attributes of the Moon.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Mars : Brotherly
Brother/sister, earth, Lord Karthik, Goddess Patrakali, shorttempered, potter, persons in fire-related profession, war, blood,
wounds, bravery, copper, red gemstones, fear of fire, deep
wounds, hatred, loans, adultery, potency, cheerful, goat, leader
of army, surgeon, commanding posts, sexual relationship with
widows, instant death etc are some of the attributes of the Mars.
Rahu : Grandfather
Science, grand father and paternal relationships, chemistry,
physics, magic, thefts, various acting professions, cinema,
profession as servants, foreign life, involving in such professions
which are unfitting to his community, enchanting and conjuring
magic, sexual relationship with women of ill-health, leprosy,
military arms and missiles, swellings, chronic diseases, fear of
poison, dangers in water, being handicapped, over-talking, gas
troubles, fits, bile diseases* respiratory diseases, cut wounds,
deep wounds etc are some of the attributes of the Rahu.
Jupiter ± Offspring
Children, lord Brahma, wisdom, yoga practice, teaching
profession, the eight great powers explained in 'the Vedas,
advices, clever and intelligent, good suggestions on
administration, monarchy powers, family, service to the king,
wealth, moral, fame, gifts from the king, nickname, divine
matters, peace, gold, valuable gem stones, sweet, eyes, honey,
groundnut etc are some of the attributes of Jupiter.
Saturn : Servant
Lifespan, the grace of mid-night god, means of living, bull pen,
iron, slavery, servant, agricultural fields, blue gemstone such as
sapphire, carpentry, theft, soul troubles, imprisonment,
punishments from the king, useless talk, shameless, sufferings,
talkative, loans, immoral acts, fainting, eating out, sexual
relationships with widows- handicapped or women of low castes,
living in lonely islands, eunuch, handicapped, mental instability,
sexual diseases, hair, skin, nails, bile disorders, oil etc ate some
of the attributes of the Saturn.
Kaalchakra—The Planets

Mercury : XJncie
Uncle, education, knowledge, Lord Vishnu, businessman,
accountant, the manager of wealth, ambassador, charioteer,
orator, public speaking, poetry, tales, music, astrology, skill,
true statements, Vaishnava sect in Hindu tradition, business,
writing profession, sculpture, eunuch, chariot, traditional dances,
paralysis, poisonous diseases, involvement with prostitutes,
universal wisdom, reliable speech, lack of childbirth, green
gemstones such as emerald, leaves etc are some of the attributes
of the Mercury.
Ketu : Grandmother .
Wisdom, religious matters, maternal grandparents, laser
equipments,, legal profession, professions of low status,
prostitution, immoral professions, foreign life, deep wounds,
leprosy, stomach pain, dangers with fire, pompous, lack of
pleasure, imprisonment etc are some of the attributes of the Ketu.
Venus : Spouse
Marriage, residence, nickname, sexual relationship with many
women, attractive prostitutes, musical instruments, inclination
towards traditional dances, scented flowers, varions scents, bed
mattresses, luxurious beds, royal ladies, beautiful women, sexual
enjoyments, beauty, youth, dark eyes , wealth, vehicles, garlands,
flags, gemstones, silver, shipping trade, witty speech, desires,
divine prayers to the Goddess Lakshmi, exuding charm to
general public, friendship, cows, milk, curd rice, lead metal,
divine women, air and sea voyages etc are some of the attributes
of the Venus.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PLANETS
Note : The horoscopic charts comprise of 12 houses or bhavas .
These bhavas carry specific well-defined attributes covering
all the aspects of our life and environ .It is understandable that
the characteristics of the planets will be influenced on account
of their placement in these different bhavas .
An illustrative list of planetary characteristics in different bhavas
in which the said planet or its stars appear is presented in the
following:
Sun
Bhava Characteristics of Sun in different bhavas
1 Elegant structure, pride, strong bones in the body,
prestigious activities , administration capacity ,
leadership quality, status, self-prestige, executive
responsibility.
2 Government assets, treasury, financial institutions,
documents of ministry of finance, stamps, financial
status of a country* government orders, savings,
opal, gems, government rewards.
3 Government commands, national communication
departments* posts and telegraph* telephones* news,
advertisements, government messages, records,
documents, national details, 7
4 Government buildings, offices, mansions, palaces,
vehicles, educational centres, colleges, urban lands,
governments gifts, government staff quarters,
government machineries, properties , agricultural lands ,
ponds, wells, water tanks, mountains, housing and
transport departments.
5 Government temples, function halls, politics, religion,
governmental celebration of arts , sports meets , political
leaders, government subsidy details, games, arts
department, chess.
Kaatchakra — The Planets 33

6 Government loans, government litigations, government
servants, food, dresses, medicines, employment
schemes, food department, veterinary, agricultural and
medical departments.
7 General welfare, public populace, opponents,
domineering wife, officers, those who have relationships
with our country, public welfare departments.
8 Government seizure, damages in properties and
government buildings, stealing government documents,
top leaders of the nation, death, quitting politics,
government punishment, death penalty, removal of
encroachments charge-sheets, criminal activities, fire
accidents
9 Religious departments, institutions of higher education,
foreign embassies, government research centres, finance
departments, foreign companies.
10 Officers of higher anthority, government related offices,
industrial centres, vocational educational centres,
employment centres, government business centres,
prestigious posts in government.
11 Government halls, clubs , friendship centres, functions,
guest house, co-operative centres, government rewards,
monuments, government gifts and incentives, providing
help, important leader in politics.
12 Investigating department, customs department, sales tax
department, audit department, prisons, hoarder, offices
involving in secret activities, department which handles
seizure, government hospital, place where post-mortem
is carried out, offices which carry out punishments.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Moon
BItava Characteristics of Moon in different bhavas
1 Calm disposition, matured actions, confused mind,
unstable acts, increase in water content of body, over
thoughts, not accepting responsibilities, submissive,
prideless friendship, co-operative.
2 Frequent income, dear speech, consultant in financial
companies, orator, quick acts through money, pearl
ornaments, silver artides.
3 Fast messages, news, tours, document writer, author pf
various articles, novels and poems, commentaries,
encouraging news.
4 Lakes, agricultural lands, boats, aquatic matters, watery
fruits and vegetables, educational trainings, dams, rain
water, underground water, wells, lakes, ponds, potable
water, vehicles, refrigerators.
5 Good acting performance, youthful acting, poets,
thinkers, quick and enjoyable sexual relationships,
pleasure clubs, children, playgrounds, intelligent
children, cricket players.
6 Labour in dams, ship workers, fishermen, plumbers,
water related diseases, weakness, labour in agricultural
fields, lunatic.
7 Young-looking women, brisk women, sadistic sexual
tastes, women with oscillating moods’, business partners,
customers and those who meet us.
8 Madness, unconsciousness , forgetfulness, bad thoughts
and deeds, damages in water content of the body, losing
intelligence, unfitting acts, lack of educational wisdom,
dangers in water.
9 Speedy researches, excellence in higher education,
illegal affairs, ships, troubles through loans, professors,
inventions, private research centres.
Kaalchakra — The Planets

10 Professions in water and liquids, medicines, white
coloured objects, quick business, exports and imports,
service in ships, harbours, fishing, boats, pipelines and
wells.
11 Confusing friends, quick satisfaction in anything, large
friends circle, selfish persons, inclined towards liquid
products.
12 Quick expenditures, investments, sea voyages, hoarding
of liquid products, enjoyable sleep and bed comforts.
Mars
Bhava Characteristics of Mars in different bhavas
1 Brave acts, angry, impertinent, selfishness, excessive
heat in the body, rough exterior, unyielding, shorttempered, never accepting to other’s opinions,
arrogance, pride, self-praise, immorality, insanity.
2 Spendthrift, lying, dishonesty, ornaments made by red
gems, metals, rough speech, daring, speech, sadistic
speech, usage of bad language, indecent speech, harsh
and wounding speech, defence weapons, stealing.
3 Bravery, confidence, encouraging acts, wrong news and
messages, forged documents, mental strength, rough
intelligence, unnecessary negotiations, incompetent
agreements.
4 Rough education, house, lands, desire in vehicles,
landlord, agricultural farms, poultry farms, chemical
fertilizers, machineries, weapons, large industries.
5 Rough sexual acts, sexually motivated children, indecent
acting, singing, atheists, painters, sculptures, artists in
colours, cabaret dancers, folk dancers, boxing.
6 Damages in muscles, diseases due to body heat, service
in industries, aggressive personality, tough servants,
cooks, tailors, food articles, pharmacists.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

7 Immoral wife, partner, arrogant wife, dishonest
customers, terrorists, haughty bank officials, seeking
help from others by force.
8 Squabbles, tiffs, revolutions, revolts, terrorism,
invasions, false allegations, police and military actions,
troubles from brothers, weapons, bombs, attacks, ghastly
accidents, rape, murder, robbery, usurping other's
properties, swindling, cheating, suicide squad.
9 Agricultural education, geology, engineering education,
history, archaeology, politician, political leader, head
master, transport owner, hereditary landlord, criminal
law departments, judges.
10 Industries, fire related professions, departments for
housing and land development, police, armed forces,
administration officers, responsible officers for
government documents, executive posts.
11 Untruthful friends, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, ultimate
success after many struggles, lunatic greed, getting or
achieving what is wanted after lacing many hurdles.
12 Improper and unbecoming activities, adulteration,
hoarding, covert activities, service in operation theatres,
prostitution dens, service in luxury hotels, investigation
departments, smuggling.
Rahu
Bhava Characteristics of Rahu in different bhavas
1 , Gigantic ideas in everything, thoughts, activities,
overgrowth of body organs, respiratory disorders,
pendiant for alcohol and women, gourmet.
2 Pretentious speech, soft spoken, keeping others' money,
foreign currency, scholarship from abroad, leader for
strangers.
3 Clerk in embassies, ambassadors, settlement through
compromises, foreign agreements, communications
from abroad, foreign articles, foreign memos.
Kaalchakra — The Planets

4 Education abroad, government vehicles, palaces
belonging to government, prisons, graveyards, narcotic
manufacturing, production of adulterated and spurious
goods.
5 Love and sexual relationships with strangers, prostitution
in foreign countries, nude dancing, invovement in
gambling anddrinking bars, getting emotional in open
places, good swimmer, athlete.
6 Respiratory disorders, gourmet, service in production
of narcotics, sedative foods, clove, cashew nut, almonds,
cardamom, alcohol, anaesthetists in operation theatres,
manufacturer of respiratory equipments.
7 Wife and opponents from unknown places, partners,
excessive sexual involvement, orgy, homosexual, neutral
genders, lecher, womanisers, likes to have prolonged
sex.
8 Incarceration, sadistic sexual desire, totally immersed
in drugs and women, getting punished abroad,
confiscated, allegations from abroad, damages in blood
vessels, carbon-dioxide problems, protein problems.
9 Researchers in drugs , narcotics and abnonnal sexuality ,
transplantation surgeons, transplantations, production of
artificial limbs, religious research centres, foreign
cultural organisations, grain storages abroad, teaching
of foreign languages.
10 Prisons, investigating officers, translators, foreign
currency exchange centres, banks, foreign employment
offices, wardens, multinational markets, magicians,
manufacturer of shoes and boots, illegal computer usage.
11 Foreign friends, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, intercommunity relationships, enjoying by watching sex
performed by others, self-less talks with selfish
intentions, sadistic pleasures.
12 Clandestine intelligence gathering, software, atomic
reactor, production of gunpowder, anesthetists in
38 Astrologies of kaalchakra

operation theatres, moderator with respiratory
equipments, plane hijack, jail.
Jupiter
Bhava Characteristics of Jupiter in different bhavas
1 Truthful, honest, own ideas, humble, prestigious,
confidence, intelligent, calm and accommodative in
nature.
2 Money in cash, treasury, gold articles, honest speech,
respectable speech, teaching, banks, jewllery shop.
3 Documents, stamp papers, cheques, cash related
negotiations, true messages, legal agreements, legal
orders and notices.
4 Legal assets, educational centres, manufacturing, large
companies, real estate owners, land surveyors,
manufacturing food products, silk, cotton, cattle farm.
5 Religious contacts, trust in divinity, children, true
romance, performers of religious rites, arts of instinct,
politics, religious leaders, serving in religious acts, deep
thoughts, having the blessings of God.
6 Service in big organisations or banks, presiding over
feasts and functions, medical treatment, foods with
cholesterol, vitamin tablets, cholesterol related diseases,
genetic disorders, getting loans through
recommendations from statusful persons, bank cashier,
medical officer, lawyers, service in law departments.
7 Calm, responsible and accommodating wife, partner,
business customers, statusful persons as business
associates.
8 Persons who get punished by law, penalties, losing gold
articles, illegal activities, legal threatenings, assets
getting impounded, acting above law, producing
damaged articles.
Kaalchakra — The Planets

9 Higher education, teaching education, professor, finance
minister of a country, extreme wisdom, changing conditions
for religion, law and morality, religious rites, temple or
church renovation works, temple trustees, manager of
temple administration, leader of an embassy, exporters.
10 Responsible persons in big organisations, service in
banks , groups for child welfare, prestigious posts , mints ,
service in gold mines, maintenance of national wealth
and monuments.
11 Truthful, generous and intelligent friends, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, legally achieving what is wanted, legal
expectations.
12 Legal but clandestine activities, legal but unknown
troubles, getting caught in income tax problems,
undisclosed assets getting impounded by the
government, legal imprisonment, secret survey by the
financial department, printing of counterfeit money.
Saturn
Bhava Characteristics of Saturn in different bhavas
1 Sluggish, cynical, making decisions only after due
consideration, research skill, dissatisfaction in
everything, inferiority complex.
2 Miser, receiving small amounts, slow in speech, telling
too many lies, keeping cheap articles, stealing by nature.
3 Frightened, undertaking short tours , writers, letters fiorn
undisclosed sources, false or forged documents,
frequently changing one's appearance, likes to walk.
4 Unclaimed lands, mines, old buildings, old articles,
wooden goods, earthenware, oil seeds, black coloured
articles.
5 Sexual relationship or romance with persons of lower
status, unfaithful love, prostitution, saintliness, lazy
children, menses, obscene or heart-rending acting,
security in temples and ponds.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

6 Inferior professions, works as labourers, lowly jobs in
the production units for food, dress and medicines, works
as helpers in the legal profession, skin diseases, receiving
small loans.
7 Immoral, unfaithful, cynical, lying and instable natuned
spouse, partners and persons gwtting associated in the
profession.
8 Disgraced, detached, facing threatenings and
intimidations, cowardice, forgetfulness, ugly appeamace,
absconding, fugitive, fearing about death, mental
imbalance, facing false allegations, litigations, gory
accidents and brutal activities, involving in the
restoration of old articles.
9 Studying science, continous studies, lack of mental
disposition befitting onefs education, oil wells, research
in seeds, clinical analysis of blood, urine and stool.
10 Peons, progressing upwards from lowly jobs, respectful
to persons of lower status, seller of old articles, doing
menial jobs in police, military and corporations.
11 Unfaithful, lethargic, having immoral and dishonest
friends, sons-in-law and daughters-in-law, receiving and
doing everything through dishonest means, purchasing
of properties full of problems.
12 Clandestine revenge, hoardings, hiding things
underground, refusing everything, making secret plans,
involving in adulterations, clandestine, unfitting and
immoral activities.
Kaalchakra — The Planets

Mercury
Bhava Characteristics of Mercury in different bhavas
1 Intelligent, quick understanding and acting accordingly,
slim and attractive in appearance, capacity to assess the
circumstances, witty, brisk activities, unstable in nature,
skills in mathematics, thinking twice before leaping,
good nervous system, cunningness.
2 Witty speech, green coloured gem stones, expensive
sensitive instruments, double based voice, visible blood
lines in the eyes, cheques, exchangeable monetary
instruments, commentaries, orators.
3 Writer of stories and articles, document writer, registrars,
clerks, postmen, communicators, providers of electrical
connections, messengers, advertisers, unstable in nature,
tax collectors, proof-readers, brokers.
4 Novel products, machineries, computers, calculators,
printers, sensitive instruments, electric and electronic
appliances, lodges, spare parts, tiles, lathe workers such
as fitters and turners, checking staff in transports, spare
parts assemblers, manufacturers.
5 Singers, famous actors, stage speakers, teachers of arts,
visual artists, sculpturers, teachers of Vedas, performers
of musical instruments, singers of meaningful poems,
commission agents.
6 Accountants, staff in business premises, issuing loans
in installments, cash collectors, labour contractors, tax
collectors, auditors, printing workers, computer
operators, experts in neuro-sciences, nurses,
compounders, office clerks.
7 Witty, cunning and exploring wife, partners,
shareholders, arbitrators, business customers, excelling
in education and knowledge.
8 Cheques, documents, proof of assets, problems related
to origin of assets, disconnections in power and
42 Astrologies of kaalchakra

telephones, negotiations, signatures of accountability,
unsigned letters, mix-up of messages, absent-minded,
lack of meaningful thoughts, nervous disorders.
9 Clerks in research centres, teachers in higher education,
consultants, lawyers, mathematical wizards, embassy
staff, agents for exports and imports, telecommunication
departments, government treasury accountants, statistic
inspectors, advertisement departments.
10 Business, sensitive instruments, weighing scales,
measurement and balance instruments, pipe lines, rods,
wiring materials, sellers of green coloured articles,
stationery stores selling notebooks and calculators,
compute* sellers.
11 Witty friends, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, elder brother,
loves to use sensitive instruments, loves to read books
of choice.
12 Invention of sensitive instruments through Secret
research, secret notes and accounts, proof of income and
expenditure, agreements, adulterations, photographs,
documents.
Ketu
Bhava Characteristics of Ketu in different bhavas
1 Unpredictable in nature, unusual in appearance, slim or
stooping in appearance, crafty and scheming, criminal
thoughts, over-acidity in the body, greedy.
2 Type of speech, that can neither be agreed to or denied,
amassing wealth through immoral means, problematic
and crafty speech, dealers in narcotics, gemstones,
rumour-mongers.
3 Forged papers, deliberate propagators of wrong
messages, criminal litigations, embezzlements, unsigned
letters, preparing false documents, forged cheques,
collectors of wrong messages.
4 Problematic assets, overtaking assets by cheating,
Kaalchakra — The Planets "" 43

producers of spurious, cheap and lesser quality articles,
producers of narcotics, taking-over possession of
concealed wealth.
5 Magics, conjuring tricks, crafty stories, scheming arts,
illegal commission agents, agents for prostitution,
narcotics, commission agents, acting or political
professions with cheating intentions.
6 Taking loans with cheating intentions, criminals,
narcotics, workers in acid manufacturing units, illegal
litigations, criminal lawyers, wily workers, doctors in
the field of body acidity.
7 Crafty wife, partners, persons who communicate with
us, customers, criminal group, persons who meet us
with cheating intentions.
8 Getting caught ahd punished in illegal activities,
punishments, stealing, involving in sabotages,
blackmailing others, sadistic, using rumours through
improper means, bending law.
9 Criminal Judges, researching for criminal acts,
investigations, archaeologists, subverave acts abroad,
trainers for illegal activities, involving in illegal exports
and imports.
10 Involving in illegal activities with prestige and status,
illegal businesses, achieving feme through illegal means,
acting illegally for lame, dissatisfaction in everything.
11 Fulfilling desires illegally, expectations, aafty friends,
son-in-law, daughter-in-law, elder brother.
12 Secret involvements in illegal and subversive activities,
secret plans, taking revenge secretly.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

Venus
Bhava Characteristics of Venus in different bhavas
1 Beauty, charm, attractive in appearance, winning over
others in self doings, pretty and good-looking, egotist,
inclined to beautify oneself, scents, loves to possess gold
articles.
2 Gold articles, wealth through beauty products,
captivating speech, diamonds, silk products, expensive
art pieces, wealthy, happy speech, financiers in cine
fields.
3 Happy news, contacts, letters, agreements, cheques,
involving happily in brokerage professions, writer of
novels, essays and poems, converting imagination skills
in words, cinema story writer, editor and script writer.
4 Palaces, mansions, flow er gardens, vegetable gardens,
producers of fancy and beauty products, glass,
chinaware, plastic products, cinema producers, building
and automobile departments, art schools.
5 Interested in arts, cinema actor, glamorous acting,
prostitution, excelling in arts, music, acting and drama,
charismatic politicians, skillful musicians, orators,
astrologers, orators.
6 Professionals in art fields, tailors, workers in vegetable
and fruit shops, service in hardware, paints, scents, glass,
chinaware and plastic fields, silk clothes, weavers, great
cooks.
7 Attractive wife, partners, happy persons, cheerful
customers, female majority in customers and the persons
we meet.
8 Disgrace through ladies, humiliation, teaching,
threatening ladies, losing happiness, suffering and
ignominy through ladies, sad news from ladies,
kidnapping ladies.
Kaalchakra — The Planets

9 Research in arts, higher education, transport, function
halls, extra-marital affairs, foreign ladies, lady teachers.
10 Status in artistic field, prestigious professions, film
director, cinema producers, music instrumental and vocal
performances, dance halls, cabaret halls, professions in
alcohol, prostitution and narcotics.
11 Happy persons, happy friends, son-in-law, daughter-inlaw, elder brother, expecting everything happily.
12 Secret activities through happy and carefree life, secret
marriage, secret agreements through ladies, secret plans,
concealing plans.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

TABLE OF CHARACTERS OF PLANETS (Table 4)
SCIENTIFIC DATA
Kaulchakra — The Planets

PLANET
SUN
MOON
MARS
RAHU
JUPITER
SATURN
MERCURY
KETU
VENUS
LEGS

Kaalchakra — The Planets

Astrologies of kaalchakra

Notes;
i) Jothida Mannaii Prof K.S.Krishnamoorthy has advocated not
to concern about the Debilitations, Exaltations, Oppositions,
Neutral details of the planets as they do not work in most of the
cases. Shri K.Bhaskaran, author of this book further advises to
exclude the aspects of planets also as they seem to be
unscientific.
1. The nodes Rahu & Ketu do not rule any sign. However they
would act like Jupiter & Mercury respectively.
2. Sun is dominant because it is a leader but Mars is arrogant
because it is considered as a soldier.
3. Please note that the above-mentioned details about the signs
and planets given in the tables are to be used judiciously based
only on the questions that are raised and not for all aspects of
the birth charts in general.
4. For further details please refer classical texts.
Kaalchakra
ThePlanets

Kaalchakra - The Bhavas
As was with the planets and the twelve signs of zodiac, the
propojjnders of astrology also detailed the attributes and
portfolios covered under the twelve cusps (bhavas).
ATTRIBUTES OFTHE DIFFERENT BHAVAS
An illustrative list of the attributes of the different bhavas is
mentioned hereinbelow:
Note : Simplest of simple life profile if studied closely would
reveal that it is truly quite complicated . If one tries to dissect
the mechanism of an apparently straightforward. event, it will
be observed that the same is an outcome of multi-step phenomena
and has dependence on a number of parameters, Likewise, on
the other hand it, in itwin injluence.tsqwany other happenings
factors! events to follow.
A very valid conclusion may he'drawn from the foregoing that
none of the cusps or bhavas acts independently i.e . in isolation .
They react on each other ; including 'themselves amt yield
multifarious results. An illustrative list fa provided in the
following detailing the resultant attributes of Jhe action of
different bhavas , one by one , on itself and on the other bhavas .
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Ascendant
Bliava Attributes of ascendant vis-a-vis all the cusps
1 Self- thoughts, ideas, brisk activities, skills, impulsive
acts, own acts, exposing power.
2 Speech skills , improvement of skills , acceptance of both
truth and falsehood.
3 Knowledge, strength, self motivation, boldness,
intelligence, mental strength, communications, mental
affiliation fitting to education, interest, modify oneself,
self-confidence.
4 Manufacture of everything, keenness in education,
involving in fruits, vegetables and grain fields, farming
operations, establishing educational institutes and
libraries, lakes, ponds.
5 Respectability, morality, fondness in arts and sports, deep
thinking, wisdom, involvement in love affairs,
imaginative skills, stable in nature, masculinity,
femininity, maturity.
6 Successes and failures , health, food, dresses, med icines,
medical treatment, self efforts, disease.
7 Social relationships, social recognitions, legal
conditions, dependence on others.
8 Pains, sufferings, inactiveness. disgrace, bring shame on.
threateninus. suicides, murders, damages, comatose,
getting punished.
9 Confidence, fame, scholar, leader, research skills,
friendship with strangers, envoy, research education,
devout, donor, temple trustees, change of actions, living
in new surround in us. bodv changes, obedient to god.
law and associates, conservative.
10 Prestige, status, leadership, prestigious posts, unsatisfied
mind, responsible consultant, administration skill, top
officials, great fame.
Kaatchakra — Tit e Bliavas

11 Greed, selfishness, exuberant, happiness, club
consultant, desires, extremely lucky, successes,
achievements, joyful, accommodating.
12 Secret activities, losing energy and power, absconding,
self-dedication, investigation, secret troubles, hurdles
, and failures in every effort.
II Bhava
Bhava Attributes of II bhava vis-a-vis all the cusps
1 Encashing own thoughts, money-making ideas, quick
functioning of body organs, increasing skills, speaking
ones mind, independant income, show-off of power
through money,
2 Great orator, increase in money-related activities, good
speech skills, truthful speech, body acceptance.
3 Intelligent speech, gains through writing skills, own
ideas, bold acts, sharp arguments and valiant acts, gainful
communication, receiving cheques by posts, receiving
advance amounts for change of places, gams through
mind-related professions, great inclination towards
money making, changing colours for the sake of money,
confidence through money.
4 Excessive energy in the body, gains through education,
fruits, vegetables, grain fields, farms, educational
institutes, libraries, contracts for lease of lakes, ponds
and bridges.
5 Gains through respectable shares, religious acts, arts,
sports, deep thoughts and acts, brilliant knowledge,
music halls, lovers, imaginative skills, stable body
charm, prostitution by both sexes, religious rites.
6 Gains through competition successes, medical
scholarships, food products, tailoring, rental sources,
rental agreements, medicines, medical treatment, hard
labour, distribution of loans, litigations, salaries, profit
as rental income through house, cooking utensils and
other articles.
A s tro logics of kaalchakra

Gains through social relationships, government
approvals, government subsidies through legal means,
gains through others’ help, partners, spouse, banks, tax
evasions.
8 Gains through bullying and stealing, robbery, profits
from old articles, making gains from working in dirty
places, raping, defamation suits, threatening, profession
of hangman, assassination, bribery in accident wards,
mortuary, commission agents, cheating, magics, illegal
acts, treasons, will, insurance, frauds.
9 Confident gains from ancestral properties, getting gold
equivalent to ones weight through fame, gains through
honesty, education, executive positions, researches, close
friendship with strangers, gains as mediators, teaching
research education, divine duties, good deeds, welfare
trusts, transplantation of organs, life in foreign countries,
gains by way of donating despite tax evasions, temple
assets, law departments, submissive agreements,
valuable archaeological monuments.
10 Gains through prestigious positions, status, holding top
positions, issuing responsible suggestions,
administration skill, senior executive p£gt and fame.
11 Gains through greediness, easy . gp^^ppy romantic
life, delightful means, club activities, gairfs from desired
articles, extremely lucky, successes, achievements,
making others happy, supportive fp friends.
12 Making gains from secret activities, losing energy or
body organs, h idden things, given money, saved money,
hidden cache, clandestine activities, getting back lost
things, re-joining family after separation.
Kaalchakra — The Bhavas

Ill Bhava
Bhava Attributes of III bhava vis-a-vis all the cusps
1 Recording self thoughts, bold ideas and actions, ears,
nose, sensory organs of the body, blood vessels, actions
of the nerve system, body strength, putting into actions
what are thought, independant thoughts, exposing power.
2 Excellent writing skills, writing-related actions, cheques,
monetary documents, clever writing techniques, writing
truths, receiving cheques by post, grasping mind.
3 News about us being published by the newspapers,
intel I i gent writings, letter departments, announcing own
thoughts, intellectual debates, skillful writing to urge
bold acts and to explain about mind-related matters,
receiving transfer orders, perseverance, stable natured,
self-confidence.
4 Decreasing energy in the body, educational certificates,
business of fruits, vegetables and food grains, farms for
domestic animals, birds, seeds, trees and saplings for
business, trading of notes, paper and stationery items
for educational institutes, newspaper business, trading
of machinery and spares for cooking ware, furnitures,
grocery, houses, lands, vehicles, hardware, lakes and
ponds, brokers, real estate business.
5 Equity shares, religious texts, writing about sports, love
and romance, poetry, novels, essays, politics arts and
games, actions encouraged by deep thoughts,
improvement of intelligence, performances at dance
halls, love letters, imaginative paintings, permanent
charm, vulgar dancing, announcer of religious rites.
6 Success in competition exams, medical tips, performer
of experiments, seller of food products, medicines and
dresses, tailors, trader in medical equipments, domestic
servants, giving loans in lieu of documents, lawyers,
officers in pay and accounts, collectors of house rents,
accountants, lease collectors, auctioneers, postmen.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

7 Getting social recognition, government approvals, legal
government orders, recommendation letters, partnership
agreements, letters from spouse, documents, ration cards,
letter correspondence from banks, tax notices,
8 Overtaking assets through torturing, robbing documents
and notes, selling old goods, writing vulgar, threatening
and intimidating letters, mental disorders, death penalty
order, agreement reached by way of assassination, writers
in accident wards, inspectors of mortuary, performers
of post-mortem, anti-corruption department news,
corruption agents, stealingof documents, false messages,
change of mind through magics, illegal messages,
unlawful copier of messages, will, insurance documents,
forged documents, unexpected mental dilemmas.
9 Trustworthy agreements, getting famous, money
exchanges, certificates for higher education, employment
orders for honourary posts, agreements through research,
close friendship with strangers, senders of messages,
research notes, government contacts in the service of
God, good deeds, negotiations, nationalisation of trust
organisations, organ transplantations, communications
with foreign countries, tax accounting in business, temple
assets given on lease, writers in legal departments,
mediators, researchers of ancient monuments.
10 Employment orders for a prestigious post, business
through status, records for maintaining leadership
position, responsible suggestions, messages,
appreciations for administrative skills, taking oath as the
top executive, advertisement through great fame.
11 Advance reservations through greed, satisfactory news,
criticising jolly life, happy chit-chat, getting club
recognitions or approvals, taking part in desired
activities, lucky messages, lucky numbers, certificates
through success and achievement, winning trust by
making others happy, getting friends as desired.
Kaalchakra — The Bhavas

12 Messages through secret acts, agreements for losing
energy or body organs, losing hidden records, receiving
document on given money, losing records on saved
money, totally losing hidden treasures, getting
informations on clandestine plans, losing assets,
permanently losing given things, permanent separation
of already separated persons.
IV Bhava.
Bhava Attributes of TV bha va vis-a- vis all the cusps
1 Manufacturing based on own ideas, bold acts, actions
of producing organs in the body such as heart, chest,
lungs and kidney, excessive productions in the body,
doing what is planned, independant purchases,
improving ones own energy and power.
2 Purchasing gold , expensive and useful articles, building
expensive houses, owning every thing, purchasing useful
things more than what is necessary, buying everything
to keep in store.
3 News of our change of residence being published in the
papers, publishing intelligent books, production
departments, leaving native place, brilliant education,
actions based on education, messages on production, stay
on transfer orders, exposing mind related actions,
confidence in production improvement
4 Excessive energy production in the body, education
based actions, production of fruits, vegetables and food
grains, farms for domestic animals, birds, seeds, trees
and saplings for production, production of notes, paper
and stationery items for educational institutes and
newspaper, production of machinery and spares for
cooking ware, furnitures, grocery, houses, lands,
vehicles, hardware, lakes and ponds, contractor for
buildings, bridges, and roads.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

5 Company shares, religious texts, trainers in sports, love
and romance, poetry, novels, essays, politics, arts and
games, actions encouraged by deep thoughts, teacher of
intelligence, performances at dance halls, register offices
for love marriages, producer of imaginative paintings,
prostitution dens, places for religious rites.
6 Centre for competition exams, medical camps,
laboratories, production of food items, dresses,
medicines and medical appliances, tailoring, adopting
domestic servant, loans on immovable assets, courts of
law, accountants, tenants, investors, lodges, buyers on
auctions, milkmen.
7 Member of society, government staff quarters,
government donated and legally obtained lands, joining
with guests and partners, wife staying in joint family,
inclusion as member in the ration card, buying assets
through banks.
8 Usurping assets through torturing, problematic assets,
robbery, reproduction of old articles, living in ugly
looking dilapidated buildings and dirty places, damaged
or repaired articles, showing aggressions, hanging places
in the prisons, operation theatres, slaughter houses, clerks
in accident wings, managers of mortuary, graveyard
workers, stealing other's belongings, anti-corruption
departments, false assets, illegal encroachments,
providers of document copies illegally, assets through
will, vehicle insurances, spurious products.
9 Contract through assets, getting famous through
education, exchange of goods, teachers of higher
education, head-master posts, production of new articles
through research, intimate relationships with strangers,
importers, research centres, constructions of temples
through government aid, trusts formed by the
government, production of organs to be transplanted,
foreign aids, production taxes, trust maintaining temple
properties, clerk in courts, village administration boards,
protector of archaeological monuments.
Kaalchakra — The Bh avas 59

10 Prestigious post as Zamindar or landlord, owners of
industries, responsible officers of government records,
responsible positions, efficient officers, person who
makes officers taking oath of office for higher posts,
persons with name and fame.
11 Amassing assets greedily, building expensive villas and
halls, buildings built through associations, buying desired
things, tucky house, tucky objects, winning prizes
through successes, great achievement in production,
changing into a new residence, visit of desired friends
to our house.
12 Ptans for secret acts, losing energy or numbness of body
organs, hidden things, receiving given things, things
being saved, getting hidden treasures, secret ptaces for
clandestine acts, stabilizing assets, permanent re-union
of already separated person.
V Bhava
Bhava Attributes of V bhava vis-a-vis all the cusps
1 Own, deep thoughts, production of living things, excellent
achievements in artistic fields, heart, chest, tungs and
production of btood celts in the body, increase in
immunity powers, improvement of skill of imagination,
independant thoughts.
2 Purchase of expensive things of artistic value, useful
musical instruments, artistic gotd artictes, receiving
commission amounts, musicat records, keeping
everything in an artistic taste, teaming of useful arts more
than what is required, receiving everything in
imagination.
3 News of our artistic involvement being published in the
papers, publishing art books, advertisement departments,
brilliant artistic education, actions based’ on artistic fietds,
agreements on artistic fietds, changes in transfer orders,
exposing mind retated actions on artistic fietds,
confidence in production improvement of childbirth.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

4 Excessive immunity power production in the body,
education based artistic actions, production of nutritious
fruits, vegetables and food grains, farms for domestic
animals, birds, seeds, trees and saplings for production,
production of musical instruments, newspaper editors,
producers of cosmetics and beauty products, cinema
producers, organiser of dance and music programmes.
5 Shane brokers, preachers of religious texts, lovers of
sports, deep involvement in love affairs, poets, story
writers, writers of essays on artistic fields, political
inclinations, trainers in art fields, sport centres, teachers
of deep thoughts and wisdom, auditoriums, register
offices for love marriages, inventors of imaginary artifacts
of artistic value, prostitution dens, halls for vulgar
dancing, places far performing religious rites.
6 Centres for artistic competition exams, obstetricians,
examiner of blood cells, nurses, production of food items
for feasts, natural medicines, tester of medicines, service
in artistic fields, law courts, commission agent, tenants,
investors for earning commission, service in lodges and
cinema theatres.
7 Good relationships with members of society, government
quarters for artistes, government donated musical
instruments, guest houses, joining with partners, marrying
lover, public welfare centres.
8 Sadistic rapes, suffering disgrace and ignominy, getting
caught and cheated, repairing old musical instruments,
vulgar acting, living m pitiable conditions, receiving
punishments.
9 Contract through arts, getting famous through artistic
education, exchange of arts, teachers of music, drama
etc., head-master posts, new changes in the fields of music
and drama through research, intimate relationships with
strangers, importers of art materials, research centres for
arts, religious texts and astrology, prayers in temples
through government aid, trusts overtaken by the
Kaolcltakra — The Bhavas

government, production of replacement things, foreign
agreements, temple taxes, trust maintaining temples,
judges in courts, members of village administration
board, protectors of archaeological sculptures.
10 Prestigious post as great artiste, industries for art
materials, responsible officers of government temples,
cushy jobs, efficient and artistic officers, person who
makes national leaders taking oath of office, astrologers,
persons with name and fame.
1 1 Learning arts greedily, building pleasure halls , branches
for associations, joint efforts through clubs or
associations, friendships with desired women, lucky
agreements, lucky chances, winning prizes through
lottery, achievement in production of living objects,
ceremony on girl attaining puberty, naming ceremony
for newborn child, spending happy moments with desired
friends.
12 Plans for secret love, losing love or lack of romantic
sense, one-way love, recovering lost energy, protecting
children, secret child-birth, secret places for clandestine
love affairs, creating child, reconciliation with the
separated person.
VI Bhava
Bhava Attributes of VI bhava vis-a-vis all the cusps
1 Own ideas, disease- ridden body, successful actions,
functions of body organs such as stomach, intestines and
digestive organs, large reduction of immune power of
body, decrease in physical actions, lack of independant
functioning, improvement of woik efficiency.
2 Successful and profitable speech, good digestive power,
buying gold articles by loans, receiving money as loans,
purchasing expensive things, permanent nature of loans,
hard work more than what is required.
3 News of our successes being published in the papers,
publishing business related books, advertisement
62 Astrologies ofkaalchakra

departments, actions through own capacity, agreements
on employments, employment and transfer orders, mindrelated actions, confidence of production improvement
in service, jobs in writing, communications, tenders,
clerical jobs.
4 Excessive immunity power production in the body,
service in house, land, vehicle, buildings and big
organisations, producers of food and eatables,
maintenance of forms for domestic animals, birds, seeds,
trees and saplings, labour on daily wages, school teachers,
producers of domestic appliances and furniture,
organisers of dance and music programmes.
5 Wait as share brokers, preachers of religious texts,
workers in the manufocture of sports goods, brokers for
women, proof-readers for writings about stories, poems,
art essays, politics etc., working in sports centres,
auditoriums, register offices for love marriages,
prostitution dens, halls for vulgar dancing, bars and place
for performing religious rites.
6 Service in competition centres, hospitals, nurses,
production of food and medicines, tailors, weavers,
service in medical professions, law courts, lodges.
7 Service in welfare centres, stooge for government
officials, marriage brokers, labour contractors, worker
in public and labour welfare centres.
8 Hard labour, disgraceful jobs, jobs without labour
welfare, repairing of old articles, lowly jobs, jobs in
pitiable surroundings, excessive working load, slavery.
9 Contracts in harbours, offices which decide on transfers,
teachers on education, service in research centres and
importing offices, government job as temple priests, trust
offices, foreign agreement offices, collectors of temple
taxes, trusts for the maintenance of temples, courts,
village administration board offices, protection of
archaeological sculptures.
Kaalchakra — The Bhavas

10 Permanent job , cushy jobs , efficient officers, prestigious
professions with name and fame, promotions.
11 Struggles in everything but successful through greedy
means, always staying in pleasure houses, service in
associations, successful in litigations through clubs,
retaining desired servants, lucky chances, lucky
employment opportunities, proving excellency in job,
accurate diagnosis of a disease, eating desired food items.
12 Obtaining loans through secret plans, repayment of loans
through fresh loans, getting hack lost things, getting back
what is invested, getting medical treatments in hospital,
separated person suing us again, equality of income and
expenditure, losing body functions through ill-health.
VII Bhava
Bhava Attributes of VII bhava vis-a-vis all the cusps
1 Combined ideas, submissive, kidney, uterus and
abdomen, successful partnership efforts, weakness due
to excessive loss of immunity, increase in opposition,
lack of independant actions, facing competitions, well
acquainted persons.
2 Money through help from others, profitable negotiations
with bank, lack of digestive power, purchasing of gold
articles through help from others, borrowing money from
others, receiving expensive articles as donations, doing
everything as help, hardworking for others more than
what is required, receiving anything as help from others,
staying as one of the members of the family.
3 News of us being published in the papers by help from
others, publishing books on public service, advertisers,
spending energy for others, agreements on meetings,
recommendation letters, news of transfer orders, actions
based on others’ opinions, registrars, confidence through
others help, petitioners, communication department,
submitting tenders, tenant as neighbour, person living in
next street.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

4 Relatives, persons living in the same compound, person
living in the opposite house, our own home, land, vehicle
and building, relative who maintains large organisations.
5 Lovers, artists, art painters, singers, astrologers, religious
heads, religious workers, priests, prostitutes, pimps,
ascetics.
6 Bank officials, financiers, servants, separated friends,
medical patients, doctors, cooks, lawyers, contagious
diseases.
7 Strangers, opposite gender, social workers, stooges for
government officials, persons working for public welfare,
marriage brokers, contractors, workers for improvement
of public amenities, partner, persons we encounter on
business.
8 Cheating persons , opponents, murderers , robbers , insurance
officials, middlemen for corruption, traitors, cunning
persons , criminals , terrorists , those who insult us .
9 Leaders, foreigners, exporters, strangers, judges, priests,
trustees, teachers, persons lacking social recognition.
10 Colleagues, those who admire us, executive officers,
those who are in power, prestigious persons, questioners
with authority, co-workers, trade union leaders, those who
help us through business , business customer, dealers.
11 Persons we are fond of, friends, honest persons, those
who care about us, those who have sexual relationships
with us, elders, close friends, those who make us happy,
those who make agreements with us legally, getting
recognition.
12 Secret planners, those who recover loans, thieves, those
who trouble us, those who have secret contacts, those
who help us by making investments, those who create
losses for us, those who know our secrets, those who
carry-out raids, those who intimidate us.
Kaalchakra—T/te Bhavas

Yin Bhava
Bhava Attributes of VIII bhava vis-a-vis all the cusps
1 Losing self- thoughts, body functions getting affected,
wastage of produced energy, actions with struggles,
blockages of body functioning, lack of body acceptance,
reduction in efficiency, lack of independant actions,
problems in our normal activities, pains and sufferings,
body injuries, remorseful, sorrowful, rueful,
disappointments.
2 Speech full of troubles and hurdles, allergy, giving away
gold articles, and donations unexpectedly, gifting
expensive things, giving away more than ones capacity.
3 Damaging news about us being published in the papers,
publishing books of criminal, murder and robbery
subjects, slanderer, mathematical mistakes, forgetfulness,
things getting misplaced, lack of performance to capacity,
wear and tear of body organs, break in job agreements,
hurdles in appointment orders, cancellation of transfer
orders, problems in doing mind-related activities, black
marks in service, problems in the job of production
improvement, problems in the jobs of writings,
communications, tenders and clerical works.
4 Production organs in the body getting damaged, involved
in accidents, injuries, problems or accidents in houses,
lands, vehicles, buildings and large organisations, food
items getting spoilt, unexpected deaths of domestic
animals and birds, hurdles in education, house-hold
appliances getting into repairs, furnitures getting broken.
5 Accidents in music and dance programme stages, toys
turning into bizarre dangers, being raped, disgrace,
humiliation, brought to disrepute through publishing of
poems, stories, art essays, politics etc., getting punished
in sports and games, facing disgrace in auditoriums,
disgraced through love marriage, ordeals in prostitution
dens, wild and crazy acts in lewd dance halls, quarrels in
booze bars, discrediting the places of religious rites.
66 Astrologies of kaalchakra

6 Problems in competition exam centres, increasing of
agony of disease through medical treatment, bungling
acts of nurses, wrong results of medicines, allergy through
food, acidic medicines and dresses, accidents in the
production of medicines, mistakes in medical procedures,
quarrels in courts, allegations in lodges.
7 Immoral activities in social service centres, antagonising
government officials, corruptions in public welfare
centres, disappointments in marriages, partnership
cheatings, discredit and disgrace through spouse and
enemies, murder threats.
8 Bad deaths, getting murdered , sufferings, quarrels, pains
and torments, injuries, illegal acts, death sentences,
carrying out revengeful acts, seizures, mad acts,
incompetent actions.
9 Problems in labour contracts, hurdles in job changes,
hurdles irf teaching jobs, fire accidents in research centres,
problems faced by importers, cancellation of job as priest
by government, closure of trust offices, cancellation of
foreign collaboration offices, frauds in the collection of
temple taxes, sabotages in trusts for the maintenance of
temples, punishments meted out by the courts, village
administration boards getting divided, damages in
archaeological offices.
10 Allegations regarding job confirmation, corruptions in
cushy jobs, fraudulent acts of efficient officers, losing
name, fame and prestige, hurdles in promotions in job.
11 Greedy struggles in everything, sufferings in pleasure
houses, swindles in clubs, no-confidence motions through
clubs, problems in desired objects, lucky chances turning
into unlucky, unlucky job opportunities, testing times in
service, diagnosis of vitamin deficiency, hatred towards
desired things.
12 Problems through secret plans, disappointments, assets
getting confiscated, seizure, getting cheated, unable to
get back investments, coma stage in hospital, separated
Kaalchakra — The Bhavas

person troubling us again, losses in income and
expenditure.
IXBhava
Bhava Attributes of IX bhava vis-a-vis all the cusps
1 Research with own thoughts, stable actions, produced
energy functioning differently, well educated, calm
activities, increase in body functions, good acceptance
by the body, improvement of skills, independant
activities, some changes in efficiency, swellings, obesity,
changes in body appearance, peacefulness, sleep, ideas.
2 Calm and compliant speech, getting ancestral gold
articles, receiving money and expensive gifts as
donations, getting anything as donation.
3 Excessive thinking beyond one's capacity, good news
about us being published in the newspapers, publishing
books on negotiations, communications, village
administration boards, research and education subjects,
person who spreads the news, mathematical
involvements, deep memory power, exchange of assets,
acts within capacity, growth of body organs.
4 Learning teacher's education, ancestral properties,
foreign assets, imported products, donated properties,
setting-up schools and colleges, temple properties,
vehicle maintenance departments, production
departments, storages for grains, research centres,
protector of temple assets.
5 Doing divine acts, pilgrimages, spending happy moments
with strangers, religious beliefs, clairvoyant persons,
getting cured from diseases through the grace of God,
divine child.
6 Supervisor for competition exams, increase in hereditary
diseases, nurses, medical examinations, unusual results
of medicines, over intake of foods, allergy through
relationship with strangers, problems by way of
involvement in acidic medicines, joint effort in medical
A strologics ofkaalchakra

research, immoral relations in research centres, joint
agreements in national parliaments, job given to legal
heir, allegations in staying places, getting separated from
second wife or illegal affairs.
7 Moral acts in social service centres, getting acquainted
to government officials, government approved social
service centres, second marriage, second partner,
adultery with opposite sex, sexual relationship with
younger sister of wife.
8 Murder threats through immoral relationships, fraudulent
acts in ancestral properties, mistakes in research centres,
malfunctioning in rockets sent to space, hurdles in higher
education, troubles from foreign countries, failures in
agreements, hurdles in foreign journeys, hurdles in
research efforts.
9 To become a national leader, excellent investigators,
leading persons, those who are in prestigious posts,
ambassadors, those who make agreements, judges,
government financial departments, foreign embassies,
religious departments.
10 Transport departments, communication, professor,
embassy, exports and imports, harbour, electricity, water
pipes, oil wells, mines, department which decides on
transfer orders, teaching job, service in research centres
and import offices, job as a temple priest through
government, service in trust offices, foreign agreements,
collection of temple taxes, offices for temple
maintenance, courts, village administration offices,
archaeological departments.
11 Diploma courses, cushy and prestigious jobs, success in
research attempts, attaining name, fame and prestige,
taking oath of office, successful in every effort through
greed, always in a jolly mood, good relationships within
clubs, successful agreements through clubs, having
relationships with desired strangers, lucky chances, lucky
opportunities for agreements, achievement in research
Kaalchakra — The Bltavas

efforts, identifying correct methods, likes to consume
fatty food items.
12 Losses through secret contacts, financial constraints,
spending on temple renovations, incapable of getting
back the investments, discovery of hidden messages,
financial problems through new business, learning
research education.
X Bhava
Bhava Attributes ofX bhava vis-a-vis all the cusps
1 Business based on own ideas, excessive skill of action,
increase in produced energy, business magnate,
prestigious acts, troubles in body functioning, body
allergy on certain food items, improving on self-power,
independent actions, new changes in working methods.
2 Prestigious speech, professions through speech, business
of ancestral gold or expensive articles, financial
business, getting everything through business.
3 Business based on own i^leas formed beyond one’s
natural capacity, news of us being an industrialist getting
published in the newspapers, profession as a broker,
communication departments, profession on lease
agreements, publisher, sender of messages, printer,
writer, bill collector, accountant, workers in electricity
departments, plumbers, business based on deep memory
power, venders, assistants.
4 Manufacturers, growth of body organs, agriculturists,
building workers, industrial workers, tree climbers,
carpenters, vehicle maintenance staff, cleaners, workers
in power generation units and water tanks, fertilizer
units, boilers, grain fields, farms, orchards, storage
yards.
5 Professional performers of religious rituals, organisers
of pilgrim tours, pimps, involving in divine duties, being
a yogi, prophets, religious preacher, workers in art fields,
actors, singers, poets, artists, astrologers, musical
70 Astrologies of kaalchakra

wizards, obstetricians, producers of vitamin medicines.
6 Service in competition exam centres, doctors, nurses,
medical examinations, medicinal preparations,
production of food items and dresses, farms for domestic
animals and poultries, hotel workers, lawyers,
financiers, daily labours.
7 Job in public welfare centres, marriage brokers,
partnership business, service in national welfare,
speakers in clubs and associations, labour contractor.
8 Criminal profession, business on old and used articles,
renewing old articles, profession in rapes, stealing,
robbery and assassinations.
9 Service in social service centre, those who makeagreements with government officials, offices of public
welfare departments, marriage register offices, export
business, professors, work in research centres,,
production of space rockets, teachers of higher
education, service m foreign embassies, those who make
agreements, organisers for foreign jobs, to become a
national leader, researchers, leaders, those who are in
prestigious posts, ambassadors, judges, government
legal departments, religious endowment boards,
transport departments, communication, harbours,
electricity, water pipes, oil wells, mines, department for
transfer orders, teaching job, service in research centres,
importing offices, job as a priest through government,
service in <ru$t offices, job in foreign agreement offices,
collector of temple tax, jobs in trusts for temple
maintenance, courts, village administration boards, jobs
in offices for maintenance of ancient sculptures.
10 Cushy and prestigious jobs, jobs with name, lame and
prestige, service in customs, income tax and sales tax
departments.
11 Jobs in clubs, those who make agreements through
clubs, involving in desired business, hicky opportunities
in business and business agreements, achievements in
Kaalchakra — The Bhavas 71

business, enriching business standards.
12 Business through secret contacts, doing two different
businesses, spending money for business, making
business investments, doing business on hidden mattes,
secret involvement through new business, researchoriented business.
XI Bhava
Bhava Attributes of XI bliava vis-a-vis all the cusps
1 Thinking more about self, excessive vitamin presence
in the body, increase in greediness, self-praise, happy
involvements, excellent body f unctioning, enjoying food
tastes, selfish, independant ideas, new changes in own
actions, good imagination skills.
2 Happy speech,’ profit through speech, getting gold
articles as desired, making profits through friends, sonin-law and daughter-in-law, getting expensive articles,
changing anything into self-favourable.
3 Increase in body energy, auspicious news about us
getting published in the newspapers, entering into
agreements, involvement in communications, writing
books, receiving messages, verifying accounts, writing,
improving memory power, responsibility for sales
contracts.
4 Purchasing desired articles, problematic assets, vehicle
getting into repairs, appliances getting damaged.
5 Happy relationships, sexual relationship with desired
person, mutual trust, peace agreements, inclined towards
arts.
6 Success in every venture, vitamin-related diseases,
joining in a desired job, identifying a disease in such a
job, successful opportunities.
7 Selecting a life partner of choice, moving with the
general public in a loving attitude, pouring love on
Astrologies of kaalchakra

others, likes to meet desired persons.
8 Facing problems in desired things, tensions, vitamin
related troubles, dissatisfactions, impulsive, facing
dilemmas.
9 Contacts with social service organ isations, contacts with
high officials, involving oneself happily in public
welfare and service centres, polygamy, foreign travel
as desired, higher education as desired, involving in
research activities, foreign contacts, involvement in
agreements.
10 Cushy and prestigious posts, jobs with name, fame and
prestige, doing desired jobs.
11 President in a club, those who make agreements through
clubs, lucky chances, lucky opportunities for
agreements, achievements, enriching new methods,
clandestine involvements.
12 Happiness through secret contacts, making investments
as desired, explaining about hidden matters, secret
involvements through friends, successes through
research.
XUBhava
Bhava Attributes of XII bhava vis-a-vis all the cusps
1 Masochist, losing energy in the body, increase in
complex of inferiority, low self-estimation, unsatisfied
involvements, hurdles in body functioning, food allergy,
unselfishness, hurdles in one's activities, losing skill
involving imagination.
2 Getting back what is given, eye defects, making
investments in gold articles, digestion related diseases,
secret monetary income.
3 Losing energy, bad news about us getting published in
the newspapers, breaks in agreements, hurdles in
communication, book sales, blockage of news, mistakes
in accounts, losing memory power, selling things.
Kaakhakra — The Bhavas

Making investments in desired articles, benefits through
automobiles, hiding things.
5 Break in happy relationships, sexual relationships with
persons we dislike, hurdles in mutual trust, breaks in
agreements, losses in artistic fields.
6 Success through secret means, losing consciousness
through allergic food intake, getting transferred in job
as desired, servant leaving us, inability to identify
diseases, successful chances but with loss potentials.
7 Choosing a foreigner as life partner, living separately
from general public, extreme dislike of others,
separation from opposite sex.
8 , Facing problems, losses and shameful positions in every
activity, comatose, tilings getting confiscated, impulsive
running away from hometown, dilemmas, suffering
losses.
9 Spending money on social service causes, secret
contacts with high officials, secret involvements of
public welfare centres, secret marriages with many
women, travels abroad, hurdles in higher education and
research education, secret foreign contacts,
involvements in secret agreements.
10 Responsible posts of secrecy, jobs with overwork,
undertaking dual natured jobs.
11 Secret activities of clubs, breaks in agreements through
clubs, hurdles in lucky opportunities, cancellation of
lucky agreements, failures in achievement attempts,
concealment of new methods.
12 Losses through secret contacts, invested money, given
money, inability to get back binami properties,
concealing already hidden matters, strengthening of
secret involvements, doing continuous research
activities.

Aries
General Nature of the sign Aries
There is a set of a few karakas (significations) of Aries/Mesham:
It is a Fiery, Movable sign ruled by Mars. Barren, Four legged,
Singular, Masculine, Violent, Long-ascension, Soft-natured
animal, Lane, Ruined Palace, Early mornings, Compound of
houses, The front part of a street, The Mountains, Area with
lesser population, Dwellings of thieves and criminals, Low lying
areas, Industrial area, Police quarters, Eastern direction, Red in
colour, Forests, Represents the month of “Chithirai” in the Tamil
years or the “Chaithra” of the Saka years.
The significations may be categorised into (i) ascendant related
and (ii) independant.
(a) It is a Fiery sign :Short temper, Anger, Violence, Never
respecting others, hyper-thermal in the body-nature.
(b) It is a Movable Sign .’Developing nature of either good
or bad qualities.
(c) The Lord of Aries is Mars : Rough in appearance and
the structure of body.
(d) It is the First sign ofKaaichakra :Bold and courageous
in activities, Leadership, Treating others as slaves or
forcing others to stick to his commands or words.
Aries

In the same manner, the remaining significations could also be
studied.
The sign Aries contains these three stars leading to the following
body natures :
Ashwinl : Owned by Ketu (Acidity and Hyper-thermal).
Bharani : Owned by Venus (Sugar and Hyper-thermal).
Krithigai : Owned by Sun (Calcium and Hyper-thermal)
Mars, the lord of Aries is also the owner of Vrischiga/Scorpio,
the 8th house to the Aries. Hence, the Bhava Karakas (House
significations) of the houses 1 & 8 of the planet Mars as in
Chapter HI, Part A would combine to form the general nature
and appearance of the Aries-ascendant horns.
I House significations of Mars:
Bold and courageous, Short-tempered, Selfishness, Rough in
appearance, Disregarding others, Assertive, Self-pride, Violent
and Immoral.
VHI House significations of Mars:
Quarrelsome, Faith in terrorism, Struggles, Riots, False
allegations, Police and military actions, Accidents, Loss of
chastity, Murders, Robbery, Suicide army, Abduction of other’s
properties and belongings, Cheatings etc.
Refer to the Karakas of I & VIII house that are related/
dependant to Asc as in Chapter IV, Part A.
I House siguifications in the I house:
Self-thought, Active, Capacity to act independandy, Show of
strength.
VHI House significations in the I house:
Loss of self-thoughts; Inactive, Loss of.energy, Struggles in acts,
Lameness of the body, Allergic, Difficulties in works, Pain and
stress, Dejections, Disappointments etc.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

Note 1: The readers may raise a question here. In the I house
significations, it has been mentioned as active whereas in the
VEI house significations it has been mentioned as inactive in
nature. Does it mean that the person would remain inactive in
the mornings and would be active in the nights? No! It could
not be so! A mixture of sudden laziness and activeness would
firm the character of Aries-boms. This mixture could not be
comparable to a mechanical joint of a nut and bolt but would be
similar to a synergic compound.
Note 2: There are 6000 million people in our globe, the Earth.
Does it mean that the characters of all the possible 500 million
Aries-boms would remain as one and the same? It could not be
rational; Hence, to differentiate, our ancient astrologers insisted
to look for the star in which the Asc has actually fallen. This is
what we call as ' Stellar astrology". We have got three stars in
Aries - Ashwini, Bharani and the first quarter of Krithigai owned
respectively by the planets KETU, VENUS and the SUN.
If the Lagna/Ascendant of Aries-boms falls in the star of -
(i) Ashwini, owned by Ketu, the person would be a criminal
in nature
(ii) Bharani , owned by Venus, the person would be a
Sex-maniac
(Hi) Krithigai , owned by Sun, the person will carry
self-pride.
ASCENDANT RELATED SIGNIFICATIONS OF ARIES
General significations: Fluctuations in body structure, Character
that could not be easily estimated by others, Criminal and greedy
in nature, Lean in appearance, Acidity in the body.
1 . KETU does not own any sign of Zodiac. According to Prof.
KJS. Krishnamoorthy, KETU is like MERCURY and RAHU is
like JUPITER. Mercury is the lord of GEMINI, the III house
and VIRGO, the VI house to Aries. So, in the cases of
ASHWINI- ARIES ascendant-births,in addition to t^planetary
Aries

significations ofKetu for ASC, i.e., unpredictable in nature,
unusual in appearance, slim or stooping in appearance, crafty
and scheming, criminal thoughts, over-acidity in the body, greedy
etc, the significations of houses 1, 3, 6 & 8 would combine to
determine the character. (Significations of 1 & 8 are already
given in the previous paragraphs)
III House significations meant for I house:
Written self-thoughts, Courageous thoughts, Active sensory
organs, Nerves and Blood vessels. Doing things as per selfdesires, Independant thoughts, Tendency to show the strength.
VI House significations meant for I house:
Self-thoughts, Disease that w ould lead to inactiveness, Diseaseborne body, Successful actions, Active digestive organs, Lack
of immi lity, Developing the skills and workmanship etc., the
combination of MARS and KETU denotes criminal and
vindictive attitude.
2. VENUS is the lord of TAURUS and LIBRA, the H and the
VII houses to Aries. Hence, far BlHARANI-MESHA ascendantbirths, houses 1, 2, 7 & 8 would combine together to form the
character.
ASC-related (Planetary) significations of VENUS: Beautiful
structure and handsome in appearance, Attracting others through
activeness, Self -pride, Fond of cosmetics and ornaments.
II House significations meant for I house:
Money making through self-thoughts. Materialistic intentions,
Active, Ability to express the thoughts, Show of status through
money.
VTt House significations meant for I house:
Team spirit. Listening to others, Diseases in Kidney, Uterus,
Stomach, Successful team ventures, Increasing enmities,
•Dependence, Weakness due to lack of immunity. The
combination of MARS and VENUS denotes excessive interests
in sexual affairs.
M '‘ml mm* IM ihi h ms ^mb a^M MM m IHHBB a^M a^M Mi <^bb aM
78 Astrologies of kaalchakra

3. SUN is the lcrd of LEO, the V house to Aries. Hence for
KRITHIKAI-MESHA ascendant-births, houses 1 , 5 & 8 would
combine to form the character.
Planetary significations of SUN: Majestic in appearance and
structure, Powerful bone-structure, Honesty, Leadership, Selfesteem, Authority and power.
V House significations for I house:
Independant deep thought^, Production of poultries, Interest' in
politics, Inclination towards Arts and Music, Active heart, Lungs
and high count of blood cells, Power of Immunity, Imagination
skills, independant thoughts etc., the combination of MARS and
SUN indicate power, authority and ability to command.
Note 3: Now, as per the above stellar classifications, we could
classify the births of probable 500 million births in the sign
Aries into three; the probable 220 million in the Ketu Star, the
220 million in the Venus star and the 60 million in the Sun Star.
But stil I, we need a better tool to proceed further in classification.
l.The Traditional astrologers use the “N AVAMS A CHARTS "
by classifying the births of the same star into 4 equal quarters,
1. e., the “Padas”. Thus there could be 9 parts in each sign.
According to this, there could be 50 Million births in a single
quarter.
2. Instead of dividing the star (The DASA) into four, there Is
another way of classification, i.e., identifying the 9 Bhukthis
(The Kaalamsas). This concept was initially popularized by
Meena (Shri. R. Gopalakrishna Rao) in his article, "The truth
about Amsa Divisions" in the monthly journal “Astrological
Magazine" Volume 58, in June 1969. Later, Jothida Mannan,
Shri. KJS. Krishnamoorthy has familiarized this concept in*
identifying the Ascendant and the other 1 1 cuspal points by using
Placidius System. The advantage in this system remains in its
scope of extension, by identifying the Antharaas and
Sookshamas. Hence the 729 divisions of a single star through 9
Bhukthies (Kaalamsas) or (Subs as called by Prof. Shri. K.S J£)
and further through 9 Antharaas (Subsubs) and in through
the 9 Sookshamas (Subsubsubs) enable us to marl: a set of 3

lakh births from the probable 220 million births in the same
star. This is known as “KP SYSTEM" in Astrology.
3. Shri. K. Baskaran, Author of this book, has propounded a
theory of "Cuspal Interlinks" by using the "Kaalamsas" . Through
cuspal interlinks, we can get 479,001,600 divisions of an
ascendant so that we can exactly find the uniqueness of each
and every horoscope. For further details kindly refer the book,
"Principles of Cuspal Interlinks". But whatever be the method
of classification, we should not bypass or overlook the true
significations of a SIGN/RAS1 in predictions.
4. hi presenting the following details, it is assumed that the cuspal
points fall in consecutive houses. Please see notes at the end of
this chapter for other cases.
There are certain significations that are meant for ASC but
remain in he other 1 1 houses. Let us start studying them.
II House : Taurus
Speech is a signification of the H House that is meant only for
supplementing the Asc. Taurus/Rishaba the second sign to
Aries/Mesha. It is a fixed sign. Hence the Aries asc boms will
stick to their words. Since Taurus is an earthy sign, Aries asc
boms will maintain intimacy in conversations. They are usually
fond of natural foods like vegetables and fruits.
Taurus is ruled by Venus. Hence the Aries asc boms will
maintain love, affection and sweetness in conversations. They
will have beautiful eyes and lips.
Aries is ruled by Mars and Taurus is ruled by Venus. The
combined significations of Mars and Venus are: Vehicles,
Opposite sex, Sexual interests, Glasswares , Plastic goods, Drugs
etc. Hence, the Aries asc boms would like mostly to converse
on these subjects; to be precise, Aries asc boms are better in
delivering sexy jokes .
According to the starlord/sublord of the beginning point of the
II cusp, a detailed nature of speech and other characters could
be predicted.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

ill House : Gemini
1 1 1 house supplements the Ascendant with the significations such
as "Courage". Since Gemini, the IH sign to Aries is ruled by
Mercury, the Aries asc boms would lack in mental stability.
Since Gemini is an airy sign, the Aries asc boms tend to disclose
confidential matters. They would be fond of undertaking shortjourneys as Gemini is a Common sign.
IV House : Cancer
Aries asc boms are educated since their fourth sign, Cancer is
a watery and a movable sign. They never hesitate to share their
knowledge with others. They like to live in places which are
cool in climate.
Since Cancer is ruled by Moon, Aries asc boms would like to
gather knowledge in Mathematics and difficult & complex
subjects.
V House : Leo
Aries-boms would soon become addicted to smoking since LEO
is a fiery sign. Since it is a fixed sign, Aries-asc boms like to
practice martial arts. Since LEO is ruled by SUN, they like to
attend Government festivals & functions and political meetings.
They like vulgar and obscene dances. There may arise quarrels
or misunderstandings in the course of occasions like festivals
and feasts.
VI House : Virgo
Aries-asc boms would be consistent in the sense of dressing
and would not control their diets since Virgo is a common sign.
They would like to eat greenish and natural food items. Since
Mercury, the Lord of Virgo is also the lord of Gemini, i.e.,
houses 3 & 6, Aries-asc boms naturally possess a high degree
of writing skill.
Aries

Vn House : Libra
Libra/Thulam, the 7th Sign to Aries is an airy and a movable
sign. Hence, Aries -asc boms tend to remain in the company of
intelligent and active people.
Venus, the lord of Libra happens to be the lord of 2 & 7 to
Aries. It automatically means 1 & 8 to Wife/Partners. Hence,
the Aries-asc boms would cause for fear and caution to their
companions.
VIH House : Scorpio
Scorpio/Vrischigam the 8th sign to Aries is a watery and fixed
sign. Hence, Aries-asc boms would meet with accidents in Wells,
Ponds, Overhead Water Tanks, Sumps etc.
Since the lord of Scorpio is Mars and it is being the ruler of 1
& 8, the Aries-asc boms, would be short-tempered; they will
have criminal intentions and frequent fears of death.
IX House : Sagittarius
Dhanus/Sagittarius, the 9th sign to Aries is a common, fiery
and a dual sign. Hence Aries-asc boms will face mental blocks
and would loose their interest during higher education. They
may have to continue their higher studies in more than a single
institution. They tend to show a bit of arrogance while doing
higher studies.
Since the lord of Dhanus is Jupiter, the lord of houses 9 & 1 2,
the Aries-asc boms may be interested in the fields like Research,
International trade, Law, Transport, Finance etc.
X House : Capricorn
Makaram/Capricorn is the 10th sign to Aries. It is an earthy
but a mono sign. Hence, the Aries-asc boms would gain status
and confidence through helping others.
Since Saturn, the lord of Makaram is the lord of houses 10 &
1 1 , the Aries-asc boms would come up in their life. They like to
act independantly as per their will and wish.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

XI House : Aquarius
Kumbham/Aquarius is the 1 1th sign to Aries . It is a fixed and
aiiy sign. Hence, the Aries-asc boms tend to expect praising
words. They have the capacity to fulfill their wishes. They will
excel in the field of arts and culture.
Since the lord of Kumbham is Saturn, the lord ofhouses 10 &
1 1 to Aries, the Aries-asc bom people will succeed only after
struggles. They aspire to work hard for achievements.
XII House : Pisces
Meenam/Pisces the 12th sign to Aries is a watery and dual
sign. Hence, the Aries-asc boms tend to have a secret and a
double-sided approach in all walks of their life. They like bedcomforts. They tend to spend more time on long-distance travels.
They like to spend money on others.
Since the lord of Meenam is Jupiter, the lord of houses 9 & 12,
the Aries-asc borns may have secret illegal affairs and
clandestine ties with their bosses.
Till now we have studied a few of the Asc related significations
of Aries asc boms by using one or two significations of the
Signs/Planets. I would like to caution the readers as not to forget
the fact that there are more than a few hundred significations
with respective permutations and combinations of ASC/Signs /
Planets to fine-tune and determine about one’s character.
Aries

SIGNIFICATIONS OF ARIES NOT RELATED TO ASCENDANT
II House :
Money is one of various significations of the II house, which is
relatively independant of ASC.
Taurus, the II house to Aries, is an earthy and fixed sign. Hence,
the Aries asc bom would be firm and clear in their financial
matters. They will utilize money in worthy ways. Their income
will have a steady and stable nature. Most pf the Aries asc bom
will belong to the salaried class.
Taurus is mled by VENUS, the planet that represents women.
Hence, the Aries asc bom will gain through women and in the
field of arts and through their attractive speech. They would
also happily earn their money in a quick and short span of time
in the fields of gold, diamond, costly articles, cinema and
cosmetics.
If the II cusp falls in Krittiga star, which is mled by SUN, the
Aries asc born will deal in government treasury, government
assets, financial institutions, financial documents, national
savings, national awards stamps, government orders and
valuable stones such as mbies.
SUN is also the lord of V house to Aries* So the Aries asc bom
will gain through blue chip shares , religious and endowment
service, arts, culture, sports, prostitution, religious rites, deep
thoughts, intelligence, imagination skill and glamour.
If the II cusp falls in Rohini star, which is mled by MOON, it
would enable the Aries asc bom to gain through frequent
financial transactions, clear speech, counselling in financial
institutions, costly gems like pearls and ornaments.
Moon is also the lord of the IV house to Aries. So Aries asc
bom will gain through education and fiom the fields of fruits,
vegetables, grain fields, farms and libraries; make gain out of
leasing of ponds, lakes, and bridges.
If the II cusp falls in Mrigasira star, which is mled by MARS,
then the Aries asc bom will be spendthrifts, will be dishonest in
84 Astrologies of kaalchakra

financial matters to seize the properties from others and will
gain from costly gems.
Mars is also the lord of houses I & 8 to Aries. So the Aries asc
bom will,
(i) gain from self-thoughts, will have independent income
and will like to exhibit financial strength;
( ii ) gain in all kinds of criminal and illegal activities like
raping, harassments, thefts, robbery, defamation suits,
murders, treason, bribery, corruption, cheatings and
forgery and through magic* wills insurance and charters;
will gain in serving at accident wards, dirty places and
mortuary.
Ill House :
DI house to Aries is Gemini. It is an airy and common sign.
Hence the Aries asc bom will naturally have writing ability
with interest in the fields of Journalism and Mass
communication. Since it is a common sign, they would not be
able to sustain their interest in these fields. Since it is an airy
sign, their works would be appreciated by others as astonishing.
Mercury, the lord of III house, would induce the Aries asc bom
to write anonymous letters and to sue others. Their writings
will aim to win over others. They will become authors of stories,
document writers and will become clerks* postmen, messengers,
electricians, ambassadors, advertisers, proof-readers, brokers
and tax-collectors. Their show of courage will be unnatural and
blind. Since Mercury is a planet of dual nature, the writings of
Aries asc bom may require editing or rewriting.
If the III cusp falls in Mrigasira star, owned by Mars, the Aries
asc bom will be courageous and confident, will spread false
news, will forge documents and will involve in unnecessary
and controversial dialogues and in unethical agreements.
Mars is also the lord of houses I & 8 to Aries. So the Aries asc
bom,
Aries

(i) will have courageous thoughts and actions, will have
needed physical strength, will have independent
thoughts, will like to exhibit their strength, will have
excellent and proper functioning of blood vessels,
sensory organs and nerves;
(ii) will seize properties by threatening, will rob documents
and notes, will sell old and obsolete goods, will write
obscene letters, will enter into agreements for murder,
will serve as clerk or inspector in accident or mortuary
wards in hospitals, will become doctor to postmortem
of corpses or brokers for bribery, will become informers
to anti-corruption wing, will spread illegal news and
will have unexpected mental changes.
If the III cusp falls in Arudra star, owned by Rahu, the Aries
asc bofn will become clerks in embassies, will become
ambassadors or mediators, will enter into agreements with
foreigners, will have notes and communication links with foreign
organisations, and wilt deal with foreign goods.
Rahu would act alike Jupiter as far as the significations of
houses are concerned.
If the HI cusp falls in the star of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter,
the Aries asc bom will deal in documents and stamps, negotiable
instruments, will enter into legal agreements, will issue legal
orders and notices and will spread faithful and truthful news.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 9 & 12 to Aries. So the Aries
asc bom,
(i) will enter into confident and reliable agreements and
contracts, will involve in exchange of currency, will be
glorified, will be certified in higher education, will enter
irito agreements of research, will become messengers,
will negotiate in endowment activities and religious
service, will nationalise religious/ endowment
organisations, will assemble organs for transplantations,
will have international communication network, will
submit sales tax accounts, will become clerks in law
departments, mediators, leasers of temple properties,
86 Astrologies of kaalchakra

will provide information about ancient archaeological
monuments;
( ii ) will have information about secret activities and plans,
will lose enemy, will Jose secret documents and savings
certificates, will receive documents for money, will lose
belongings and outstanding money and will have
permanent separation of the already separated member
of the family.
IV H ouse :
Cancer, the IV House to Aries is a movable and watery sign.
Hence, the residence of Aries asc born would mosdy face eastern
direction and may be in the prime part of a South-North street.
Their residences will be surrounded by trees and will have
surplus ground water.
Since it is a multi-legged sign, their residences will have multiple
rooms. Since it is a movable sign, to raise the value of their
buildings or lands, the Aries asc bom would improve their houses
by frequent modifications and further constructions. Their
possessions will become valuables.
Since the Moon, the fastest planet, is the owner of the sign
Cancer, the IV House, the Aries asc bom will speedily make
their purchases of properties, lands, machinery and household
appliances etc. They may own ponds, agricultural lands, boats^-
air-conditioners and refrigerators etc. They mVy harvest rain
water and will have surplus ground water.
If the IV Cusp falls in Poonarvasu star owned by Jupiter, the ,
Aries asc bom will own properties without encumbrances, Will
run educational institutions or macro organisations, will become
owners of real-estates, will involve in production and
manufacturing process of commodities like food articles, cotton,
silk and turmeric goods etc..
Jupiter is the lord of houses 9 & 12 to Aries* So the Aries asc
bom,
Aries

(I) will enter contracts for properties, will earn nanu
through education, will become head masters or high
school teachers, will involve in novel production through
research, will maintain close affinity towards foreigners,
will become importers, will ran research centres, will
induce the government to construct temples or create
endowments, will manufacture organs for
transplantations, will receive foreign subsidies, will
become trustees of temples or protectors or care takers
of ancient monuments and will work as clerks in law
departments;
(ii) Will work on secret plans, will lose physical energy,
will gain secretly placed articles or treasures, will regain
the articles that were lent, will have the nature of saving
the articles and consolidating the ownership on
properties, will have secret places for secret activities
and will have reunion of separated member of the joint
family.
If the IV Cusp falls in Pushyam star owned by Saturn, the Aries
asc bom will encroach village common lands, will own mines
and old or ancient buildings, old or wooden goods, pottery, oil
seeds and black coloured articles etc.
Saturn is the lord of houses 10 & 1 1 to Aries. So the Aries asc
bom,
(i) will earn name and fame as honorary landlords; own
small scale industries and hold responsible posts with
administrative capacity.
(ii) will accumulate wealth with greedy nature and to their
choice, will construct guest houses, will organize forums
and will construct houses through companies, will gain
fortunes through house and articles, will receive gifts
for their achievements in production and will have
frequent visits of friends of their choice to their house.
If the IV Cusp falls in Aslesha star owned by Mercury, the
Aries asc bom will be in possession of machines, computers,
calculators, printers, micro instruments, electrical and
88 Astrologies ofkaalchakra

electronics goods, spares, and tiie$j will serve as checkers in
vehicles, will become assemblers! of spare parts, will do
manufacturing and will own lodges.
Mercury is the lord of houses of 3 & 6 to Aries. So the Aries
asc bom,
(i) will have the press-publicity about their transfers, will
publish books on knowledge, will confidently involve
in production technology and gain information about
echnical know-how, will leave the native place, will
have stay on transfer orders, will exhibit mentally
inclined activities.
( ii ) will leave their properties like lodges for the use of
competitive examinations, medical camps, research
laboratory, will do preparation of food articles or
medicines, tailoring, manufacturing of medical
equipments, will become money lenders against
properties or milk men, will serve in the departments of
accounts or purchase and will live in houses for monthly
rent.
V House : Leo
V house to Aries is Leo. It is a fixed and fiery sign. Hence, the
first issue of the Aries asc bom may be an aborted child or a
child with short-temper. Since it is a fixed sign, the delivery of
the first child will be difficult and mostly through caesarean.
Since the 5th sign is mled by Sun, the Aries asc bom will have
success in the fields of arts , music and literature. The Aries bom
will show interestinthe fields of politics, sports, will be invited
for government feasts, festivals and sports events and will deal
with government subsidy etc.
If the V cusp falls in the star of Makha, ruled by Ketu, the Aries
asc bom will become pimps, magicians or agents on illegal
professions, will deal with drugs and intoxicating materials, will
enter into cheap and dirty politics with others, will be cunning
in all their activities and will write stories on crime subjects
and on witches and spirits.
"Aries

Ketu would act like Mercury as far as significations of houses
are concerned. Mercury is the lord of houses 3 & 6 to Aries. So
the Aries asc horns,
(i) will have press-publicity about their artistic
performances, will publish books on arts, will involve
in advertising departments, will enter into agreements
on artistic performances and will learn intelligent arts;
(ii) will run competitive centres for arts, will become
gynaecologists, nurses, costume designers, servants in
the fields of arts and culture or at cinema halls or at
lodges, will stay in lodges, will prepare natural
medicines, will run medical laboratories and will work
for commission.
If the V house falls in the star of Poorvapalguni, ruled by Venus,
the Aries asc bom will shine as stars in the fields of arts and
culture, will become performer of obscene dances, may become
prostitutes and will excel as orators, astrologers, pundits or
politicians.
Venus is also the lord of houses 2 & 7 to Aries. So the Aries asc
bom,
(7) will collect artistically valuable goods like musical
records, musical instruments, ornaments, and will
arrange things in artistic manner;
(ii) will have cordial social relationships, will leave in
government quarters or in guest houses, will receive
musical instruments as donations from the government,
will associate themselves with voluntary or social
organisations and will enter into love marriage.
If the V house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,,
added to its planetary significations, as it is the lord of the V
house, the Aries asc bom will become share brokers, priests
and registrar of marriages; will be fond of sports; write poems,
stories, run sports centres, show excessive interests in sexual
pleasure and will associate with prostitution dens, cabaret halls,
places of religious rituals etc.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

VI House : Virgo
Virgo is the 6th house to Aries and it is a common and earthy
sign. So the Aries asc bom will have intermittent and frequent
health problems.
Since the lord of Virgo is Mercury, a karaka planet for nerves,
blood vessels and sensory organs, health problems in these parts
of body may trouble the Aries asc boms. Since Mercury denotes
green colour, problems due to indigestion may occur by taking
food with greenish vegetables. The Aries born may become
accountants, workers in shopping centres, money lenders for
installments, collectors of money and taxes, labour contractors,
printers , computer operators , neurologists , nurses , compounders
and office clerks.
If the VI cusp falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Aries asc boms will acquire loans firm the government,
will face litigations from the government, will be in government
service, will be supplied with uniforms, medicines and food by
the government, will serve in the government departments of
employment, food, agriculture, health and cattle development.
Sun is also the lord of V house to Aries. So the Aries asc born
will serve in share-brokers offices, auditoriums, sports centres,
marriage registration offices, prostitution homes and liquor bars,
will chant Vedic mantras, will manufacture sports goods and
may become pimps , or proof-readers of books on arts and culture .
If the VI cusp falls in the star of Has tha, ruled by Moon, the
Aries asc bom will work in water reservoirs, ships, fisheries
departments and agricultural fields, will become plumbers, will
suffer due to diseases caused by water.
Moon is also the lord of IV house and hence the Aries asc bom
will work in the fields of lands, vehicles, buildings, macro
organisations, food processing, live stock, education, house hold
appliances and furniture, will work for daily wages and will
become stage managers of music concerts.
If the VI house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Aries asc bom will suffer due to pains in muscles, heat borne
Aries

diseases, will serve in factories, will become insane, will be
hard workers, cooks, tailors, manufacturers of food and
medicines.
Mars is also the lord of houses 1 & 8 to Aries. So the Aries asc
bom,
(i) will have self-thoughts, will suffer due to diseases in
digestive system and to remain as inactive, will have
success through activities, lack the power of immunity,
will become dependant m activities, will improve their
working capacity.
(ii) will render hard labour, work under poor conditions,
repair old goods and will have excessive work load.
VII House :
VII house to Aries is Libra. It is a movable and aiiy sign. Hence
spouses of Aries asc bom will be clever and will carry selfpride. They are dynamic with their natural talents. They are
always active. Since it is a masculine sign, their appearance
will be blended with masculinity. The spouses of Aries asc boms
will not stay for behind to their husbands in their public and
social fife.
Since Libra is owned by Venus, spouses of Aries asc boms
would appear beautiful. They tend to carry excessive sexual
desires. They would often meet with women customers in their
business. Since Venus is the lord of houses 2 & 7 for Aries and
1 & 8 to the VII house, wives of Aries asc bom are shorttempered and talkative. They may suffer due to body pains and
mental stress.
If the VH cusp falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Aries asc boms will have undisciplined and arrogant wife/
partners, will meet with liars, anti-social elements as customers,
will have to deal with arrogant bank officials and will be forced
to request assistance from others.
Mars is also the lord of houses 1 & 8 to Aries. So the Aries asc
bom,
Astrologies of kaalchakra

will have collective thoughts, will listen to the words of
others, will suffer due to problems in Kidneys, Uterus
and lower abdomen regions, will gain success in joint
ventures, will face increasing opposition and will lack
independence in actions.
(ii) will meet with cheats, murderers, criminals, anti-social
elements, insurance officials, terrorists and policemen.
If the VII cusp falls in the star of Swathi, ruled by Rahu, the
Aries boms will find their life/business partners from foreign
community will become homosexuals, will be fond of excessive
and perverted sexual pleasures.
Rahu would act like Jupiter m the case of house significations.
If the VII cusp falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Aries asc bom will have calm-natured, adjustable and
responsible persons as life/business partners and will have
popular persons as their customers.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 9 & 12 to Aries. So the Aries
asc bom,
(i) will often meet with leaders, foreigners, exporters,
judges, priests, trustees and teachers and socially down
trodden people.
(ii) will plan secretly, will become collectors of loan-dyes,
will meet thieves, persons who threaten, persons who
have secret links, persons who assist them in investments
and persons who would lead to losses to them.
Vm House : Scorpio
Scorpio is the 8th sign to Aries. It is a watery and fixed sign.
The Aries asc bom will meet with accidents due to heavy rains
or in floods or at bridges or at ponds and wells.
Since this sign is owned by Mars, accidents and dangers would
be caused by fire or by red coloured articles and may be due to
production of excessive heat. Accidents and dangers may be
caused by short-temper, arrogance and anger of the Aries bom.
mmm mmm a
Aries

They may involve in petty street quarrels, riots, struggles,
terrorism, seizures, false allegations, police and military actions,
troubles caused by brothers, handling of weapons, cruel
accidents, raping, murders, robbery, forgery, cheatings and
suicide squads.
If the VIII house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Aries asc bom will be punished by law, will do illegal
activities and will disobey rules and regulations.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 9 & 12 to Aries. So the Aries
asc bom,
(i) will face troubles in export/import contracts in ports and
in teaching profession, will meet with fire accidents in
research centres and ancient monuments, will close
endowments and trusts, will misappropriate temple
taxes, will be punished by the court and will divide the
panchayat boards.
(ii) will face troubles in secret plans, will face dejections,
seizures, robbery and cheatings, will become unable to
liquidate investments, will face troubles caused by the
separated member of the family and will face losses.
If the VDI house falls in the star of Anuradha, mled by
Saturn, the Aries asc bom will face disrespect, will be
annihilated, will be threatened, will threaten, will
abscond, will become cowards, will suffer due to loss
of memory, will face false allegations, cruel accidents,
will modify old goods and will involve themselves in
cruel acts.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 1 0& 1 1 to Aries. So the Aries
asc bom,
(i) will face allegations in the substantiation process of
employment, will be corrupt in higher posts by using
their administrative capacity, will lose name, fame and
• status and will face hurdles in promotion process in
service;
Astrologies of kaalchakra

( ii) will struggle with greediness, will be harassed in lodges,
will misappropriate in societies, will face no-confidence
motions in societies, will face troubles and dejections
in desired fields, will see the fortunes turning into
misfortunes, will have unfortunate employment
opportunities and will suffer from vitamin deficiency.
If the VUI house falls in the star of Jyeshta, mled by Mercury,
the Aries asc bom will face troubles by way of cheques,
negotiable instruments, documents, electrical and telephone
connections, agreements, surety, anonymous letters,
forgetfulness and neurological disorders.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 3 & 6 to Aries. So the Aries
asc bom,
(i) will have notorious press publicity, will write books on
criminology, will spread rumours, will make mistakes
in accounting, will suffer due to forgetfulness, will face
adverse remarks in service matters, Will face troubles
in the services as clerk, in taking tenders, in writings
and communications and will suffer due to deteriorations
in body organs.
(ii) will face troubles in centres of competitive
examinations; suffer due to medical treatment,
negligence of medical staff, side effects of medicines,
acidity and allergy; will face allegations in lodges and
will meet with accidents in the preparation of medicines .
IX House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius is the 9th sign to Aries. It is a dual and a common
sign. Hence, the Aries asc bom may study two different types
of courses. To go for higher education, they may have to change
their places of residence. Since it happens to be a fiery sign,
their character and appearance would not match to their studies.
Since Jupiter is the lord of this sign, their profession may not
be related to their studies. Aries asc bom will excel in research
fields and in higher studies and at foreign countries. They may
become professors, financial controllers of countries, temple
Aries

trustees and ambassador in embassies, exporters and the trend
setters in the fields of law, religion and discipline of the society.
If the IX house falls in the star of Moola, ruled by Ketu, the
Aries asc bom would become judges in criminal courts, would
study criminology and forensic science, will investigate crimes,
will become archaeologists, will train subversive elements, will
illegally export and import goods and will carry subversive
activities in foreign countries.
Ketu would act like Mercury as far as the significations of
houses are concerned. Mercury is the lord of houses 3 & 6 to
Aries. So the Aries asc bom,
(i) will get due press publicity about celebrations and happy
occasions, will publish books on information and
communication, research and education, will spread
news, will show interest in mathematics, will have good
power of memory, will exchange properties and will
undertake works within their capacity;
(ii) will become supervisor in competitive examination
centres, will suffer due to increase in hereditary disorders
or due to side effects of medicines or due to excessive
intake or due to acidity, will become nurses or medical
lab technicians, will undertake joint ventures in medical
research, will have illegal affairs in research fields, will
sign mutual agreements in international bodies and will
be offered with employment on the grounds of legal
heirships.
If the IX house fallsin the star of Poorvashada, ruled by Venus,
the Aries asc born will involve in the research of artistic fields,
will study higher education and automobile engineering, will
become decorators of marriage halls and halls of feast and will
have illegal affairs with foreigners or teachers.
Venus is also the lord of houses 2 & 7 to Aries. So the Aries asc
bom,
Astrologies of kaalchakra

(i) will talk decently and adjustably, will get ancestral gold
and goods , will get money as donations , and will receive
costly gifts.
( ii) will be alleged in lodges, will be separated from second
wife, will have illegal affairs with sister-in-laws, will
discontinue the illegal affairs, will win friendships with
government officials and will get due recognition for
their social service institutions.
If the IX house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun, the
Aries asc bom will be interested in the fields of religion, higher
education, embassies, government research centres, finance
departments and international organisations.
Sun is also the lord of V house to Aries . So the Aries asc bom
will undertake religious endowments or pilgrimage, will have
religious faiths, will get cured from diseases by god's grace and
will get relieved from service.
X House : Capricorn
Capricorn is the X sign to Aries, which is a movable and earthy
sign. Hence, the professional life of Aries asc bom would always
progress upwards.
Since Saturn is the lord of this sign, which is also the lord of
houses 10 & 1 1, fulfillment of professional ambitions would be
delayed. They may become office assistants in the departments
of police, military and corporate companies. They would come
up in their life firm the lower status and will respect the feelings
of subordinates. They may also deal in old goods.
If the X house falls in the star of Uttarashada, mled by Sun, the
Aries asc bom will become higher officials and will hold
honoraiy posts, will be in government service and will be able
to work in industrial centres or industrial training institutes,
employment exchanges and trade centres organised by* the
government.
Sun is also the lord of the V house to Aries . So the Aries asc
bom will perfonn religious rituals, will organise pilgrimage
tours, preachers of religion, priests, artists, painters, singers,
Aries 97

poets, astrologers, musicians, gynaecologists, producers of
vitamin syrups and will perform religious rituals.
if the X house falls in the star of Shravana, ruled by Moon, the
Aries asc bom will be in white collar jobs, will handle liquid
and white coloured articles in their professional fields, wilt deal
in consumer goods , will be in the fields of ports , wells , pipelines ,
boating and fisheries.
Moon is also the lord of the IV house to Aries . So the Aries asc
bom will manufacture goods, would, involve in production
process, will do fanning, building constructions, carpentry, auto
mechanism, cleaning and production of electricity, will be in
the fields of water tanks, boilers, grain fields, fruit gardens and
godowns.
If the X house falls in the star of Dhanishta, rulecf by Mars, the
Aries asc bom will handle fine in their profession, will become
administrative officers in the departments of police and military,
will act on responsible capacity, will be accountable for
government documents and will be in the fields of lands and
houses.
Mars is also the lord of houses 1 & 8 to Aries. So the Aries asc
bom,
( i) will use their own ideas in their professional fields, will
be over enthusiastic in their profession, will become
industrialists, will undertake honorary and prestigious
ventures, will sufter due to malfunctioning of the body,
will increase their power, will be capable of acting
independently and will make modem changes in their
professional fields.
(ii) will become professional criminals and anti-social
elements of all kinds and will sell old and repaired goods.
XI House : Aquarius
Aquarius is the 1 1 th Sign to Aries. It is a fixed sign. Hence the
Aries asc boms tend to carry long-term ambitions. Since it is
also an airy sign, they carry a higher degree of expression of
their talents and they are greedy for name and fame.
98 Astrologies ofkaalchakra

Since this is a sign ruled by Saturn, the lord of houses 10 & 1 1 ,
the Aries asc bom will have to overcome difficulties in fulfilling
their ambitions. They never get satisfied at any particular point.
False satisfactions are common among many Aries asc bom.
They will have friendships or relationships with liars, lazy and
undisciplined people; and they may also purchase properties
with litigations.
If the XI house falls in the star of Dhanishta, mled by Mars , the
Aries asc bom will have friendships or relationships with
insincere people, will have to win things of their choice after
prolonged struggles and will be greedy.
Mars is also the lord of houses 1 & 8 to Aries. So the Aries asc
bom,
(i) Will always think about themselves, will have excessive
percentage of vitamins in the body, will have increasing
desires , will be fond of name and fame, will have a high
sense of taste, will be selfish, will have independent
opinions and will have the ability of imagination.
( ii ) Will face trouble in things of their desires, will become
tension-borne, will have dissatisfactions and dejections,
will be hasty in desires and will have mental fluctuations .
if the XI house falls in the star of Sathabisham, mled by Rahu,
the Aries asc bom will become researchers in the fields of drugs
and liquors, will become surgeons of transplantations, will
manufacture artificial organs, will run religious research centres
and international cultural centres, will teach foreign languages
and will deal in foreign grain godowns.
Rahu would act like Jupiter as far as the sign iflcations of houses
are concerned.
If the XI house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, mled by Jupiter,
the Aries asc bom will fulfil their legitimate desires through
lawful means; will have friendships and relationships with
truthful and sincere people.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 9 & 1 2 to Aries . So the Aries
asc bom,
Aries

( i ) Will have links with social service institutions and higher
officials, will undertake voluntary service, will become
polygamists, will undertake foreign journeys of their
choice, will study the course of their choice, will have
international links and agreements of their choice and
will involve in research fields.
( ii) Will be happy through secret contacts, will invest in the
fields of their choice, will have success in research
attempts, will detail things which could not easily be
understood by others and will have secret relationships
through friends.
XII House : Pisces
Pisces is the 12th house to Aries. It is a watery sign. Hence, the
bed comforts would be pleasant to the Aries asc bom. Since it
is also a common sign, they may have to visit other states
frequently.
Since Jupiter is the lord of this sign, the Aries asc bom will
have an inclination towards research, and may have illegal affairs
and international and inter-state contacts etc. They will have
secret disturbances through law, will get into income-tax raids,
will be imprisoned, will print fake currency and will undertake
jobs of secret financial reviews.
If the XII house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter,
in addition to its own bhava karakas as detailed in the previous
paragraph, as it is lord of houses 9 & 12 to Aries, the Aries asc
bom,
(i) Will spend for social service and voluntary organisations,
will have secret links with higher officials and with
foreign nations, will enter into secret agreements, will
study research education, will face hurdles in higher
education, will have secret and multiple love affairs and
will undertake foreign journeys.
(ii) Will incur losses in secret contacts, will be unable to
liquidate investments and recollect outstanding amounts
and binami properties; will maintain secrecy, will go
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

on undertaking research and will have stable and
permanent secret relationships.
If the XII house falls in the star of Uttarabadra, ruled by Saturn,
the Aries asc bom will take secret revenges, will hoard things,
will avoid things, will plan secretly, will do adulterations and
smugglings and will secretly involve in indecent acts.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 1 0 & 1 1 to Aries . So the Aries
asc bom,
(i) Will secretly hold responsible posts and will undertake
jobs with heavy workloads and dual natured jobs.
(ii) Will have secret activities in societies and clubs, will
have breach of agreements with societies, will miss
fortunate opportunities, will fail in achievements and
will keep modem methods in secrecy.
If the XII house falls in the star of Revathi ruled by Mercury,
the Aries asc bom will invent micro instruments through
research, will keep secret notes, photographs, documents and
accounts, will enter into secret agreements and will not hesitate
to do adulterations.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 3 & 6 to Aries . So the Aries
asc bom,
(i) Will lose their physical energy, will get notorious
publicity in the press, will have breach of agreements,
will face troubles in information and communications,
will sell books, will block information, will make
mistakes in accounts, will lose power of memory and
will become sellers.
(ii) Will gain secret success, will become unconscious due
to allergic food, will change service of their choice, will
get successful opportunities after making undue
expenditures, will suffer due to the inability to diagnose
diseases and will be separated from the subordinates or
servants.
Aries

Note 1: As per the Placidius system of Cuspal divisions, two
bhavas may fall in a single sign itself. For example, in a few
charts of Aries asc bom, the fourth and fifth cusp may fall in
Cancer itself. The star lord of the V house will be Mercury in
these cases. If so, we may have to draw predictions by
considering the planetary and Bhava significations of the Planet
Mercury.
Note 2: The traditional followers may appropriately include the
residential bhava significations of planets for further predictions.
Note 3: Method of using Sublord or Subsublord .
(i) Identify the sublord. For example, let us presume that
ASC is Mars-Venus-Mercury in Aries and Mercury is
the sublord of the Asc. Then the significations of houses
3 & 6 would fonn the core of the character alongwith
the planetary significations of Mercury.
( ii ) Identify the starlord of the sublord. If Mercury, the ASC
sublord resides in the star of Moon, include the
significations of IV house, as Moon is the lord of Cancer,
the IV house to Aries along with the planetary
significations of Moon.
(iii) Identify the starlord of the sublord. If Mercury, the ASC
sublord resides in the star of Moon, in stead of using
rule (ii), note down the cuspal points, to which Moon is
the cuspal sublord. Supposing that Moon is the cuspal
sublord of houses 5 & 8, then, the significations of houses
5 & 8 along with the planetary significations of Moon
are to be studied for predictions. (KB method)
(iv) The above rule could extensively be used for subsubs
as better replacement to the subs. However, the accuracy
of subsubs would depend on the accuracy of software,
birth time and place of birth. Hence, care has to be taken
in using " Subsubs ".
Note 4i Character, Physique especially with regard to the weight
and the colour and behaviour of a person tend to change
according to the Dasa/Bhukthi periods. It has also to be taken
aggropriatelyinto account.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Taurus
General nature of the sign Taurus
It is a fixed, dual, earthy, soft natured animal, ox, four-legged,
feminine, semi-fruitful sign, static, obedient, long ascension,
main road, mid-days, compound houses, middle part of a street,
banks, safety rooms, khajana or treasury, cosmetics, pantry,
residences of women like nunnery or convent , fertile lands , white
in colour, east in direction, month of Vaikasi in Tamil and
Vaishaka in Saka calendars, the second sign of the Zodiac or
Kaalchakra.
ASCENDANT RELATED SIGNIFICATIONS OF TAURUS
Derivations from the above mentioned karakas of Taurus could
be as under :
1. It is an Earthy sign: Affinity towards family and friends ,
public relations, well structured body and obedient.
2. It is a house of Venus: More sexual interests, fond of
cosmetics, watery in body structure, costumes and
jewellery and good physique
3. It is a Fixed sign : Stat ic in structure and nature.
4. It is the Second sign of Zodiac: Fond of money, gold
and valuable articles; greedy.
In the same manner, the remaining significations could also be
interpreted .
Taurus

Venus is the lord of houses 1 & 6 to Taurus: Let us take the
bhava significations of the planet Venus for the houses 1 & 6,
I House : Taurus
Beauty, handsome, attractive, drawing others through actions,
sexy, self-pride, interested in self-beautification, fond of
cosmetics, costumes and jewellery.
VI House : Libra
Workers in the fields of arts and culture, tailors, servants in
vegetable and fruit shops and the fields of hardware and paints:
they will suffer from diabetes.
The significations of the II & VH house of the Kaalchakra
on Asc are:
II House ; Gemini
Materializing self-thoughts, thoughts of money, speedy
functioning of the body, highly active, immediate expression of
thoughts, independent income and expressing status through
money.
VII House : Scorpio
Collective thoughts and listening to others; kidney, uterus,
diseases in the lower parts of stomach, successful joint ventures;
weakness caused by lack of immunity, increasing oppositions
and inability to act independently; well known persons; face
oppositions resulted by their own deeds.
The sign Taurus extends over for three stars leading to the
following body natures:
Krittiga .‘Owned by Sun - High calcium content and hot body.
Rohini : Owned by Moon - Surplus blood and water in the
body.
Mrigasira : Owned by Mars - Muscular and hyper-thermal
body.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

1: Asc significations of Sun :
Majestic in appearance with powerful bone-structure; will have
qualities of honesty, leadership, self-esteem, authority and power.
Sun is the lord of IV house to Taurus: So we will also have to
take into account the IV house significations of Sun.
IV House : Leo
Production according to self-thoughts, courageous acts, heart
& lungs, excessive production in the body, increasing power
and strength, doing things as desired, active functioning of
productive organs in the body.
The combination of Venus & Sun: (1, 4 & 6)
Landlords and great achievers; suffer from diseases in bones
and productive organs of the body; will be persons with selfpride, womanisers, selfish and greedy; have excessive interests
in materialistic and sexual pleasures.
The combination of Venus & Moon: (1, 3 & 6)
Success through struggles, court cases, litigations; brokers and
lawyers; suffer from diseases in sensoiy organs, blood vessels,
nerves, mental disorders, diabetes, sentiments, self-praise,
submissive, wavering mind; sexy in appearance.
The combination of Venus & Mars: (1, 6, 7 & 12)
Excessive sexual interests, disobedient, addiction to liquor and
dmgs, indiscipline, harsh and rough attitude in sexual affairs,
divorce or separation from life-partners, problems caused by
partners, enmity, contagious diseases.
Let us study the Asc related significations of the remaining 1 1
bhavas to Taurus.
II House : Gemini
Since the El house of Kaalchakra is the II house to Taurus, the
Taurus asc boms will have natural ability to express their
thoughts. Their conversations would mostly centre on
informations and communications, documents and records etc.
Taurus

II house Gemini is an airy and common sign. Hence Taurus
asc boms will not generally stick to their words. They would
frequently change their stands in their negotiations with only a
low percentage of truth in what they say. They tend to talk as if
they know eveiything under the sky.
Since it is a house owned by Mercury, their conversations will
be clear and will contain sense of humour, double meanings
and with cunningness.
Ill House : Cancer
Since the IV house of the Kaalchakra is the IE house to Taurus,
the Taurus asc bom will not like to reside long in any one place.
They carry a desire to change their residences often.
Since Cancer is a watery and movable sign, they have wavering
minds. Doubting natured Taurus asc bom tend to confuse them.
Their mind would always hang around development of
properties, lands and houses etc.
Since Cancer is a house owned by Moon, the Taurus asc bom
would have speedy mind fluctuations and would lack mental
stability and balance.
IV House : Leo
Since the V house of Kaalchakra, Leo is the IV house to Taurus,
the Taurus bom will like to get educated in the fields of arts,
culture and about children.
Since Leo is a fixed and fiery sign, the behaviour of Taurus asc
boms would not confinn to their education. They may have to
face many hardships during then* primary education.
Since Leo is a sign owned by Sun, the Taurus asc bom will get
a good chance for educational scholarships from the government.
V House : Virgo
Since the VI house of Kaalchakra, Virgo is the V house to
Taurus, the romantic life of Taurus asc boms will face many
hardships. Diseases in the blood cells would be common among
Taurus asc boms.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

The V house Virgo is a common and earthy sign. Hence the
Taurus asc bom is flexible and tends to carry fluctuating interests
in the fields of arts and culture.
Since Virgo is a sign owned by Mercury, the Taurus asc horns
will have multiple love affairs, will be interested in more than a
single field of arts and culture and they may become
mathematicians.
VI House : Libra
Since the VII house of Kaalchakra is the VI house to Taurus,
the opponents of Taurus asc boms will lose their strength.
Taurus asc bom is easily prone to contagious diseases.
The VI house Libra is a movable and airy sign; so Taurus asc
bom will easily recover from illnesses; they are prone to
respiratory disorders and gastric ulcer etc.
Since Libra is owned by Venus, inspiration to success could
be gained through women, diseases may be caused by women,
vegetables; diabetes may be a common disease among the
Taurus asc boms.
VII House : Scorpio
.Since the VUI house of the Kaalchakra is the VII house to Taurus
asc boms, they tend to increase enmities; they are shy of talking
to the opposite sex; they are prone to tension and fear; the Taurus
asc boms are problematic people and would create problems
with their life partners.
Scorpio, the VII house is a wateiy and fixed sign. Hence the
Taurus asc bom has excessive production of sperms with more
sexual interests; they are flexible towards others but would
commit to firm decisions.
Since it is a house owned by Mars, the Taurus asc bom will
have the company of arrogant people and subsequently would
face mental agony and financial losses through them.
Taurus

VIII House : Sagittarius
The IX house of Kaalchakra is VIH house to Taurus. Hence
they will face hardships in continuing their higher education
like suspension or dismissal from colleges etc.; they may also
be punished at foreign countries; they will damage their
reputation in illegal affairs.
Since the VIII house is a common and fiery sign, they may meet
with accidents at crowded places, or may be due to animals, or
fire. They tend to attempt suicides by charring themselves due
to loss of prestige in their higher education.
Since it is a house owned by Jupiter , the Taurus asc boms may
be punished by courts oflaw and would be troubled by people
belonging to higher social strata; damage to their prestige may
be caused by children.
IX House : Capricorn
The X house of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Taurus . Hence,
the Taurus asc bom will get status through education. They
may lead educational institutions.
They will excel in higher education. They may get professional
assistance through their illegal affairs.
IX house is Capricorn. It is a movable sign. Hence speedy
progress in higher education would be possible to the Taurus
asc bom. Since it is also an earthy sign, they will serve with
their education for the benefit of the society.
Since it is a house owned by Saturn, they will study long term
courses . Education in the fields of science and technology would
suit to their interests.
X House : Aquarius
The XI house of Kaalchakra is the X house to Taurus. Hence,
the Taurus asc boms would like to hold honorary posts. They
tend to show off their self-pride and will have job satisfactions.
Since their X house Aquarius is a fixed sign, they carry
Astrologies of kaalchakra

permanent social relations. Since it is an aiiy sign, their status
would grow day by day.
Since it is a house owned by Saturn, they may have to earn
status only after a prolonged struggle. They tend to like cheap
publicity and carry false status.
XI House : Pisces
Since the XU house of the Kaalchakra is the XI house of Taurus,
the Taurus asc bom will derive satisfaction in secret affairs,
research works and life at foreign countries .
Pisces, their XI house is a watery and common sign. So the
Taurus asc boms tend to change their interests according to
changing circumstances. They will struggle and win in their
chosen fields and circumstances with high fluctuations.
Jupiter is the lord of their XI house. Hence they will gain legally
and in the fields of religion and philosophy. (Since Jupiter also
happens to be the lord of 8th house, such gains would come
unexpectedly)
XU House : Aries
Since the first house of Kaalchakra is the XU house to Taurus,
the Taurus asc boms will not show their natural face and would
never hesitate to carry-out secret plans, subversive acts,
adulteration and forgery etc. They will go to any extent to fulfil
their personal desires.
Since Aries is a fiery and movable sign, the Taurus asc boms
will have deceiving and cruel mind; they will maintain intimacy
with officials and secret persons.
Since it is a house owned by Mars , the lord of houses 7 & 12 to
Taurus, the Taurus asc boms will have many secret enemies.
Taurus

SIGNIFICATIONS OF TAURUS UNRELATED TO
ASCENDANT
II House : Gemini
Gemini, the IH house of Kaalchakra is the II house to Taurus,
Hence, the Taurus asc boms would make financial gains in the
fields of information, communication, writings, agreements,
cheques, money-order and documents etc.
Gemini is a common sign. Hence the Taurus asc boms would
not have a steady flow of income. Since it is an airy sign, the
Taurus asc boms could make their earnings in a speedy way.
But in the same speed, they would spend all their income.
Since this house is owned by Mercury, the lord of houses 2 &
5 to Taurus, the Taurus asc boms can make profits through
lottery, gambling and in playing cards etc. They could earn in
installments. They can earn through greenish articles, costly
micro in iruments, cheques and negotiable instruments. They
will make money with their ability of witty and descriptive
speech and mimicry.
If the II hou^e falls in Mrigasira star ruled by Mars , the Taurus
asc boms will be spendthrifts, will not hesitate to tell lies and
will be dishonest in financial matters, will make money out of
coral ornaments and metals, will seize properties and belongings
of others, will use indecent and filthy language to hurt the
feelings of others in financial matters.
Mars is also the lord of houses 7 & 12 to Taurus. So the Taurus
asc boms will,
(i) make profits through spouse and relatives , government
recognition, government subsidy, assistance firm others,
partnerships, banks and by tax evasions.
(ii) financially be benefited through secret plans and
activities, money lending, savings, investments,
hoardings and ancient articles; they will be able to
recollect the outstanding and the goods that were lost.
If the II house falls in the star of Arudra, mled by Rahu, the
110 Astrologies of kaalchakra

Taurus asc boms will talk generously and decently in financial
matters, will have foreign exchange, will avail foreign
scholarships or aids, will guide foreigners and will keep the
money of foreigners.
Rahu would act I ike Jupiter as far as the significations of houses
are concerned.
If the II house falls in the star of Punarvasu ruled by Jupiter,
the Taurus asc boms will deal in treasuries, gold articles,
jewellary and banks and will be honest and sincere in financial
matters.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 8 & 1 1 to Taurus. So the
Taurus asc boms will,
( i ) make money through hard labour under severe working
conditions and at dirty places, will earn as bribe money
in mortuary and accident wards, will earn through
harassments and all kinds of anti-social activities and
will gain in insurance policies or wills and charters and
magic;
(ii) gain through greedy nature and in easy and happy means,
romance, societies, fortunes, success, achievements,
entertainments, friends and through cordial speech; they
could make money through means of their choice.
Ill House : Cancer
Cancer the IV sign of the Kaalchakra is the El house to Taurus.
Hence the Taurus asc boms will produce documents for village
common lands and for unclaimed properties without legal heirs.
They will deal in the fields of education , lands , houses , vehicles ,
machinery etc. They will maintain good relationships with
advertisers, representatives and agents.
Since Cancer is a wateiy and movable sign; they may acquire
water reservoirs, bridges or irrigation tanks etc through lease.
They can also make profits out of them.
Since it is a sign owned by Moon, the Taurus asc be i nstead i i
change their places of residences, vehicles, machiner and Ian
m w
n.
Taurus

etc ., they will be quick in communicating, will undertake speedy
journeys, will write articles and stories with imaginations and
will always like to have happy information.
If the ED house falls in the star of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter,
the Taurus asc boms will deal in documents, stamps, cheques
of huge amounts, will negotiate in financial matters, will be
truthful in communications, will enter into legal agreements
and will-get communications by way of government orders and
legal notices.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 8 & 1 1 to Taurus. So the
Taurus asc boms will,
(i) seize properties by humiliating others, will steal notes,
will sell old goods, will write obscene and threatening
letters, will have mental depressions, will work as clerks
M i accident wards, will become inspectors of mortuary,
. ill give news about anti-corruption activities, will have
illegal news, will hold insurance policies, will forge
documents and will have mental fluctuations in
negotiations and agreements;
(ii) make advance reservations and registrations with greedy
motives, will have satisfactory informations, will boast
about their romance, will be recognised by societies,
will show interest in the fields of their choice , will have
fortunate informations, will be certified for their
successes and achievements, will win confidence of
others by entertaining others , will make friendships with
persons of their choice .
If the HI house falls in the star of Pushyam, ruled by Saturn, the
Taurus asc boms will become afraid of negotiations and
communications, undertake frequent short journeys, prefer to
walk long distances, frequently change themselves, write
anonymous letters and foige documents.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 9 & 10 to Taurus. So the
Taurus asc boms will,
A strologics ofkaalchakra

(i) enter into confident and honest agreements, will have
name and fame, will exchange money, will become
certified in higher education, will receive orders of
leaderships, will enter into agreements of research, will
make friendships with foreigners and will establish
international contacts, will send messages, will negotiate
in religious endowments and practices, will become
clerks in law departments, will act as mediators, will
take lease of temple properties and will involve in the
transplantations of organs;
(ii) receive orders for honorary posts, will do business
through status, will show responsibility in counselling,
will be appreciated for their administrative capabilities
and will get needed publicity through their name and
fame.
If the HI house falls in the star of Aslesha, ruled by Mercury,
the Taurus asc boms will be able to write stories and articles,
will become document writers, registrars, clerks, postmen,
communicators, electricians, ambassadors, advertisers, proof
readers and tax collectors and will lack stability in mind.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 2 & 5 to Taurus. So the
Taurus asc boms will,
(i) excel in their writings, will act according to writings,
will receive things in their mind and will write truths;
( ii) deal in share markets, will write about politics, religion,
sports and romance, will improve theirintelligence, will
excellently write love letters, will have permanent
physical attraction and will spread news about religious
rituals.
IV House : Leo
Leo, the V sign to the Kaalchakra is the IV house to Taurus.
Hence the Taurus asc boms tend to dwell in places near
maternity homes, temples, and child care centres etc.
Since Leo is a fieiy and a fixed sign, the Taurus boms tend to
dwell in congested places or in a compound of houses. They
Taurus 113

may have to live in the outskirts of a city. Their houses may
lack thermal protection. The walls of the houses may have a
few cracks and at times may collapse.
Since it is a house owned by Sun, they may live in the houses of
government officials or near government staff quarters. They
may encroach village common lands, will be in possession of
government vehicles and machinery, will study in government
institutions and will deal with government departments of forest
and hills, housing and transport.
If the IV house falls in the star of Makha, ruled by Ketu, the
Taurus asc boms will purchase properties with litigations, will
seize properties through cheatings, will prepare spurious or
substandard goods, drugs and intoxicating materials and will
possess ancient and archaeologically valuable goods.
Ketu would act like Mercury, as far as the significations of
houses are concerned. Mercury is the lord of houses 2 & 5 to
Taurus. So the Taurus asc boms will,
(i) purchase costly and valuable articles like gold
ornaments, will construct bungalows and will
excessively keep things in store;
(ii) deal in company shares, will produce artistically rare
goods , will become trainers at sports or religious centres,
will deal in auditoriums, marriage halls and prostitution
homes.
If the IV house falls in the star of Poorvapalguni, ruled by Venus,
the Taurus asc boms will live in palaces with greenish flower
gardens, manufacture cosmetic goods, glass ware, plastics,
produce films and run institutions of arts and automobiles.
Venus is also the lord of houses 1 & 6 to Taurus. So the Taurus
asc boms will,
(i) manufacture goods with their own ideas and selfthoughts, will act courageously, will have proper
functioning of productive organs in the body, will make
independent and personal purchases, will improve their
ability and capacity and will do things only as they think;
114 Astrologies of kaalchakra

(ii) organise medical camps, will own lodges, centres of
competitive examinations, medical laboratories, will do
catering, tailoring, manufacturing of medical
equipments, live in houses for rent, work as accountants
in purchase departments, involve in money lending on
properties.
If the V house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
besides its planetary significations, by being the lord of the IV
house would enable the Taurus asc boms to involve in farming
and cattle developments, deal in stationeries and papers for
educational institutions, deal in groceries, produce furniture,
machineries and hardware materials for construction industry.
V House : Virgo
Virgo, the VI sign of the Kaal chakra is the V house to Taurus.
Hence the Taurus asc boms will have unhealthy children; they
may have to raise loans or to face court cases on behalf of their
children.
It is an earthy and common sign; so the Taurus asc boms will
show excessive affinity towards their children; but they would
not live together with their children for long.
The V house is owned by Mercury. Hence the Taurus asc boms
will have more than a single child. Their children may be
intelligent and will excel in conversations. The Taurus asc boms
will become good singers, comedians, debaters, commission
agents and trainers of arts, drawings, sculptures and musical
instruments.
If the V house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Taurus asc boms will have success in the fields of arts,
music and literature. The Taurus asc boms will show interest
in the fields of politics and sports, will be invited for government
feasts, festivals and sports events and will deal in government
subsidy etc .
Sun is also the lord of the IV house to Taurus. So the Taurus
asc boms will have high level of immunity, will act for training
in arts, will prepare nutritious food, will do cattle development
Taunts

and live stock, will manufacture musical instalments, will
become cosmeticians, journalists, film producers and stage
managers of dance and music concerts.
If the V house falls in the star of Hastha, the Taurus asc boms
will perform character or youthful roles in dramas and cinemas,
will become poets, thinkers, will be blessed with intelligent
children, wi|j associate themselves with recreation clubs and
will have pleasant and cordial married life.
Moon is also the lord of the III house to Taurus. So the Taurus
asc borns will get press publicity about their artistic
performances, will publish books on arts, will involve in the
field of advertising, will enter into agreements for artistic
performances and will be intelligent and imaginative in
performing arts.
If the V house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Taurus asc bom will be arrogant in copulation, will perform
obscene dances, will be atheists and will like martial arts and
boxing.
Mars is also the lord of houses 7 & 1 2 to Taurus. So the Taurus
asc boms will,
(i) have cordial relationships with society, will live in
government staff quarters or guest houses, will receive
musical instalments as donations, will many lover, will
join with partners and will associate with voluntary
organizations.
( ii ) plan secretly in love affairs, will fail in love affairs, will
regain eneigy, will secretly deliver illegitimate child and
will reunite with separated member of the family.
VI House : Libra
Libra, the VH sign of the Kaalchakra is the VI house to Taurus.
Hence the Taurus asc boms will raise bank loans and would
file law suits. They tend to make social relationships with selfish
motives. Their friendships would not last long. They could
achieve success only with the assistance of others.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Since Libra is an airy and movable sign, their loans tend to
increase; they may serve in gas services, boilers and automobile
service stations. They tend to show self-pride in their professions.
Libra is a sign owned by Venus; soTaurus asc boms will
become debtors on behalf of women. Taurus asc boms will
serve in the fields of arts, weaving, tailoring, catering, fruits
and vegetables, cosmetics, glass and plastic ware, silver and
silk.
If the VI house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Taurus asc boms will suffer due to muscle pains and heat borne
diseases, will serve in industries, may become insane, will be
hard workers and labourers, cooks, tailors, manufacturers of
food and medicines.
Mars is also the lord of houses 7 & 12 to Taurus. So the Taurus
asc boms will,
(i) serve in social service institutions, voluntary
organisations and labour welfare departments, will
become agents to government officials, will act as
marriage brokers and will become labour contractors.
(ii) acquire loans through secret plans, will clear debts by
further borrowings, will regain whaL#vas lost, will be
able to liquidate investments, will undertake medical
treatment, will have break-even of income and
expenditures and will face litigations by the separated
member of the family.
If the VI house falls in the star of Swathi, ruled by Rahu, the
Taurus asc boms will suffer due to respiratory disorders, will
like to have excessive intake of food, will become addicted to
drugs and intoxicating materials, will serve as anaesthetist and
operators of artificial respiratory equipments and will deal with
food items with fragrant smells.
Rahu would act like Jupiter as far as the significations of the
houses are concerned.
If the VI house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Taurus asc boms will serve in huge organisations, banks,
Taurus

will be fond of fatty food items, will suffer due to excessive
percentage of cholesterol and diseases in blood cells, will acquire
loans through banks, will lead feasts and festivals and will
become bankers, medical officers and lawyers.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 8 & 1 1 to Taurus. So the
Taurus asc boms will,
(i) become hard labourers or medical surgeons, will work
under dirty and severe working conditions, will repair
old goods and will have heavy workload.
(ii) win after struggles, will remain in lodges, will serve in
societies, will win litigations against societies, will have
fortunate opportunities of employment, will make
achievements in their fields and will be able to correctly
diagnose diseases.
VII House : Scorpio
Scorpio, the Yin sign of the Kaalchakra is the VII house to
Taurus. Hence the Taurus asc boms may have to meet with
accidents at the time of their marriage and may blame their
spouses as unlucky.
It is a watery and fixed sign; The Taurus asc boms would
frequently be attracted by the opposite sex. They tend to maintain
long-standing relationships with their spouses or partners.
Since it is a house owned by Mars, the Taurus asc boms may
have to face difficulties and financial losses on behalf of their
spouses or partners. Their spouses would be arrogant and
indisciplined. They may have to meet with customers who are
liars. They may have to deal with arrogant bank officials and
anti-social elements. They would be forced to request the
assistance firm others.
If the VII house falls in the Star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Taurus asc boms would have a calm and adjustable spouses;
they may deal with popular persons, honest customers and
partners in their professional field.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Since Jupiter is the lord of the houses 8 & 1 1 to Taurus, the
Taurus asc boms,
(i) may have to meet with all kinds of anti-social elements
and insurance officials;
(ii) will like to meet with friends of their choice, elderly
people, entertainers, well-wishers, parties who are
interested in legal agreements, recognised persons and
truthful people.
If the VII house falls in the star of Anuradha, mled by Saturn,
the Taurus asc boms will marry or meet with insincere,
untruthful, indecent persons with doubting minds.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 9 & 1 0 to Taurus. So the
Taurus asc boms will,
(i) meet with political leaders, priests, foreigners, exporters,
judges, trustees, teachers and socially downtrodden
people;
(ii) often work and meet with colleagues, administrative
officials, trade unionists, business customers and dealers,
persons of status and persons who bring status to them.
If the VII house falls in the star of Jyeshta, mled by Mercury,
the Taurus asc boms will marry or meet with witty,
well educated and clever people ; they would often meet
with mediators and shareholders.
Mercury is the lord of houses 2 & 5 to Taurus. So the Taurus
asc boms will,
(i) be able to get financial assistance from others, will have
profitable negotiations with banking institutions, will
purchase and acquire gold or costly articles with the
assistance of others, will receive costly articles as gifts,
will render excessive labour, will lead the family and
will receive or give money as assistance instead of loans.
(ii) marry or meet with lovers, artists, painters, singers,
astrologers, teachers, saints, priests, pimps or prostitutes.
Taurus

VIII House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the IX sign Of the Kaalchakra is the VIII house to
Taurus. Hence the Taurus asc borns may have to face
difficulties through ancestral properties and lose them by way
of penalty. They may have to face troubles in the course of
researches or during life at foreign places .
Sagittarius is a fiery and common sign. So the Taurus asc boms
may meet with accidents caused by fire or by animals. They
may face accidents during air journeys or at traffic-congested
places.
It is a house owned by Jupiter. So the Taurus asc boms would
get unexpected gains due to god’s grace or by reputed persons
of the society or through their children. Taurus asc boms would
be threatened or fined or punished by law as they would prefer
illegal means at times. They would donate gold and would
produce goods in damaged conditions.
If the VIII house falls in the star of Moo la, ruled by Ketu, the
Taurus asc boms will get into illegal activities, will be punished
by court of law, will involve themselves in sabotage and
subversive activities, will be harassed and threatened, will
blackmail others, will misuse information and will not hesitate
to steal.
Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of houses 2 & 5 to
Taurus. So the Taurus asc boms will,
(i) suffer due to allergy, will raise controversies in their
speech and will donate golden goods beyond their
capacity •
( ii) meet with accidents in drama and music concerts, will
get into troubles as matters of fun becoming matters of
serious nature, will spoil their name, fame and reputation
in the fields of arts and culture, sports, love marriages,
artistic performances, prostitution homes, liquor bars
and places of religious rituals.
If the VIII house falls in the star of Poorvashada, ruled by Venus,
the Taurus asc boms will threaten women, spoil their name,
120 Astrologies of kaalchakra

fame and reputation due to women and kidnap and threaten
women.
Venus is also the lord of houses 1 & 6 to Taurus. So the Taurus
asc horns will,
(i) become unconscious, will become inactive, will involve
in struggles, will suffer due to allergy, will lack
independence in actions, will face stress, pain,
amputation and dejection and will face troubles in
working capacity.
(&) face troubles in competitive examination centres, will
suffer due to medical treatment, negligence of nursing
staff, side effects of medicine, allergy, and acidity, will
meet with accidents in manufacturing of medicines and
will face allegations in lodges.
If the VIII house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Taurus asc boms will face seizure of their properties by the
government, damages in properties, will steal government
documents, will quit hum politics, will be punished by the
government, will meet with fire accidents and involve in criminal
activities.
Sun is also the lord of IV house to Taurus. So the Taurus asc
boms will meet with malfunctioning of productive organs in
the body, will meet with accidents, will face troubles in studies
and in the fields of lands, vehicles, properties, household
appliances, furniture and in big organisations.
IX House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the X sign of the Kaalchakra is the IX house to
Taurus. Hence, the Taurus asc boms will have changes or
breaks in their professional life. They will get their fortunes
only through their professional life. They could excel in their
professions at out-stations, or at other states or at foreign
countries.
It is a movable and earthy sign. Hence the Taurus asc boms
may have to undergo foreign tours for professional purposes;
Taurus

they will improve their research abilities in the course of their
profession.
It is a house owned by Saturn* So the Taurus asc boms tend to
make many changes and agreements in their professions. They
may have illegal affairs with older women or at their old age.
Taurus asc boms will study steadily in science education, lack
needed interest in studies, involve in diagnosis of diseases in
medical laboratories and will deal in oil wells and seeds.
If the IX house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, mled by Sun,
the Taurus asc boms will involve in government departments
of finance, research, higher education, religion and endowments
besides big multi-national organisations.
Sun is also the lord of IV house to Taurus. So the Taurus asc
boms will study courses of teacher training, will hold ancestral
properties, will have properties at foreign countries and imported
goods, will become trustees of temple properties, will own
research laboratories, grain fields, automobile service centres,
will install educational institutions and will be able to get
properties as donations.
If the IX house falls in the star of Shravana, mled by Moon, the
Taurus asc boms will involve in the fields of water reservoirs,
boats, agricultural lands, rain water harvesting, ground water,
wells, drinking water, refrigerators and vehicles.
Moon is also the lord of HI house to Taurus. So the Taurus asc
boms will think beyond their mental capacity, will get press
publicity about their happy occasions, publish books on
education or communication, spread news, show interest in the
fields of mathematics, exchange properties and have deep
memory powers.
If the IX house falls in the star of Dhanishta, mled by Mars , tne
Taurus asc boms will study agricultural sciences, geology,
archaeology and mechanical engineering; will become
politicians, landlords, criminal lawyers, judges or transport
owners.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Mars is also the lord of houses 7 & 12 to Taurus. So the Taurus
asc boms will,
( i ) face discomfort in lodges , will behave honestly in social
and voluntary organisations, will make friendships with
government officials, will remany, may involve in illegal
affairs especially with the younger sister of wife.
( ii ) make undue expenditure in their secret affairs, will face
financial troubles and crisis especially due to new
professional ventures, will spend on religious rituals,
will be incapable of liquidating capital and investments
and will study research oriented education.
X House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Taurus.
Hence the Taurus asc boms will generally have job satisfaction.
They tend to maintain very good public relations. They are fond
of feasts and festivals; Co-operatives, companies, arbitration
are some of the possible professional fields for Taurus asc boms.
X house is a fixed and airy sign; gas, air-planes, helicopters,
rockets, cleaning machines, air-conditioners and sieves are some
of the professional fields of Taurus asc boms.
It is a sign owned by Saturn. So the Taurus asc boms may
have to face frequent troubles in their professions. Lay-offs,
lock-outs, shut-downs, and availing long leave and absenteeisms
are inevitable in their professional lives. Taurus asc borns will
become office assistants especially in police, military and
corporate offices, will come up in their life fiom lower levels,
will respect the feelings of downtrodden people and will be
sellers of old goods.
If the X house falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars, the
Taurus asc boms will work with responsible capacity in the
fields of industries, police, military and administration and will
have to handle fire in their profession.
Mars is also the lord of houses 7 & 1 2 to Taurus. So the Taurus
asc boms will,
Taurus

(i) work in social service and voluntary organisations, will
become marriage brokers or labour contractors, wilt do
joint ventures and will represent people in assemblies;
(ii) do business with secret contacts, will involve in dual
ventures, will spend for and invest in profession, will
have secret links through new ventures, will undertake
research as profession and may do subversive acts as
profession.
If the X house falls in the star of Shathabisham, mled by Rahu,
the Taurus asc boms will work in prisons or investigation
departments, will work as translators , wardens in hostels,
magicians, manufacturers of shoes and abusers of computers
and will work at international centres of market , trade, banks
and employments.
Rahu would act like Jupiter as far as the significations of houses
are concerned.
If the X house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, mled by Jupiter,
the Taurus asc borns will become controller of macro
organisations, child care centres and ancient and national
monuments will hold honorary posts in banks and will serve in
gold mines or at mints.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 8 & 11 to Taurus. So the
Taurus asc boms will,
(i) become professional criminals with all kinds of anti
social activities and will sell old and repaired goods;
(ii) serve in societies, will enter into agreements with
societies, will do professions of their choice, will have
fortunate professional opportunities, will make
achievements in their professions and will develop their
respective professional methods.
XI House : Pisces
Pisces, the XII sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house to Taurus.
So the Taurus asc boms will be interested in research fields,
secret planning and subversive activities, investigations and life
Astrologies of kaalchakra

at foreign countries etc.
It is a watery sign. Hence the Taurus asc boms are always greedy
in their ambitions; as it is also a common sign, at times they get
into dissatisfactions.
It is a sign ruled by Jupiter. Hence the ambitions of Taurus asc
boms will be fulfilled with difficulties subsequent to litigations.
Their high ambitions will be hill of encumbrances . They will
win friendships with sincere and generous, intelligent people.
They may expect things to materialise only through legal means.
If the XI house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter,
besides its planetary significations, as Jupiter is also the lord
of houses 8 & 1 1 to Taurus, the Taurus asc boms will,
(i) face problems and dissatisfactions in the fields of their
choice; will be hasty and tension-borne; suffer due to
vitamin deficiency and will have mental fluctuations in
the fulfillment of their own desires.
(ii) become leaders of societies, will enter into agreements
through societies, will have fortunate opportunities of
agreements, will make achievements and will introduce
novel methods in their chosen fields.
If the XI house falls in the star of Uttarabadra, ruled by Saturn,
the Taurus asc boms will have friendships with untruthful, lazy,
indisciplined and dishonest people, will get things done in
improper ways and means and will purchase properties with
encumbrances.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 9 & 10 to Taurus. So the
Taurus asc boms will,
(i) have finks with social service centres, international
organisations and higher officials, will show interest in
rendering voluntary service, will undertake foreign
journeys of their choice, will study courses of their
choice and will involve in research fields;
(ii) hold honorary posts with name and fame and will
undertake works and ventures of their choice.
Taurus

If the XI house falls in the star of Revathi, ruled by Mercury,
the Taurus asc boms will win friendships and relationships with
witty people, will be fond of micro instalments and will like to
read books of their choice.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 2 & 5 to Taurus* So the
Taurus asc boms will^
(i) be benefited through speech, will get expected golden
ornaments and costly articles , will utilize circumstances
to their own favour and will be profited through friends
and sons-in-law;
( ii ) have happy relationships, will have sexual pleasures with
people they love, will enter into peaceful accords and
will show interest in fine arts.
XII House : Aries
Aries, the first sign of Kaalchakra is the XU house to Taurus.
The Taurus asc boms, in the course of years, may have to face
downward trends in their status, name and fame etc. They may
have to face very tough and challenging situations in their life.
XII sign is a fiery and movable sign. So the Taurus asc boms
will be spendthrifts. They will lose their properties and
belongings on behalf of others and would invest in useless and
unprofitable ventures.
It is a sign owned by Mars. The Taurus asc boms could never
get due returns from their investments resulted by extravagant
expenditures. They will involve in illegal and secret activities,
will do adulteration, hoardings and smugglings and will work
in operation theatres, prostitution homes, lodges and
investigation departments.
If the XII house falls in the star of Aswani, mled by Ketu, the
Taurus asc boms will show secret interest in illegal and
subversive activities, will plan secretly and would take secret
revenges.
Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of houses 2 & 5 as far as the
significations of houses are concerned. So the Taurus asc boms,
Astrologies of kaalchakra

(i) will lose their savings, will suffer due to eye diseases
and digestion problems, will invest in golden articles
and will secretly hold black money;
(ii) will experience breaches in happy relationships, will
be forced to have sexual pleasures with persons unsuited
to their choice, will face troubles in mutual agreements
for peace and would make undue expenditure in the
fields of arts and culture.
If the XII house falls in the star of Bharani , ruled by Venus , the
Taurus asc bom will maintain secrecy in romance, will secretly
marry, will enter into secret agreements with women, will hide
things and will make secret planning.
Venus is also the lord of houses 1 & 6 to Taurus. So the Taurus
asc boms will,
(i) become masochists with inferiority complex, will lose
physical energy, will underestimate their own potential,
will have dissatisfied relationships, will suffer due to
malfunctioning of body and allergy, will lack in selfinterest and enthusiasm, will lack in imaginations and
will face troubles in all kinds of their activities;
(ii) get success through secret means, losing consciousness
through allergic food intake, get transferred in jobs
as desired, servants leaving them, inability to identify
diseases, successful chances but with loss potentials.
If the XU house falls in the star* ofKrittiga, ruled by Sun, the
Taurus asc boms will keep contacts with the government
departments of investigations, customs and excise, sales tax,
auditing, pay and accounts offices, prisons, hospitals especially
post mortem- wards and departments of seizures and
punishments.
Sun is also the lord of XII house to Taurus. So the Taurus asc
boms will invest in things of their choice, will secretly keep
belongings and articles in safe custody and will maintain
excellent functioning of their vehicles.
Taurus

Gemini
General nature of the sign Gemini
Airy sign, common, intelligent, dynamic, instable, quick in
grasping, shoulders and hands of the body, human, short
ascension, two-legged sign, masculine, singular, pair of boys,
the end part of a street, two-storied building, nights, high places,
mountains, sports ground, communication and information
offices, press, research centres, book-shelf, acoustics, represents
Shravana month in Saka and Aani in the Tamil Years, black in
colour, south east in direction, congested traffic.
ASCENDANT RELATED SIGNIFICATIONS OF GEMINI
Derivations from the above mentioned karakas of Gemini could
be as under:
/. It is an airy sign: Airing self-pride, general awareness,
research attitude.
2. It is a sign of Mercury: Witty, intelligent and fond of
knowledge, lean in structure, active nerves
3. It is a Common sign: Frequent changes in nature,
disobedient, unstable health
4 . It is the III sign: Writing skills, imagination, information
and communication, filing evidences.
In the same manner , the remaining significations could also be
studied .
Astrologies of kaalchakra

The sign Gemini extends over three stars leading to the
following body natures:
Mrigasira : Owned by Mars - Lean but extra-muscles
Arudra : Owned by Rahu - Stout with respiratory disorders
Punarvasu : Owned by Jupiter - Stout but anaemic.
Mercury is the lord of this sign. It is also the lord of Virgo the
4th house to Gemini. The combined significations of Mercury
are as follow:
I House: Intelligence, Quick in grasping power, Lean and
beautiful in structure, Estimating the situation, Witty, Quick in
action, Instability and fluctuations, Mathematics, Calculative,
Thinking twice before doing once, Neurology, Cunning.
IV House: The mind and character to find and work with different
and modem things, machineries, computer, calculator, printer,
electrical and electronic goods, lodges, assembling spare parts,
tiles, lathe works and manufacturing etc.
The significations of III house of Kaalchakra on Ascendant are:
11! House : Recording self-thoughts, courageous thoughts and
action, ear, nose and sensory organs, blood veins, functioning
of neurological system, strength of the body, acting as desired,
independent thoughts, showing the strength.
We have got three stars in Gemini. If the asc falls in,
(i) Mrigasira, owned by Mars -- Great achievements,
struggle for success, vitamin deficiency.
( ii ) Arudra, owned by Rahu - Social thoughts , lesser interest
in sexual pleasures, differences of opinion between the
couple.
(Hi) Punarvasu owned by Jupiter- Self-prestige, more
interest in partnership ventures, fluctuating relations
between the couple.
If the Asc fal Is in the star Mrigasira, owned by Mars, the Gemini
asc bom will have self-pride, rough but humorous speech, more
Gemini

interest in sexual pleasures and diseases caused by excessive
heat.
If the Asc falls in the star of Arudra, owned by Rahu, the Gemini
asc bom will have status and authority, appearance as a popular
personality, very good public relations and different tastes in
sexual pleasures and may suffer fiom contagious diseases.
If the Asc falls in the star of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter, the
Gemini asc boms would be industrialists, landlords, owners of
macro organisations; they may also gain in partnership ventures;
they may find dissatisfaction in married life; they will have
status,; prestige and very good relations with theologists.
II House : Cancer
Since the sign Cancer, the 4th sign of Kaalchakra is the II house
to Gemini, the Gemini asc boms would have conversing and
negotiating skills to deal in house, land, vehicles, machineries
and properties.
Since Cancer is a movable sign, the Gemini boms would
, improve their talents on conversing; since all watery signs are
fruitful signs, their oratorical skills would bring fruitful and
expected results.The Gemini asc boms would always like to
speak truth.
Since it is a sign owned by Moon, the Gemini asc boms would
swiftly express new and innovative ideas. They do not expose
their talents in conversations.
Ill House : Leo
Since Leo, the V house of the Kaalchakra is the III house to
Gemini, the Gemini asc boms are affectionate towards children;
they gain mental satisfaction in religious matters; they expose
their mind by writing articles and paintings in the fields of
religion, astrology etc.
Ill house is a fiery and fixed sign. Hence Gemini asc boms tend
to suffer from mental dejections, they tend to do things
aggressively, without proper analysis of the positive and negative
Astrologies of kaalchakra

reactions. The Gemini asc boms are short-tempered and
argumentative people, but they carry open minds in their
expressions.
Since it is a house owned by Sun, the Gemini asc boms tend to
show themselves as courageous and mentally strong people.
They also carry self-pride!
IV House : Virgo
Since Virgo, the VI house of the Kaalchakra is the IV house to
Gemini, the Gemini asc bams are more interested in their
education; they tend to learn many languages and in the fields
of medical, diet, costumes, textiles and chemicals etc.,
Since Virgo is an earthy and common sign, the Gemini asc
boms tend to help the society with their education; they excel
in their education despite fluctuations; they become debtors for
the cause of their education.
Since Virgo is ruled by Mercury, the Gemini asc boras have
natural interest in mathematics.
V House : Libra
Since Libra, the VII house of the Kaalchakra is the V house to
Gemini, the Gemini asc boms tend to gain wisdom and
knowledge due to persuasions by opposite sex; they have the
capability to entertain the society through arts and music.
Libra is a movable and airy sign; so the artistic and cultural
movements of Gemini asc boms would#®#ftys move in the
path of development, in less than a reasonable time.
Since it is a house owned by Venus, the lord of houses 5 & 1 2 to
Gemini, the Gemini asc boms tend to make extravagant
expenditures on behalf of their interests in the fields of arts and
culture; they may also have to face troubles caused by their
secret enemies.
Gemini

VI house : Scorpio
Scorpio, the VIII sign of the Kaalchakra is the VI sign to Gemini.
Hence they tend to suffer firm stress and pain resulted by sudden
illnesses and diseases. They may also have to face difficulties
due to litigations. They also cany a desire to commit suicide
due to excessive borrowings.
Since this VI house Scorpio is a watery and fixed sign, the
Gemini asc bom may have to lead a life full of struggles due to
permanent diseases caused by glands and in private organs.
Since this house is mled by Mars , the lord of houses 6 & 1 1 to
Gemini, the Gemini asc bom would suffer from diseases caused
by vitamin deficiencies.
VII House : Sagittarius
Since Sagittarius, the IX sign of Kaalchakra, is the VH house
to Gemini; the Gemini asc boms will have very good social
relationships with teachers, priests, temple trustees, lawyers and
judges.
Since this VH house is a common but fiery sign, the Gemini
asc boms would meet persons with short-temper and wavering
minds; their friendships would not last long.
Since this house is owned by Jupiter, the lord of houses 7 & 10
to Gemini, the Gemini asc boms may lack love and affection
towards their life-partners and are materialistically interested
persons and will maintain relationships with many people in
their profession.
VIII House : Capricorn
Since Capricorn, the X house of Kaalchakra, is the VI II house
to Gemini, the Gemini asc boms would face mental stress in
their profession; they may also have to meet with accidents in
their professions.
The Gemini asc bom tends to face the problems quietly , because
their VIE house is a movable but an earthy sign.
This house is owned by Saturn, the lord of houses 8 & 9 to
132 Astrologies of kaalchakra

Gemini. Hence the Gemini asc boms would face difficulties
while undertaking long journeys; they may face deadlocks in
reaching agreements; they would find it difficult to reach their
destination as desired.
IX House : Aquarius
Since Aquarius, the XI house of Kaalchakra is the IX house of
Gemini, the Gemini asc bom are more interested in higher
education and could study in the fields of their own interest.
They have a liking for illegal sexual affairs.
Since this IX house is an airy and fixed sign, the Gemini asc
boms tend to gain intelligence and research interest through
their academic education.
Since it is a house owned by Saturn, the lord of houses 8 & 9 to
Gemini, the Gemini asc boms may have breaks in their higher
education and discontinue their higher studies.
X House : Pisces
Since Pisces, the XII sign of Kaalchakra, is the X house to
Gemini, the Gemini asc boms will not hesitate to undertake
secret activities like adulteration etc. They gain status and honour
through two different types of profession. They carry needed
inclination for research and innovation.
Since this X house is a common and watery sign, the Gemini
asc boms will have fluctuations in their professional life. They
venture in multiple professions in the fields of liquids.
Since it is a house ruled by Jupiter, the lord of houses 7 & 1 0 to
Gemini, the Gemini asc boms will excel in partnership deeds.
But these partnership ventures would have to face breaks.
XI House : Aries
Since Aries, the first sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house of
Gemini, the Gemini asc boms will get position of chiefs as
desired by them; they tend to implement their plans immediately
after assuming responsibilities as chiefs.
Since it is a movable and fiery sign, the Gemini asc boms are
Gemini 13

crazy and have a never-ending desire to gain name and fame.
Since it is a house ruled by Mars, the lord of houses 6 & 1 1 to
Gemini, the Gemini asc boms will gain success in their life
only after struggles.
XII House : Taurus
Since Taurus, the II sign of the Kaalchakra is the XU house to
Gemini, the Gemini asc boms tend to maintain secrecy in their
investments and would not hesitate to undertake secret activities
for financial gains.
Since this XU house is a fixed and earthy sign, the Gemini asc
boms would like to invest in immovable properties.
Since it is a house mled by Venus, the lord of houses 5 & 12 to
Gemini, the Gemini asc boms will lose money and properties
due to their love affairs.
SIGNIFICATIONS OF GEMINI UNRELATED TO
ASCENDANT
II Hbuse : Cancer
Cancer is the II house to Gemini. Since it is the IV sign of
Kaalchakra, the Gemini asc boms could make money out of
land, vehicles, properties, machinery, agriculture and
manufacturing.
This II house is a watery and movable sign; the income pattern
of Gemini asc boms will mostly maintain upward trends; the
income of them would mostly be used for honest purposes.
Since it is a house of Moon, the income pattern of Gemini asc
boms wilt have frequent and speedy transactions of money, will
profit from clear speech and pearl ornaments, will become
counsellors in financial institutions and will become active
through financial sources.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Punarvasu, mled by Jupiter,
the Gemini asc boms will be sincere, respectful, honest and
truthful in financial matters; will deal in jewellery shops, treasury
and banks.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Jupiter is also the lord of houses 7 & 10 to Gemini. So the
Gemini asc boms will,
(i) be benefited from society, banks, government
recognition, partnership deeds, spouse and relatives, will
gain through government subsidy and tax evasion;
(ii) gain by holding honorary or high posts, through status,
leadership, administrative capacity, name and fame and
responsible counselling.
If the 2nd house falls in the star* of Pushyam, ruled by Saturn,
the Gemini asc boms will become misers, will belong to small
income group, will tell lies in financial matters, will be in
possession of costly goods and will tend to seize properties and
belongings of others.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 8 & 9 to Gemini. So the Gemini
asc boms will,
(i) profit through all kinds of anti-social, illegal and criminal
activities like robbery, thefts, cheating, forgery,
threatening, murders, kidnappings etc. They will gain
by accepting bribery in accident wards and mortuary in
hospitals, insurance claims, magics and wills;
(ii) gain through ancestral properties, confidence, honesty,
education, leadership, research, religious service,
endowments, transplantation, taw, temple properties,
ancient monuments and life at foreign countries.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Aslesha, ruled by Mercury,
the Gemini asc boms will gain through greenish stones and
articles, mimicry and witty speech, micro instruments,
negotiable instruments and by rendering commentary.
Mercury is the lord of houses 1 & 4 to Gemini. So the
Gemini asc boms will,
(i) make money with self-thoughts, will always be fond of
money, will increase their activities with the use of
money, will increase their status through money and will
have independent sources of income;
Gemini

(ii) benefit through education, frnits and vegetables, grain
fields, farms, education centres, libraries, lease of ponds
and water reservoirs.
Ill House : Leo
Leo is the HI sign to Gemini. It is the V house to Kaalchakra.
Hence the Gemini asc boms tend to write and communicate
much about religion, arts and culture. Since this HI house is a
fiery and fixed sign, the Gemini asc boms will show steady,
serious and stubborn involvements in the fields of arts and culture
and are adamant in their religious practices.
Leo is a sign ruled by Sun. So the Gemini asc boms will deal
with statistics, records, orders, informations, communications
and postal departments of the government.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Makha ruled by Ketu, the
Gemini asc bom will forge documents, spread rumours , file
criminal cases, manipulate accounts and write anonymous
letters.
Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of houses 1 & 4, as far
as the significations of houses are concerned. So the Gemini
asc boms will,
(i) record their self thoughts , will have courageous thoughts
and acts, will have proper functioning of neurological
and sensory organs including blood vessels, will do
things as they like with the use of their physical strength,
will carry independent opinions and thoughts and will
like to exhibit their strength;
( ii ) lose physical energy, will be certified for education, will
sell vegetables and fruits, livestock, nursery, stationeries
and papers used in educational institutions, newspapers,
vessels, utensils, furniture, groceries, hardware,
equipments and accessories used in the construction of
bridges and would become real estate brokers.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Poorvapalguni, ruled by Venus,
the Gemini asc borns will happily get information,
communication, letters, agreements, brokerage, script writings
136 Astrologies of kaalchakra

and film editing: they would be able to capitalize their skill of
writing and imagination.
Venus is also the bid of houses 5 & 12 to Gemini. So the
Gemini asc boms will,
(i) deal and write about stock market, sports, politics, arts
and literature, religion and Vedic rituals, will paint with
pure imagination, will have intelligence, will have
attractive physique and will perform obscene dances.
(ii) have information through secret sources, will lose
physical energy, will miss the evidences and savings
certificates, will receive documents for outstanding, will
get needed information for secret plans, will permanently
lose outstanding and will experience permanent
separation of person who is already and temporarily
separated fiom the family.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, mled by Sun,
besides its planetary karakas, as it is also the lord of the JR
house to Gemini, the Gemini asc boms will have needed press
publicity, will use intelligence in writing, will express own ideas,
will participate in debates and discussions, will write to boost
the confidence and courage of the readers and will have stable
mind with courage and confidence.
IV House : Virgo
Virgo the VI sign of Kaalchakra is the IV house to Gemini.
Hence the Gemini asc boms will mostly live in rented-houses;
they may face litigations in their properties; loans and
borrowings against lands, vehicles and properties are inevitable.
Since this IV sign is an earthy and common sign, the Gemini
asc boms tend to gain profitable returns fiom their lands, vehicles
and properties. They tend to make changes in their lands, vehicles
and properties.
Mercury is the lord of this house. So the Gemini asc boms
could hold double natured lands, vehicles and properties and
could be called as landlords . They may get ancestral properties.
Gemini

If the 4th house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Gemini asc horns will live in or near government buildings
and government offices, will be in possession of government
vehicles and could handle government machinery, will encroach
village common lands, will run educational institutions with
due government recognition and will deal with government
departments of vehicles, lands, forest and hills, grains, civil
supply godown, water tanks, wells and ponds.
Sun is also the lord of in house to Gemini. So the Gemini asc
boms will get press publicity about their transfers and place of
postings, will publish books on general knowledge, will leave
their native places, will confidently involve in the production
processes, will be knowledgeable persons and will behave
according to their standards of education.
If the 4th house falls in the star of Hastha, ruled by Moon, the
Gemini asc boms will deal with water reservoirs, agricultural
lands, dams, wells, ponds, boats, watery fruits and vegetables,
rain water harvesting, refrigerators and vehicles.
Moon is also the lord of n house to Gemini. So the Gemini asc
boms will purchase costly and valuable articles, jewels and
bungalows and will tend to keep things in excess at their personal
possession and custody.
If the 4th house falls ih the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Gemini asc boms will show arrogance towards their education;
will show strong interests in lands, vehicles, automobiles,
machinery, agricultural farms, machinery for production of
chemicals and fertilizers and may own huge industries.
Mars is also the lord of houses 6 & 1 1 to Gemini. So the Gemini
asc boms will,
(i) have centres of competitive examinations, will organise
medical camps, own medical laboratories, will do
catering, tailoring, manufacturing of medicines and
medical equipments, will finance against properties, will
become accountants in purchase departments or
milkmen in societies and will become lessors;
A stro logics o f kaalchakra

(ii) accumulate properties with greedily, will construct
bungalows, will construct with assistance from societies,
will purchase goods of their choice, will live in fortunate
houses, will receive gifts as token of their successes,
will make professional achievements and will have
frequent visits of friends of their choice.
V House : Libra
Libra the VE sign to Kaalchakra is the V house to Gemini,
Hence the Gemini asc boms have a chance to give birth to twins .
They would love their life-partners very much.
This V house is an airy and movable sign. So the Gemini asc
boms will have intelligent and beautiful children; they will love
people with self-pride.
Since this V house is ruled by Venus, the Gemini asc boms will
have to make huge expenditures on their iovers or daughters.
The Gemini asc boms will be interested in the fields of arts,
culture and cinema and may perform obscene roles; they may
also be popular politicians, orators and astrologers.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Gemini asc boms will be arrogant during copulations, will be
known for their obscene styles in the fields of arts and culture,
will practice martial arts and will not have faith in god.
Mars is also the lord of houses 6 & 1 1 to Gemini. So the Gemini
asc boms will,
(i) run competitive centres for arts, willbecome
gynaecologists, nurses, costume designers, caterers*
producers of natural medicines, laboratory technicians
and workers in lodges, cinema halls and would reside
in lodges.
(ii) learn arts greedily, will construct lodges and branches
of union, will venture jointly with societies, will have
sex with people of their choice, will enjoy fortunate
opportunities, will always remain in the company of
joyful friends and will make achievements in the
production of livestock.
Gemini " " ~39

If the V house falls in the star of Swathi, ruled by Rahu, the
Gemini asc boms will have sex with foreigners, will involve in
gambling and prostitution at foreign places, and may become
swimmers and sprinters.
Rahu would act as Jupiter as far as the significations of houses
are concerned.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Gemini asc boms will have faith in god, will be truthful in
their love affairs, will adhere to religious practices and rituals,
will become leaders in the fields of religion and politics and
will perfonn arts with intuition power.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 7 & 10 to Gemini. So the
Gemini asc boms will,
(i) have cordial social relationships , will live in government
quarters, will receive musical instruments as donation
from the government, will enter into partnerships, will
marry the lover and will associate with voluntary
organisations;
( ii ) hold honour, name, feme and status as eminent artists,
will become officers with administrative capacity, will
manufacture artistic goods, will be responsible for
temples that were undeitaken by the government and
will hold posts of easy jobs.
VI House : Scorpio
Scorpio the VIII sign of Kaalchakra, is the VI house to Gemini.
Hence the Gemini asc boms will gain success only after
struggles. They could get double the amount as loans beyond
their expectations.
Since it is a watery and fixed sign, the Gemini asc boms will
have increased borrowings for their litigations and medical
treatments. Their court cases, loans would last relatively
pennanently.
Since it is a house owned by Mars , the lord of houses 6 & 1 1 to
Gemini, the Gemini asc boms are to struggle for success in all
Astrologies of kaalchakra

walks of life. They will suffer due to muscle pains and high
fever; will serve in industries, will become manual labourers,
cooks, tailors and producers of medicine and food.
If the 6th house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Gemini asc boms will serve in huge industries or banks,
will become medical officers, lawyers, presidents of feasts and
functions and bank cashiers, will suffer due to cholesterol in
blood, will produce nutritious tablets and would be able to raise
loans with recommendations of popular persons of the society.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 7 & 10 to Gemini. So the
Gemini asc boms will,
(i) serve in social service, voluntary and labour welfare
organisations, will become labour contractors or agents
to government officials and will act as marriage brokers;
(ii) join in permanent service, will hold posts with easy jobs ,
will become officers known for administrative capacity
to earn name, fame and status with promotion avenues.
If the 6th house falls in the star of Anuradha, ruled by Saturn,
the Gemini asc boms will have sexual relationships with people
belonging to lower strata, will be insincere and unfaithful in
love affairs, may become prostitutes, security guards in temple
ponds or priests, will perform sober roles in the fields of arts
and will have lazy children.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 8 & 9 to Gemini. So the Gemini
asc boms will,
( i) render hard labour under severe working conditions and
dirty circumstances; will repair old goods and will have
heavy workloads.
(ii) serve as teachers, priests, researchers, scientists and in
the fields of international trade, endowments, courts,
panchayat boards, ancient monuments, temple tax
collection offices and temple trusts.
If the 6th house falls in the star of Jyeshta, ruled by Mercury,
the Gemini asc boms will serve at commercial centres or as
Gemini

accountants, labour contractors, tax collectors, nurses,
compounders, office clerks, neurologists, computer operators
and printers and in hire-purchase or instalment agencies.
Mercury is also the lard of houses 1 & 4 to Gemini. So the
Gemini asc boms will,
(i) work with self-thoughts, improve their working capacity,
will have successful acts, will have proper functioning
of digestive and neurological system, will tend to depend
on others in functioning, will lack in efficiency and will
suffer due to loss of power of immunity;
(ii) have excessive power of immunity in the body, will serve
in the fields of lands, buildings, housing, vehicles and
machinery, will become caterers, maintenance staff of
liyestock, labourers on daily wages, school teachers,
manufactures of house hold appl iances and furniture and
stage managers for dance and musical events.
VII House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the IX sign of Kaalchakra is the VII house to
Gemini. Hence the Gemini asc boms may become polygamists.
They would have plump wives, belonging to different states.
It is a common and fiery sign. Hence the Gemini asc boms may
have immoral spouses and opponents. They will have fluctuating
relationships with their spouses, partners, opponents and persons
they meet in the course of life, functionings of sensory organs
and kidney in their body will be that of fluctuating in nature.
Since it is a house owned by Jupiter, the lord of houses 7 & 10
to Gemini, the Gemini asc boms are money minded in their
matrimonial affairs. They tend to gain partnerships with socially
popular personalities and good Matured people. They will have
understanding, calm and responsible spouses, partners and
business customers.
If the 7th house falls m the star of Moola, owned by Ketu, the
Gemini asc boms will have dissatisfactions and dejections in
their married life. They will have criminal minded spouses,
business partners and customers.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Ketu would act like Mercury as far as the house significations
are concerned. Mercury is the lord of houses 1 & 4 to Gemini.
So the Gemini asc boms will,
(i) have collective thoughts and joint efforts, will listen to
others, will suffer due to contagious diseases and at
abdominal regions of the body, will become weak due
to loss of power of immunity, will lack independence in
actions, will invite competitions and oppositions due to
their activities and will become well known persons;
( ii ) marry among relatives, residents in the same compound
or opposite houses and caretakers of house, land,
organisations and vehicles.
If the 7th house falls in the star of Poorvashada, ruled by Venus,
the Gemini asc boms will have attractive spouse and business
partners, will often meet with happy and joyful persons and
women as customers in their businesses.
Venus is also the lord of houses 5 & 12 to Gemini. So the
Gemini asc boms will,
(i) often meet with their lovers, artists, painters, singers,
astrologers, teachers, religious servants, priests,
prostitutes and pimps;
(ii) often meet with secret planners, thieves, people who
threaten them by knowing their secrets and who lead to
losses to them and people who assist them in
investments.
if the 7th house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun, the
Gemini asc boms Will have spouse or business partners who
are authoritative with self-pride, will often meet with officers
of public welfare departments.
Sun is also the lord of 3rd house to Gemini. So the Gemini asc
boms will get press publicity about the assistance received by
them, will publish books on public service, will meet with
advertisers, will spend their energy for the cause of others, will
write recommendation letters and petitions for others, will Work
Gemini 143

as registrars, will gain confidence through others and will have
spouse or business partners from neighbours.
VIII House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the X Sign of Kaalchakra, is the VIII house to
Gemini. The Gemini asc borns may have to meet with accidents
at their places of profession; they may also have to serve with
excessive workloads; they could come up in their life only by
way of hard work.
Since it is a movable and earthy sign, the Gemini asc boms will
be troubled by natural calamities.
Since it is a house owned by Saturn, the lord of houses 8 & 9 to
Gemini, the Gemini asc boms will have to face a series of
problems. They will be humiliated, annihilated, threatened,
alleged and sued with false charges and they may abscond
sometimes; they will behave like cowards; they will suffer due
to forgetfulness and frequent fears of death; they may meet with
cruel accidents and they will involve in modification old goods.
If the VIE house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun,
the lord of III house to Gemini, the Gemini asc boms could get
into troubles by sudden communications from government; they
would also be troubled by anonymous letters. Their properties
may be seized by the government; they may steal government
documents , will quit politics , will involve in criminal activities ,
will meet with fire accidents and will be punished by the
government.
Sun is also the lord of III house to Gemini. So the Gemini asc
boms will get notorious press publicity, will publish books on
criminology, spread rumours, make mistakes in accounting,
suffer due to forgetfulness, misplace belongings, suffer due to
wear and tear of body organs, will have adverse remarks in
service and will face troubles in the service as clerks and in
communications .
If the 8* house falls in the star of Shravana, ruled by Moon, the
Gemini asc borns will suffer due to mental depression,
foigetfulness and unconsciousness, lack proper knowledge, meet
A strologics of kaalchakra

with accidents in water, lose, their mental balance and will
involve in anti-social thoughts and activities.
Moon is also the lord of H house to Gemini. So the Gemini asc
boms will enjoy frequent income, clear speech, pearl ornaments
and silver articles; they will be consultants in financial
companies, orators; their acts will be quick through money.
If the 8th house falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars, the
Gemini asc boms will involve with quarrels, riots, struggles,
terrorism, seizures, false allegations, police and military actions,
use of weapons, bomb blasts, cruel accidents, forgery, cheating,
suicide squads, murders and robbery; they will be troubled by
brothers.
Mars is also the lord of houses 6 & 1 1 to Gemini. So the Gemini
asc boms will,
(i) have problems in competitive examination centres,
would suffer due to medical treatments, negligence of
nursing staff, side effects of medicines, allergy and
acidity, will meet with accidents during preparation of
medicines and will face discomforts in lodges;
(ii) struggle with greediness, will be harassed in lodges, will
misappropriate in clubs, will face no-confidence motions
in societies, will experience the fortunes turning as
misfortunes, will have unfortunate employment
opportunities and will be dejected in the fields of their
choice.
IX House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI sign of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Gemini.
Hence the Gemini asc bams will gain success in their research
efforts; they may face hurdles in undertaking foreign journeys.
Since this house falls in an airy and fixed sign, the Gemini asc
boms may undertake frequent air journeys; they will show keen
interest in their research efforts.
Since it is a sign owned by Saturn, the lord of 8 & 9 to Gemini,
the Gemini asc boms will have to face hurdles and hardships in
Gemini

all their research efforts. Gemini asc boms would be able to
steadily study science. They may lack needed mental inclination
for higher education; and they could study about oil wells, natural
gas and medical research.
Jf the 9th house falls in the star of Dhanishta; owned by Mars ,
the Gemini asc boms would win in competitions in the fields
of research, higher education and contests for honorary posts.
They may study agriculture, geology, mechanical engineering,
history, archaeology and criminal law; they may become criminal
judges, transport owners, head masters and politicians.
Mars is also the lord of houses 6 & 1 1 to Gemini. So the Gemini
asc boms will,
(i) serve as supervisors in competitive examination centres,
will suffer due to hereditary disorders, excessive intake,
allergy, acidity, and the side effects of medicines, will
study nursing courses and medical research, will make
joint efforts in medical fields and will have illegal affairs
in research fields.
(ii) study diploma courses, will hold honorary posts with
easy jobs, name and fame, will make success and
achievements in research ventures, will always remain
joyful, will gain in all fields, will have cordial
relationships in societies, will get fortunate opportunities
of accords, will be able to find the right way of doing
things and will be fond of fatty food.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Shathabisham, ruled by Rahu,
the Gemini asc boms will become researchers of drugs and
intoxication, will become surgeons of transplantation and fitting
artificial organs, will associate with religious research centres
and internationalfriendship clubs and will teach foreign
languages.
Rahu would act like Jupiter as far as the significations of houses
are concerned.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter,
the Gemini asc boms will have higher education in the field of
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

teaching, will become financial controller, administrators of5
temples, trustees, exporters and ambassadors and will modify
the fields of religion, law and social discipline.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 7 & 10 to Gemini. So the
Gemini asc boms will,
(/) face discomforts in lodges, will detach from illegal
affairs, will behave in a disciplined manner in social
service institutions, will remarry, will have illegal affair
with the sister of spouse and will make friendships with
government officials;
(ii) work in the fields of transport, communication, embassy,
international trade, electricity, water supply, teaching,
research fields, religious endowments, courts of justice,
panchayat boards, ancient national monuments, oil
wells, gold mines and trusts.
X House : Pisces
Pisces, the XU sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Gemini.
Hence the Gemini asc boms will do their profession in the fields
of research centres, investigation & customs departments,
adulteration, secret planning, shoe makers, hospitals and imports
and exports etc. They may work in foreign countries.
Since the X sign is a common but watery sign, the Gemini asc
boms may undertake business through sea ports, work in the
fields like transport, boats and ships, may do fishing and may
use liquids in their profession.
Since it is a house of Jupiter, the lord of houses 7 & 10 to
Gemini, the Gemini asc boms will excel in partnership ventures;
they may have to face unexpected breaks in their professional
life. They will become responsible officers in big organisations,
will serve in child welfare organisations, currency printing
division of banks, gold mines, national monuments and will
hold honorary posts.
If the 1 0th house falls in the star of Poorvahadra, ruled by Jupiter,
besides its planetary significations, Jupiter being the lord of
houses 7 & 1 0 to Gemini, the Gemini asc boms will,
Gemini

(7) work in the social service or national service
organisations, will enter into partnerships, will become
labour contractors or marriage brokers and will represent
Ihe nation in international bodies;
(77) hold responsible but easy posts with name and fame
and will serve in customs and sales or income tax
departments;
If ihe 1 0th house falls in the star of Uttarabadra, ruled by Salurn,
the Gemini asc boms will work as assistants in office and would
come up in their life hum ihe lower level especially in ihe
departments of police or military; they will respect socially
downtrodden people and they may sell old goods.
Salurn is also the lord of houses 8 & 9 to Gemini. So the Gemini
asc horns will,
(i) be professional criminals of all varieties and will sell
and modify old goods;
(ii) work at social service institutions, voluntary
organisations, offices of international trade, marriage
registrar office, universities, colleges, communication
and information departments, transport offices, religious
institutions, trusts, courts, panchayat boards, ancient and
national monuments, electricity departments, water
supplies department, oil wells, mines, employment
exchanges and will become professors, judges,
negotiators, registrars and posts with honour and respect.
If the 10th house falls in the star of Revathi, ruled by Mercury,
the Gemini asc boms will do business, will deal with micro
and measurement instruments, papers, stationeries, books,
calculators, computers, wires and rods and will gam from
greenish articles.
Mercury is also the lard of houses 1 & 4 to Gemini. So the
Gemini asc boms will,
(i) work with self-ideas and thoughts, will become over
active, will become industrialist, will do respectful
independent acts, will suffer due to allergy, will improve
Astrologies of kaalchakra

their physical strength and will make suitable changes
in their profession;
(ii) manufacture goods, will work as agriculturalists,
construction workers, carpenters and electricians, will
work in the fields of automobiles , cleaning , water tanks ,
fertilizers, boilers, farms, fruit gardens and godowns.
XI House : Aries
Aries, the I sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house to Gemini. So
the Gemini asc boms will lead in all fields of life through self
efforts. They have the quality of leadership; they will show their
cleverness in politics.
Since the XI house falls in a fiery and movable sign, the Gemini .
asc boms are adamant in nature; they never believe in religious
rituals and conventions. They are more ambitious in fulfilling
their personal desires.
This house is owned by Mars. Hence the Gemini asc boms
will always carry the spirit of competition and will be forcibly
fond of success. The Gemini asc boms will have friendships
and relationships with sincere people , will gain success in desired
things after struggles and will be greedy and arrogant.
If the 1 1th house falls in the star* of Aswani, mled by Ketu, the
Gemini asc boms will purchase properties with litigations or
encumbrances; they tend to opt for and would expect things in
illegal means and they would cany on with criminal activities.
They will have friendships and relationships with criminals.
Ketu would act like Mercury as far as the significations of
houses are concerned. Mercury is the lord of houses I & 4. So
the Gemini asc boms will,
(i) always think about themselves, will have a high
percentage of vitamins, will show happy relationships,
will be selfish with self-pride, will have independent
opinions, will have imagination and will make new
changes in their activities , will have a high sense of taste
and will have proper body functioning.
Gemini

(ii) purchase things of choice and will purchase properties
with encumbrances; their vehicles and their belongings
will get damaged.
If the 1 1 * house falls in the star of Bharani, ruled by Venus, the
Gemini asc boms will have friendships and relationships with
happy and joyful persons and they would always expect happy
and joyful events.
Venus is also the lord of houses 5 & 12 to Gemini. So the
Gemini asc boms will,
(i) have happy and joyful relationships, will many persons
of their love, will enter into mutual agreements and will
show interest in the fields of arts and culture;
(ii) enjoy Happiness in secret contacts, will invest in the
fields of their choice, will explicitly express hidden
things, will have secret interests through Mends and will
gain success in the research fields.
If the 1 1th house falls in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the
lord of 111 house to Gemini, the Gemini asc boms will have
highly selfish desires and would fulfil them through public
relations. They will be part of government bodies, societies,
friendship clubs, co-operative centres and they will be awarded
with gold medals, mementos and subsidies by the government
and they will associate with the feasts, festivals and monuments
of the government.
Sun is also the lord of the 3 house to Gemini. So the Gemini
asc boms will increase their energy, will have press publicity
about their good tidings, enter into sales agreements and
communications, write books, receive messages, verify accounts
and will improve power of memory.
XII House : Taurus
Taurus, the II sign of Kaal chakra, is the XII house to Gemini.
So the expenditures of Gemini asc boms will in a way end up
as investments; they will do very well in their second profession;
they tend to conceal gold and other valuables; they may gain
from hiddervtreasurcs. _
150 Astrologies of kaalchakra

Since it is a fixed and earthy sign, the Gemini asc boms.tend to
make long term investments of fruitful returns inspite of delays
It is a house of Venus, the lord of houses 5 & 12 to Gemini, The
Gemini asc boms will face dejections in their efforts to help
others; they may be cheated by opposite sex. They will have
secret activities in sexual relationships, will secretly marry, will
enter into secret agreements with women and will tend to hide
things.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the
lord of HI house to Gemini, the Gemini asc boms will invest
on commercial and business ventures. They may also involve
in the government departments of investigations, customs,
excise , sales tax, auditing, prisons, hospitals, postmortem wards,
punishments and seizures.
Sun is also the lord of 3rd house to Gemini. So the Gemini asc
boms will lose their memory and physical energy, will get press
publicity about their sorrow, will face breach of agreements and
communication, will make mistakes in accounting and will sell
things especially books.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Rohini, ruled by Moon, the
lord of II house to Gemini, the Gemini asc boms would go on
investing their money. They will make investments quickly, will
undertake voyage, will hoard liquid articles and will have
pleasant bed comforts.
Moon is also the lord of II house to Gemini. So the Gemini asc
boms will lose their savings, suffer due to eye diseases and
indigestion, invest in gold articles and will possess black money.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Mrigasira, ruled by Mars,
the lord of house 6 & 1 1 to Gemini, the Gemini asc boms will
involve in money lending and would get reasonable returns from
it. They would also involve in adulteration, smuggling, hoarding,
secret, illegal and subversive activities, will work in prostitution
homes, lodges or in investigation departments.
Gemini

Mars is also the lord of houses 6 & 1 1 to Gemini. So the Gemini
asc boms will,
( i) gain secret success, will fall unconscious due to allergic
food, will change service of their choice, will suffer due
to inability to diagnose the diseases and will gain success
after making undue expenditure for the same;
(ii) have secret activities in societies, will face breach of
agreements in societies, will face troubles in fortunate
opportunities, will fail in achieving and will keep new
and modem methods in secrecy.
With the above examples, readers are requested to interpret the
remaining significations of the respective houses to Gemini, to
get a wider perspective to provide general predictions for the
Gemini asc boms.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Cancer
General nature of the sign Cancer
It is a watery, movable, feminine, calm, even, fully beneficial
sign. Multi-legged, silent, fast understanding, developing, short
ascension sign. Lodges, agricultural fields, gardens, grain storages, education, educational institutions, complexes, compound
houses, crab figured, first part of the lane, morning period, south
in direction, white in colour. Punarvasu 4, Pushyam I, 2, 3, 4
and Aslesha 1, 2, 3, 4 .It is the 4th sign of the Zodiac, owned by
the Moon. Aashada month in Saka and Aadi month in Tamil
calendars.
First let us begin with the Asc-related matters of Cancer in
general.
ASCENDANT RELATED SIGNIFICATIONS OF CANCER
1 . It is a Watery sign: Calm and quiet as deep water,
wisdom, not exposing their true talents, excellence,
flexible to circumstances, never inclined to have a
prolonged stay at any single place.
2 . It is a house of Moon: Fast in thoughts and action , deep
thoughts.
3 It is a movable sign: Developing nature of either good
or bad qualities.

4. h is the fourth sign of Zodiac: Capacity to produce in
the interested fields Of lands, vehicles, properties,
machinery and education.
In the same manner , the remaining significations could also be
studied .
The sign Cancer lasts for three stars leading to the following
body natures :
Punarvasu : Owned by Jupiter- Stout body with fat and water
content.
Pushy am : Owned by Saturn - Stout with rough body and skin.
Aslesha .‘-Owned by JVJercory- Lean and stiff nerves.
The sign Cancer is ruled by Moon:
The Ascendant significations of Moon are:
Calm in appearance, quick inactions, confusions, static, actions
that are not continuous, excessive water content in the body,
thoughts, avoiding responsibilities, accepting things, dependent
on others, not conscious about status.
Cancer is the IV sign of Kaalchakra. The ascendant
significations of the 4th house would play a vital role in the
determination of the character of the Cancer asc boms.
IVHouseonASC :
Production with own ideas and self-thoughts, courageous acts,
heart, lungs, kidney and other productive organs of the body,
functioning of the body, excessive production in the body,
independent purchases, increasing of strength, desired actions.
If the ascendant falls in the star of Punarvasu, owned by Jupiter,
the lord of houses 6 & 9 to Cancer, the Cancer asc boms would
be flexible to circumstances, calm and thoughtful in nature and
fond of education, faithful in moral values, fast and successful
in actions in all walks of life.
If the ascendant falls in the star of Pushyam, owned by Saturn ,
the lord of houses 7 & 8 to Cancer, the Cancer asc bonis will
Astrologies of kaalchakra

be slow in their actions, pessimistic in nature, indiscipiined,
fearful, doubtful, unhesitant to use dirty places, submissive to
slavery, I oss of memory and confusion , would be willing to share
others’ sorrows.
If the ascendant falls in the star of Aslesha, owned by Mercury,
the lord of houses 3 & 12 to Cancer, the Cancer asc boms will
be fond of frequent changes, fast and quick in actions, sharp,
intelligent, excel in education especially in mathematics,
sufficient imagination to write stories and songs, would not be
inclined to reside in any one place and talented in business
dealings.
II House : Leo
Leo, the V sign to Kaalchakra is the II house to Cancer; so the
Cancer asc boms will mainly converse about arts, literature,
culture, astrology, religion, politics, sports, children, gambling
etc.
Leo is a fiery and fixed sign. Hence the speech of Cancer asc
boms is static but rough; mostly they will not respect others
and tend to hurt others in their conversations.
It is a sign ruled by Sun. Hence the tone of the Cancer asc
boms tend to be authoritative and they would talk more about
politics and office administration.
Ill House : Virgo
Virgo, the VI sign to Kaalchakra is the HI house to Cancer; so
the Cancer asc boms will have self-confidence and courage;
they will often have to face litigations and court cases; suffer
firm diseases in nerves and veins.
This sign is a common and earthy sign; So the Cancer asc boms
would have frequent mental changes and would come down for
the sake of love and affection with members of family.
This house is ruled by Mercury, the lord of houses 3 & 12 to
Cancer. So the Cancer asc boms will mostly possess double
mind and an inclination towards writings and mathematics. They
are more interested in secret notes, letters and correspondence.
Cancer

IV House : libra
Libra, the W sign to Kaalchakra is the IV house to Cancer. So
the Cancer asc boms may have to live in a joint family. They
usually live with their relatives, near and dears. They are more
inclined towards social education.
Libra is a movable and airy sign; so they will excel in education
and may not like to reside in the same place for long.
It is a house of Venus the lord of houses 4 & 1 1 to Cancer, the
Cancer asc boms will excel in primaiy education.
V House ; Scorpio
Scorpio, the VUI sign to Kaalchakra is the V house to Cancer.
So the Cancer asc boms may have to face defamation and
disrespect in love affairs. Their love mainly aims for lust. In a
few cases when cuspal interlinks are also indicative, they may
become incestuous.
This house is a watery and fixed sign; so the Cancer asc boms
tend to show interest in arts and culture, believe in violent politics
and would like obscene and filthy dances.
It is a house ruled by Mars, lord of houses 5 & 10 to Cancer,
the Cancer asc boms will not hesitate to involve in violent
politics, gambling and prostitution: will like martial arts.
VI House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the IX Sign to Kaalchakra is the VI house to
Cancer. So the Cancer asc boms will be inclined to study law.
They may have to file suits against educational institutions and
illegal affairs. They may suffer from hereditary diseases and
piles.
This house is a fiery and common sign; so the Cancer asc boms
will suffer from multiple diseases caused by excessive body
heat. They will also suffer from swellings, growths and burning
sensations.
It is a house owned by Jupiter, the ruler of houses of 6 & 9 to
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Cancer, the Cancer asc boms will have stout body with
excessive fat; they may have to face legal proceedings often. .
VII House : Capricorn
Capricorn , the X sign of Kaalchakra is the VII house to Cancer.
So the Cancer asc boms may like the company of selfentrepreneurs and to act for professional gains; may become
dissatisfied in married life.
Capricorn is a movable and earthy sign; so the Cancer asc
boms will get professional gains from society. Their professional
friendships will last long.
Capricorn is ruled by Saturn, the lord of houses 7 & 8 to
Cancer. So the Cancer asc bom may have to face problems
due to doubtful circumstances.
Vin House : Aquarius
Aquarius , the XI sign of Kaalchakra is the VUI house to Cancer.
So the Cancer asc boms will get into various kinds of troubles
due to their greedy nature. They may make their elder brothers/
friends into enemies. Their reputation may be spoilt by their
daughters-in-law or sons-in law.
Since Aquarius is a fixed and airy sign, the Cancer asc boms
will have the mind to face their life full of struggles. They are
also adept in creating problems and to spread rumors at a windy
speed.
Aquarius is ruled by Saturn, the lord of houses 7 & 8 to Cancer;
so the Cancer asc boms tend to create and develop enmities.
IX House : Pisces
Pisces, the XII sign of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Cancer.
So the Cancer asc boms may have an inclination to study
research education, and about international trade and law; have
religious faith.
Pisces is a common and watery sign. Hence the Cancer asc
boms may face delays in getting due returns to their academic
Cancer

qualifications. They may undertake foreign journeys and
pilgrimage.
Since Pisces is. ruled by Jupiter, the lond of houses 6 & 9 to
Cancer, the Cancer asc boms may be identified in the fields of
law, religion and finance.
X House : Aides
Aries, the first sign of Kaalchakra is the X house of Cancer.
Hence the Cancer asc boms will gain status by holding high
posts with power and authority.
Since Aries is a movable and fiery sign, the Cancer asc boms
will prosper through profession; though they may have to hold
tension-prone^poSts.
Since Aries is owned by Mars, the ruler of houses 5 & 10 to
Cancer, the Cancer asc bom will shine in the fields of politics
and films.
XI House : Taurus
Taurus, the II sign of the Kaalchakra is the XI house of Cancer.
So the Cancer asc boms will be greedy in earning gold and
money.
Taurus is a fixed and earthy sign; so the Cancer asc boms tend
to hold their money and valuables permanently. They would get
satisfied when their earnings are used for meaningful purposes.
Taurus is a house of Venus , the lord of houses 4 & 1 1 to Cancer.
So the Cancer asc boms will not hesitate to hold properties
with litigations or encumbrances; they may own lands, vehicles
and marriage halls.
X3I House : Gemini
Gemini, the III sign of Kaalchakra is the XII house to Cancer.
So the Cancer asc boms will have secret correspondences, secret
registrations, benami businesses and properties, black money
and secret lockers etc
Gemini is a common and airy sign; so the Cancer asc boms
158 Astrologies of kaalchakra

may face difficulties in their investments and may like to spend
money on long-journeys.
Gemini is a house of Mercury, the lord of houses 3 & 12 to
Cancer. So the Cancer asc boms may have to abscond from
their native place, may have to live underground and without
being recognised by others.
SIGNIFICATIONS OF CANCER UNRELATED TO ASCENDANT
II House : Leo
Leo, the V house to Kaalchakra is the II house to Cancer, Hence
the Cancer asc boms could get income from sources, such as
politics, arts, culture, devotion, religion, wisdom, excellence,
romance and through children.
Since Leo is a fieiy sign, the Cancer asc boms are spendthrifts
and could save only a tiny part of their income.
Since Leo is a fixed sign, however little they save out of their
income, the Cancer asc boms could save their money in the
form of valuables like gold, silver, diamonds, and costly artistic
goods.
Since Leo is ruled by Sun, the Cancer asc boms could gain
from government sources, finance companies, government
savings schemes, subsidies and through sale of stamps and
documents.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Makha, ruled by Ketu, as per
planetary significations, the Cancer asc boms could make
money through their clever, diplomatic and controversial speech,
rumour-mongering, political cunningness and through criminal
means such as sale of narcotics.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Makha, ruled by Ketu, which
would act like Mercury, the lord of 3rd & I2th houses to Cancer,
the Cancer asc boms,
(i) could make money through intelligent speech and
arguments, writing skills and from profitable
Cancer

information, cheques, secret advances, motivations in
earnings and by expressing personal opinions,
courageous acts and by changing themselves for the sole
purpose of earning money.
( ii ) may earn from secret plans and activities , through money
lending and from past savings, by hiding articles, by
losing organs and by regaining articles that were lost.
If the 2nd house fallsin the star of Poorvapalguni, ruled by Venus,
as per planetary significations, the rich Cancer asc boms may
earn from gold and valuables, silk and cosmetics, costly artistic
goods, joyous and eloquent speech and through film-financing
etc.
Since Venus is the lord of 4th & 11th houses to Cancer, the
Cancer asc boms,
(i) may earn from excessive production of energy in the
body, education and educational centres, libraries, fruits,
vegetables, crop-fields, farms and by taking lease of
ponds and water reservoirs.
(ii) will earn greedily, happily and comfortably, through
romance, unions and societies, with good fortunes,
through successes, wins, achievements, by rendering
pleasures and through friends.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni , ruled by Sun,
the Cancer asc bom may earn through their skills of speech
and by disclosing truth.
Ill House’: Virgo
Virgo, the VI house of Kaalchakra is the III house to Cancer,
So the Cancer asc boms will win litigations and make profits
out of their writings and agreements.
Virgo is an earthy sign; so the Cancer asc boms are flexible in
their negotiations.
Virgo is a common sign; so the Cancer asc boms will face
fluctuations in their efforts for transfers, communications,
agreements and writings.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Since Mercury is the lord of this sign which is the lord of houses
3 & 1 2 tq Cancer , the Cancer asc boms may serve as document
writers, registrars, clerks, postmen, communication agents,
electricity line-men, ambassadors, advertisers, tax collectors,
proof readers, brokers and journalists etc (3rd house).
The Cancer asc boms may invent micro instruments through
secret research, may work in the fields of secret notes,
documents, accounts, income-expenditure statements,
agreements , adulteration , photographs , marketing and sales . ( 1 2th
house matters).
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
which is the lord of 2nd house to Cancer, the Cancer asc boms
will have contacts with government orders, posts & telegraphs,
telecommunications, information and broadcasting etc; make
financial gains through their excellence in writings and
publications. They tend to express truth in their writings.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Hastha, ruled by Moon , which
is the lord of ascendant, the Cancer asc boms are quick in their
communication skills; write with excellent imagination, write
entertaining stories and excel in rendering commentaries.
The Cancer asc boms tend to record their thoughts; they tend
to have independent thoughts and do as they wish.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
lord of houses 5 & 10 to Cancer, the Cancer asc boms will,
(i) excel in writing articles about politics, sports, arts &
culture, romance, religion and wisdom.
(ii) have ability to act as a counselor in responsible posts;
may excel in their profession through advertisements;
may also receive orders for honorary posts and wide
appreciations for their administrative skills; may do
business by utilizing their status.
Cancer

IV House : Libra
Libra, the VH house of Kaalchakra is the IV house to Cancer.
Hence the Cancer asc boms will mostly live in the front part of
a street and in an airy place. They live in colonies.
Libra, being an airy sign, leads the Cancer asc boms to excel
in mathematics and in writing lyrics.
Since Libra is a movable sign, the Cancer asc boms will
improve their machinery, houses, vehicles and promote their
lands and academic skills.
Venus, the ruler of houses 4 & 1 1 to Cancer, is the lord of this
sign, Libra. Hence the Cancer asc boms will,
( i ) own palaces , bungalows , gardens, vegetable farms, and
may produce films, buildings, cosmetic goods, glass
wares, plastic goods and may run automobile training
centres, art schools and cultural institutions.
(ii) be the happiest persons and will have joyful company
of friends, elder brothers, sons-in-law and daughtersin-law, They tend to expect and like only happier
moments in life.
If the 4th house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Cancer asc bom may own agricultural fanns , poultries , chemical
and fertilizer machinery and industries etc.
Since Mars is the lord of houses 5 & 1 0 to Cancer, the Cancer
asc boms,
(i) may be trainers in sports and politics, run sports centres,
manufacture artistic goods, own religious centres,
auditoriums, prostitution dens and may be preachers of
Vedic concepts.
(ii) may hold honorary post of a zamindar, own industries,
responsible for government documents, have
administrative capabilities and will generally be famous
persons.
If the 4* house falls in the star of Swathi, owned by Rahu, the
182 Astrologies of kaalchakra

Cancer asc boms may get educated in foreign countries, possess
government vehicles, live in government quarters, may be
imprisoned, may live near prisons or graveyards, may do
adulterations and produce banned drugs or spurious goods.
Rahu will act like Jupiter, the lord of houses 6 & 9 to Cancer.
So please refer the bhava karakas of Jupiter.
If the 4th house falls in the star of Vishakha, owned by Jupiter,
the Cancer asc boms may hold legally valid properties,
educational centres and big organisations, may be land
inspectors, manufacturers of goods for temples, food items, silk,
cotton and turmeric and may do business in real estates etc.
Since Jupiter is the lard of houses 6 & 9 to Cancer, the Cancer
asc boms will,
(7) run centres for competitive examinations or research
laboratories, produce food, medicine and medical goods,
will do tailoring, arrange for medical camps, raise loans
on properties, let houses for rent, will be purchasers,
own inns, lodges and win tenders.
(it) win contracts, earn fame through higher education, do
barter exchanges, will be teachers or head masters,
manufacture novel things through research, have illegal
affairs with servants, involve in imports, run research
centres, construct temples, firm trusts, make artificial
organs, work as clerks in courts, panchayat offices,
archeological and ancient memorials, receive subsidies
from foreign countries and will be involved in
production of taxable goods.
V House : Scorpio
Scorpio the VIII house of Kaalchakra is the V house to Cancer.
Hence the Cancer asc boms will have to face reversions,
dejections or disrespect in the fields of arts, culture, sports or in
gambling.
Scorpio is a watery sign. So the Cancer asc boms will develop
their skills of materialistic knowledge into wisdom of god and
Cancer

will become an expert in various kinds of arts.
Scorpio is a fixed sign. So the Cancer asc boms will shine as
milestones with their Intelligence in the fields of arts and culture.
They are strong and steady in their love affairs and their children
will be blessed with long life.
Scorpio is ruled by Mars . The 5th house significations of Mars
would let the Cancer asc boms to have children with excessive
interest in sexual pleasures; Cancer asc boms may not believe
in gods. They may like folk arts and boxing. They will be
arrogant during copulations.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Cancer asc boms will have religious contacts, faith in god,
quiet and calm children, will be true to their love affairs, excel
in the field of arts through intuition, become politicians and
religious leaders, religious servants and will be blessed with
wisdom.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 6 & 9 to Cancer. When the V
house falls in the star Vishaka, mled by Jupiter, the lord of 6th
& 9th, would enable the Cancer asc boms will,
(i) mn competitive centres for arts and culture, become
gynaecologists, blood-testing technicians, nurses,
organisers of feasts, tailors of rich and artistic costumes,
producers of naturopathy medicines, drug inspectors,
commission agents and servants in lodges or cinema
halls etc.
( ii) win contracts in the fields of arts, gain name and fame
through arts, change the field of arts, become teachers
and hold honorary posts in the fields of arts and culture,
change the forms of aits through research, have love
affairs with artists, import artistic goods, mn centres of
music, arts, culture, religion and astrology, priests in
religious centres, nationalize trusts, research clownerya
er+er into agreements with foreigners, collect temple
taxes, mn trusts to maintain temples, member of the
Astrologies of kaalchakra

village panchayat board, to become a jury or a judge in
the court of law and to maintain ancient memorials etc.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Anuradha, ruled by Saturn,
the Cancer asc borns will have love affairs with people
belonging to lower strata, will not be true to their love affairs,
will not hesitate to involve in prostitution, become sanyasis,
have lazy children, act in obscene or sober roles, will be watch
guards at temples and ponds.
Saturn is the lord of houses 7 & 8 to Cancer. If the 5th house
falls in the star of Anusham, ruled by Saturn, the lord of 7 & 8,
the Cancer asc boms will,
(i) maintain good social relations, reside in government
quarters for artists, work in guest houses, love
culminating into marriage, run voluntary organisations
for social service and enter into partnership ventures.
(ii) not hesitate to rape, to seize, to behave immorally; will
be cheated, will live in tad surroundings and will be
put into disrespect.
If the 5* house falls in the star of Jyeshta, ruled by Mercury,
the Cancer asc boms will be singers, musicians, commission
agents, comedy actors, talkers, teachers of arts and Vedic
scriptures, painters, sculptors etc.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Jyeshta, ruled by Mercury,
the land of 3&12, the Cancer asc boms will,
( i) be appreciated in journals and magazines for their artistic
performances, publish books on arts, work in advertising
agencies, study fine arts which requires imagination and
intelligence, enter into agreements for artistic
performances, change the orders of transfer and excel
in arts of imagination.
(ii) plan for secret love affairs, will be disappointed in love
affairs, lack sense in love affairs, regain energy in
hospital, protect children, give birth to children secretly
and get into compromise with others.
Cancer

VI House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius , the IX sign of Kaalchakra is the VI house to Cancer.
So the Cancer asc boms will enjoy favours in their court cases.
They may issue insolvency notice and involve in illegal affairs
during their service. They may become advocates Judges, head
masters, dieticians and workers in schools, colleges, law and
research centres.
Sagittarius is a fiery sign. Hence the Cancer asc boms may
have to serve in jobs wherein fire is used.
Since Sagittarius is a common sign, food, dress, medicines,
loans and borrowings, success, litigations and services of the
Cancer asc boms would be of temporary in nature.
Sagittarius is ruled by Jupiter. So the Cancer asc boms will
serve in huge organisations, banks, medical and legal
departments; organize feasts; avail loans through
recommendations or against surety of popular and famous
people.
If the 6th house falls in the star Moola, ruled by Ketu? the Cancer
asc boms will avail loans with criminal intentions, serve in the
jobs wherein acid is used, face criminal charges, may practice
as criminal advocates or as doctors (Gastro entreomologists),
serve with criminal motives and will not hesitate to involve in
criminal activities.
Ketu would act like Mercury . Mercury is the lord of houses 3
& 12 to Cancer. So the Cancer asc boms will,
(i) publish books on their service, work in advertising
agencies, enter into service agreements, receive appointment
and transfer orders, serve as clerics, woik to their job-interests
and would believe in increasing production, receive
appreciations from newspapers and magazines with regard to
their professional or legal successes .
(ii) borrow through secret plans, re-pay loans by availing
fresh loans, withdraw their capitals and investments,
regain lost goods, will be sued by the divorcee or partner
and face break-evens in income and expenditure.
166 Astrologies of kaalchakra

If the 6* house falls in the star of Poorvashada, ruled by Venus ,
the Cancer asc boms will serve in the fields of arts, culture,
hardware and paints , glassware , plastics , silk production , become
tailors, or weavers, work in vegetable stores, fruit stalls and
produce tasty food or sweets.
Venus is the lord of houses 4 & 1 1 to Cancer. So the Cancer
asc boms will,
(i) serve in macro-institutions of lands, vehicles &
properties, prepare food varieties, serve in production
of livestock, become school teachers or producers of
house-hold articles and organise decorations of stages
for dances and music concerts.
( ii) gain success only through struggles, stay in lodges, work
for societies, gain success on litigations of societies, get
a servant of personal choice, have fortunes and fortunate
opportunities of employment, make professional
achievements, will be fortunate to taste food of personal
choice and will have the capacity to diagnose diseases
correctly.
If the 6th house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun, the
Cancer asc boms will avail government loans, become or have
government servants, get government food, uniforms and serve
in government departments of food, agriculture, poultry, health
and employment.
Sun is the lord of 2nd house to Cancer. So the Cancer asc boms
will be capable of rendering successful and profitable speech,
avail cash or gold or valuables as loans, purchase or hirepurchase costly goods keep goods against loans and work for
more than what they actually need.
VII House : Capricorn
Capricorn the X sign of Kaalchakrais the VH house to Cancer
So the Cancer asc boms would be able to do partnershtf)
ventures. However, their family life would always be in trouble
and the relationships between husband arid wife would not
remain cordial leading to frustrations in life.
Cancer

Capricorn is an earthy sign. Hence the Cancer asc boms will
have affectionate spouses with belief in moral values.
Capricorn is a movable sign. Hence the Cancer asc boms will
have increasing number of customers, make professional gains
firm society and would see development of their spouses or
partners.
Capricorn is ruled by Saturn, the lord of 7 & 8 to Cancer. So
the Cancer asc boms will,
(i) have spouses/partners/customers with indiscipline,
unfaithfulness, doubtfulness, wavering minds and
untruthful characteristics.
(ii) suffer mental tensions caused by and will be cheated by
spouses/partners/customers .
If the 7th house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun , the
Cancer boms will be in public service and work for the
development jof people, have spouses with self-pride and may
have to serve under rude officers.
Sun is the ruler of 2nd house to Cancer. So the Cancer boms
will have spouses or partners with shorter lives, get financial
assistance from others, have the ability to speak for profits
through banks, purchase gold arid valuables with the assistance
of others, get costly goods as gifts, will act to assist, work for
more than what others actually expect and will be affectionate
towards others.
If the 7th house falls in the star of Shravana, mled by Moon, the
Cancer asc boms will have colourful, young, active spouses
with perversions in sexual pleasures and wavering minds . These
characteristics would also apply to business partners &
customers.
Moon is the lord of Cancer. So the Cancer asc boms will accept
the ideas of others , listen to others , do successful j oint ventures ,
may face oppositions, require dependence to remain active,
invite competitions from others and may become as popular
persons.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

They may have to suffer from diseases in kidneys, uterus and
stomach. They are physically weak due to the decrease in the
immunity power.
If the 7th house falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars , the
Cancer asc boms will have spouses / partners of immoral
characters and arrogance, meet customers who never hesitate
to tell lies, may have to meet terrorists who threaten society,
may have to manage second child who behaves arrogantly and
will have to request for assistance from others under stressful
circumstances.
Mars is the lord of houses 5 & 10 to Cancer. So the Cancer
asc boms will,
(i) easily fall in love, will be artists, singers, astrologers,
saints or priests , religious servants , pimps or prostitutes .
( ii) enter into partnership ventures, face dissatisfactions
caused by others and will have love failures.
VUI House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI sign of Kaalchakra is the Vm house to Cancer.
So the Cancer asc boms will enjoy favours in the course of
their worries and struggles and in the same way they will get
into troubles due to their greedy nature.
Aquarius is an airy sign; hence the Cancer asc boms may tend
to meet with accidents due to natural calamities, bomb blasts
and air pressure.
Aquarius is a fixed sign; so Cancer asc boms will have long
life. The effects of accidents, worries, troubles, pains, stress,
disrespect would last long for Cancer asc boms.
Aquarius is ruled by Saturn. So the Cancer asc boms will
face disrespect, false allegations, false court cases, defamation,
dejection, annihilation and threatening, act cowardly, run away
to save their lives , live incognito or underground, have constant
fear of death, face cruel accidents and will not hesitate to
undertake cmel acts and have the capacity to repair old goods.
Cancer

If the 8* house falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars , the
Cancer asc boms will get into quarrels, riots, struggles,
terrorism, sieges and false allegations. They may be put under
police or military actions; they may be troubled by brothers and
assaulted with weapons or bombs; face cruel accidents; will
not hesitate to involve in rapes , murders, forgery and cheatings
and to be a part of suicide squads.
Mars, the lord of Dhanishta star is also the lord of houses 5 &
10 to Cancer. So the Cancer asc boms will,
(i) meet with accidents at dance and music programs and
in sports, spoil their own reputations in love affairs, will
not hesitate to rape, will be put into disrespect in politics,
arts and culture, will be punished in sports, will be
harassed in prostitution lodges, behave rudely in
indecent dance shows, involve in brawls at bars and
impure religious rituals.
(ii) face allegations in the substantiation process in service,
corrupt while holding high posts, have administrative
capacity, will not hesitate to do forgery, lose name and
fame and face difficulties in getting due promotions in
service.
If the 8* house falls in the star of Shathabisham, ruled by Rahu ,
the Cancer asc boms may be imprisoned, will easily be addicted
to liquor, drugs and women, will be punished in foreign
countries, their properties getting seized, will be blamed by
foreign countries and suffer from damages in blood vessels, lack
of protein and respiratory problems.
(Readers may please refer the bhava karakas or cuspal
significations of Jupiter for Rahu.)
If the 8* house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter,
the Cancer asc boms will be punished or fined by courts, lose
gold and valuables, do illegal acts, will be threatened by legal
proceedings or face seizures of properties and produce damaged
goods.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 6 & 9 to Cancer. So the Cancer
asc boms will, __
f70 Astrologies ofkaalchakra

(i) face problems in competitive examination centres, suffer
more due to severe diseases in hospitals, due to the
negligence of nurses and by side-effects of medicines,
suffer ftom allergy through food and dress, acidity
tablets, meet with accidents while producing medicines
and face allegations in lodges. Their debates will turn
into quarrels.
(ii) get into troubles in port contracts or while importing,
face difficulties in teaching or preaching professions and
when their transfer orders get delayed or stayed, meet
with fire accidents in research centres, may have to wind
up trusts, enter into forgeries in collecting money for
religious centres, will be punished by courts, meet with
accidents due to damages in ancient monuments and
involve in making divisions of local bodies.
IX House : Pisces
Pisces, the XII sign of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Cancer.
So the Cancer asc boms will study research and in foreign
countries; may have secret illegal affairs; have the ability to
find new and novel things and may research in religious matters;
they may have to live in foreign countries.
Pisces is a wateiy sign, so the Cancer asc boms will excel in
their higher education; they may be priests and preachers and
may undertake sea voyages.
Pisces is a common sign; so higher education, travels, life at
foreign countries, research, illegal affairs of the Cancer asc boms
will see fluctuations.
Pisces is ruled by Jupiter. So Cancer asc boms will have
wisdom, faith in religious rituals, undertake renovation works
of temples and In higher education, alter religious practices,
law and discipline of a country, will be educated in teaching
and may become as professors, temple trustees, ambassadors,
exporters and national financial controllers.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter,
the lord of 6 & 9, the Cancer asc boms will,
Cancer

(i) act as supervisors in competitive examination centres,
will become nurses, undertake medical examinations,
suffer due to the severity of hereditary disorders, side
effects of medicines, allergies due to affairs with
unknown persons and in the handling of acids, have the
habit of consuming excessive food, undertake joint
ventures in medical research, may get into illegal affairs
in research fields, enter into mutual agreements in the
national assemblies and may be employed through
heirships.
(ii) become national leaders, popular researchers,
ambassadors, holders of honorary posts, judges, enter
into agreements, work in government finance
departments, embassies and religious centres.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Uttarabadra, ruled by Saturn,
the Cancer asc boms will get educated in the fields of science;
slow but steady in higher education, lack needed interest in
higher education, involve in seed research and may become
laboratory technicians.
Saturn is the lord of houses 7 & 8 to Cancer. So the Cancer
asc boms will,
(i) show discipline in social service, have social relations
with government officials and their social institutions
will be recognised by government; have illegal affairs
with younger sister of wife, may marry twice and may
enter into second partnerships.
( ii) face threats on life in illegal affairs, commit forgeries in
ancestral properties and make mistakes in research
fields; face hurdles in continuing higher education and
research work, will be troubled in foreign journeys and
by foreigners and face failures in reaching agreements.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Revathi, mled by Mercury,
the Cancer asc boms will become clerks in research centres,
teachers of higher education, counselors, lawyers,
mathematicians, agents for imports and exports, government
cashiers and statisticians and work in embassies or information
A strologics ofkaalch akra

& field publicity departments.
Mercury is the lord of houses 3 & 12 to Cancer, so the Cancer
asc boms will,
(i) publish educational books, work as propagators, have
interest in mathematics, research, speeches,
communication, have excellent memory power, think
beyond their capacity but act within their capacity and
exchange their holdings and belongings.
(ii) spend money on their secret affairs or relations or for
renovation of temples, face financial crisis due to new
professional ventures, will be unable to liquidate capital,
make discoveries and will continue their research
education.
X House : Aries
Aries, the first sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Cancer. So
the Cancer asc boms will become leaders of their professional
teams, higher officials, political leaders and industrialists and
hold responsible posts.
Aries is a fiery sign; so the Cancer asc boms will become
industrialists and would hold responsibilities as leaders.
Aries is a movable sign; so their status, profession and promotion
to higher posts will be progressively improving.
Aries is a sign ruled by Mars. So the Cancer asc boms will
hold responsible and vital posts, become industrialists or
executive officers and work in fire-related professions or in the
fields of land & buildings, government documents, police and
military.
If the 10th house falls in the star of Aswani, ruled by Ketu, the
Cancer asc boms will involve themselves in illegal activities
with and for authority and power but in reality, will have to live
with mental dissatisfactions.
Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of 3 & 12 to Cancer. So
the Cancer asc boms will,
Cancer

(i) gain press publicity as industrialists, become brokers,
book publishers, messengers, composers in printing,
writers, bill collectors, accountants, electrical staff,
plumbers, salesmen and assistants and will work in
professions which require presence of mind and power
of memory at times beyond their capacity.
(ii) do business through secret contacts, do two different
professions, incur high expenditure and make heavy
investments on profession, have secret affairs in new
profession and will do research works.
If the 1 0th house falls in the star of Bharani , ruled by Venus, the
Cancer asc boms will have status and authority in the fields of
arts and culture and would involve themselves in the profession
of banned drugs, liquor and women.
Venus is the lord of houses 4 & 1 1 to Cancer. So the Cancer
asc boms will,
(i) produce goods of artistic values, become fanners,
masons, cleaners and carpenters and work in the fields
of glassware, woods and trees, vehicles, electricity, water
tanks, fertilizers, boilers, agricultural fields, fanns, fruit
gardens and godowns.
(ii) work in societies, will be registrars of agreements on
behalf of societies, have fortunes and favours in
profession, enter into favourable agreements, have job
satisfactions, make achievements in their professions,
improve working conditions and professional status and
develop their own professional fields.
If the 10* house falls in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the
Cancer asc boms will become government officers, work in
government, quasi-government or public sector undertakings,
industrial centres, centres of vocational education and
employment exchanges and hold honorary posts in government
sectors.
Sun is the lord of 2nd house to Cancer. So the Cancer asc boms
will show professional excellence with their skills of
A strologics ofkaalch akra

conversations and in-bom nature of speaking truth and increase
their professional activities through money.
XI House : Taurus
Taurus , the II sign of the Kaalcbakra is the XI house to Cancer.
So the Cancer asc boms will always be selfish and greedy after
money. They would tend to treat friendships for gains. They
gain through friends, elder brother, sons-in law and daughtersin law.
Taurus is an earthy sign; so the Cancer asc boms will be greedy
but show affinity towards their friends.
Taurus is a fixed sign; so the Cancer asc boms will have longterm desires and expectations and their happiness would last
long.
Taurus is a house of Venus; so the Cancer asc boms will always
be happy persons with joyful company of friends, sons -in-law,
daughters-in law and elder brother.
If the 1 1th house falls in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the
Cancer asc boms can make friendship with popular political
leaders and win awards and medals from government. They can
be part of assemblies of government, co-operative societies,
recreation clubs, festivals, guest houses and memorials.
Sun is the lord of 2nd house to Cancer. So the Cancer asc boms
will have satisfactory gains through their skills of conversations;
gain gold, costly goods and valuables of their choice; make
profits out of their friends, sons-in-law and daughters-in-law
and they will change everything to their favour.
If the 1 l,h house falls in the star of Rohini, mled by Moon, the
Cancer asc boms will have many friends and a few of them
tend to create confusions, have complacent attitude, selfish and
will be fond of drinks.
Moon is the lord of Cancer. So the Cancer asc boms will always
think about themselves and greedy, happily involve in their
activities, show self-pride, maintain different or independent
approach, make changes in their activities, show imagination,
Cancer

have the pleasure of tasting foods , have excess of body vitamins
and will have good body functions.
If the 1 1th house falls in the star of Mrigasira, ruled by Mars,
the Cancer asc boms will have unfaithful friends, sons-in-law
and daughters-in-law, struggle for success and satisfaction and
greedy with vigour.
Mars is also the lord of houses 5 & 10. So the Cancer asc
boms will,
( i ) have love affairs , happy relationships enter into peaceful
agreements and will be interested in the fields of arts
and culture.
( ii ) hold honorary higher posts with status, gain name, fame
and do jobs or works of their choice.
XII House : Gemini
Gemini, the III sign of Kaalchakra is the XII house to Cancer.
So the Cancer asc boms will have to lose their belongings and
properties in secret activities. They may also lose their
documents, benami properties and secret holdings.
Gemini is an airy sign. So the Cancer asc boms will undertake
secret research, investigations and archeological research on
ancient things.
Since Gemini is a common sign, the expenditures, investments
and secret activities of the Cancer asc boms would not last
long and see high fluctuations.
Gemini is ruled by Mercury. So the Cancer asc boms may
invent micro instruments through secret research, log secret
notes and accounts, involve in adulterations, enter into secret
agreements and possess secret photographs and documents.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Mrigasira, mled by Mars,
the Cancer asc boms will involve themselves in illegal and
secret activities, involve in smugglings and hoardings, run
prostitution dens and may work in lodges, investigation
departments and operation theatres .
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Mars is the lord of houses 5 & 10. So the Cancer asc boms will,
(i) face breaks in happy and cordial relations and peaceful
agreements, force opposite sex for love and incur
expenditure in the fields of arts and culture.
(ii) have to work heavily, serve in double-natured jobs and
in jobs wherein maintenance of secrecy would be
required.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Arudra, mled by Rahu, the
Cancer asc boms may undertake secret investigations, have to
serve in atomic power stations and gunpowder industries or serve
as anaesthetist or oxygen-assistants and may be hijackers of
planes.
(Readers may please refer and include the house significations
of Jupiter lor Rahu.)
If the 12* house falls in the star of Punarvasu, mled by Jupiter,
the Cancer asc boms will involve in secret legal activities and
fake currency notes, threaten by issuing legal notices through
courts, get into income-tax troubles and will be imprisoned by
court of law and their secret properties will be seized by the
government.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 6 & 9 to Cancer. So the Cancer
asc boms will,
(i) make secret success but with high expenditures, lose
self consciousness due to perverted feelings, change their
jobs as they wish, suffer due to inability to identify
diseases; servants absenting themselves without notice.
(ii) incur expenditures for the cause of social service, have
illegal affairs with higher officials, secret interests in
voluntary organisations, have secret affairs, undertake
secret journeys to foreign countries enter into secret
agreements and will have troubles in continuing their
higher education.
Added to the above, the inclusion of residentships of planets at
the time of birth will support the precision of predictions.
Cancer

Leo
General nature of the sign Leo
It is a fiery, fixed, masculine and singular sign. Its colour is red
and denotes heart among the organs in the body. Other chief
significations of Leo are: barren, dry, animal, four legged, lion
shaped , mountains, forests, hilly regions, deserts, forts,
government buildings, arts, music, culture and literary centres,
gambling houses, lodges, maternity homes, compound of
buildings, front part of a street, noon, V sign of Zodiac, south
direction, Shravana in Saka or Aavani in Tamil calendars.
As detailed earlier, the significations may be categorised into
(i) ascendant related and (ii) independent of ascendant.
ASCENDANT RELATED SIGNIFICATIONS OF LEO
Leo is the fifth sign of zodiac. It is a fiery and fixed sign, ruled
by Sun. These bestow the following significations to Leo asc
boms.
(a) Fiery sign: Short temper, lack of affection, arrogant in
appearance and character and self-pride.
(b) Fixed sign: Physique, character, anger, activities, colour,
beauty, appearance and talents would remain fixed.
(c) Lord of Leo is Sun: Majestic in appearance, self-pride,
strong bones in the body, generous attitude, authoritative
and leadership.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

(d) 5th house of Kaal chakra: Artistic talents, interested
towards literature, music, drama, lottery, race, gambling,
politics, cinema and commission business.
In the same manner, the remaining, i.e., ascendant independent
significations of Leo may also be studied.
The sign Leo extends over three stars leading to the following
body natures.
(i) Makha: Owned by Ketu (acidity and hyper-thermal).
(ii) Poorvapalguni: Owned by Venus*
(iii) Uttarapalguni: Owned by Sun.
If the ascendant falls in Makha star, ruled by Ketu, the Leo asc
boms will have distinct and different appearance, which could
not easily be understood by others. Greed with criminal
intentions, lean body with humpy back and excess secretion of
acid in the body may be inherent with them.
Ketu would act like Mercury, which is the lord of houses 2 and
1 1 to Leo. So the Leo asc boms will,,
(i) have the skill of expressions, the ability to adjust with
truth and false and the ability to develop their skill of
actions,
(ii) be greedy, selfish, happy and joyful; have expectations
and fortunes, success, achievements and will be adjusting
with others.
If the ascendant falls in the star* of Poorvapalguni, ruled by
Venus, the Leo asc boms will have beautiful, sexy and attractive
appearance. They will attract others through actions, have selfpride, relish self-beautifications and cosmetics and will be fond
of gold and valuables.
Venus is the lord of houses 3 and 10 to Leo so the Leo asc
boms will,
(i) be intelligent, active, make self-efforts, have courage,
self confident, interest, knowledge, remain informative,

inclined towards education, self-transformation and have
changes in jobs and
(ii) have status, authority, leadership, honorary posts,
administrative skills, high offices, name and fame,
unsatisfied mind and responsibility to render
counselling,
If the ascendant falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Leo asc boms will have majestic appearance, self-pride,
strong bones, respectable gestures, authority, leadership and
generous attitude.
Sun is the lord of ascendant to those bom in Leo. So they feature
own and independent thoughts, quick in actions and reactions,
capability to act, tendency to show strength and actions as per
their personal traits.
II House : Virgo
Virgo is the sixth sign of Kaalchakra. Hence the Leo asc boms
tend to talk more about success, litigations, loans and
borrowings, diseases and problems between husband and wife.
Virgo is an earthy and common sign. Therefore, the words of
Leo asc boms would not remain stable but would be calm. They
respect others in their words and show love and affection in
their conversations. Their words will always aim at winning
others.
It is a house ruled by Mercury, which is also the lord of houses
2 and 1 1 to Leo. So the Leo asc boms will talk with evidences,
clarity, profit-motives in a well-oiganized manner and with
multiple meanings.
Ill House : libra
Libra, the seventh sign of Kaalchakra is the third house to Leo.
So the Leo asc boms will always think about others by carrying
competitive spirits and their minds will be inclined towards
others.
Libra is a movable and airy sign. So the Leo asc boms believe
Astrologies of kaalchakra

in self-pride, self-acclamations, self-publicity and selfconfidence.
Venus rules Libra, which is the lord of houses 3 and 10 to Leo
thereby making the Leo asc boms to have happy minds and
imaginations. They like writing and may choose it as a career.
IV House : Scorpio
Scorpio, the eighth sign to Kaalchakra is the fourth house to
Leo. The Leo asc boms may have to face hurdles in their primary
education.
Scorpio is fixed and watery sign. Thus the natives may excel in
education. They would not hesitate to live in dirty places and
like to change their residences. They tend to change themselves
as per the requirements of the situations. They will be interested
in agriculture.
Scorpio is a house ruled by Mars, the lord of houses 4 and 9 to
Leo. So the Leo asc boms will excel in their higher education
in spite of their natural attitude of arrogance.
V House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the ninth sign of Kaalchakra is the fifth house to
Leo. Leo asc boms will fall in love with married persons or
with children. They show arrogance and try to thrust their love
in their affairs, which may initiate at colleges, law offices or in
temples.
Sagittarius is a fieiy and common sign. Hence the Leo asc
boms tend to show more interest in the fields of arts, culture,
politics and sexy dances.
Since it is a house of Jupiter, which is the lord of houses 5 and
8 to Leo, they may have their respect spoiled on account of
sexy dances, prostitution, politics, religion, gambling and
astrology and in sports. They have the grace of god with them
and would excel in the art of mixing their intuitions with deep
thoughts.
Leo

VI House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the tenth sign of Kaalchakra is the sixth house to
Leo. So the Leo asc boms will suffer permanently from pain in
legs and professional hazards.
Capricorn is an earthy and movable sign. So the Leo asc boms
will suffer from excessive body weight. They always gain
success in their actions.
Capricorn is ruled by Saturn, which owns the houses 6 and 7
to Leo. So the Leo asc boms are likely to suffer horn contagious
diseases and their diseases may be severe.
VII House : Aquarius
Aquarius , the eleventh sign of Kaalchakra, is the seventh house
to Leo. This renders Leo asc borns to have cordial and
harmonious social and private relations.
Aquarius is a fixed and airy sign. Their friendships usually are
longlasting and they have public or family relations with people
of self-pride. They have a sensitive feel of touch and a normal
functioning of kidneys.
Since Saturn , the lord of houses 6 and 7 to Leo, rules this house
the partners of the Leo asc boms may lack needed sexual interest.
The Leo asc boms will win over their opponents or enemies.
Vin House : Pisces
Pisces, the twelfth sign of Kaalchakra is the eigth house to Leo.
The Leo asc boms may get into troubles on account of their
secret activities. They may also become dejected in their
investments.
Pisces is a common and wateiy sign. The Leo asc boms may
have to meet with accidents in seas and during return journeys.
Since this sign is ruled by Jupiter, the lord of houses 5 and 8 to
Leo, the Leo boms may get into troubles one after another and
get their reputation damaged.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

IX House : Aries
Aries the I sign of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Leo. So the
Leo asc boms excel in higher education, win others’ confidence
and gain status in life.
Aries is a movable and fiery sign. The Leo asc boms would not
care for anything, which distracts them from higher studies. They
shine in the field of machineiy.
Aries is a sign ruled by Mars , which is the lord of houses 4 and
9 to Leo. Leo asc boms usually study about buildings,
automobiles, machineiy, agriculture etc.
X House : Taurus
Taurus , the II sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Leo. So the
Leo asc boms gain status in the professions of banking, jewellery
and diamonds, mortgages and selling of stamp papers.
Taurus is a fixed and earthy sign. So the status and authority of
Leo asc bom remains permanent. Such natives use their
influence to benefit others.
Since it is a sign ruled by Venus, the lord of houses 3 and 1 0 to
Leo, the Leo asc boms will use their professional relationships
for the professional benefits of others.
XI House : Gemini
Gemini, the III sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house to Leo. The
Leo asc boms will be satisfied with their interests and selfconfidence as with struggles. They will also win the confidence
of their sons-in-law, daughters-in-law and friends.
Since Gemini is a common and airy sign, the Leo asc boms
will be fond of name and fame and would not carry their desires
forever. They tend to switch their interests from one field to
another.
Since it is a house of Mercury, the lord of houses 2 and 1 1 to
Leo, the Leo asc boms will prosper with generally big financial
benefits.
Leo

XII House : Cancer
Cancer, the fourth sign of Kaalchakra is the twelfth house to
Leo. So the Leo asc boms will usually have secret interests in
lands, vehicles, buildings, machinery and properties. They may
even possess black money.
Since Cancer is a watery and movable sign, the Leo asc boms
will get due returns firm their secret investments.
Cancer is the house of Moon, so the Leo asc boms will keep
secret notes and secret documents.
SIGNIFICATIONS OF LEO UNRELATED TO ASCENDANT
II House : Virgo
Virgo the sixth sign of Kaalchakra is the second house to Leo. So
the Leo asc boms will prosper out of their loans, diseases,
litigations, service, costumes, food and unofficial negotiations for
mutual agreements.
Virgo is an earthy sign. The Leo asc boms would like to preserve
and improve upon their earnings by saving them.
Virgo is a common sign. The belongings and valuable articles
like gold, diamonds, money, costly goods and documents of the
Leo asc boms may not remain preserved with them in spite of
their efforts in this direction.
It is a sign mled by Mercury. So Leo asc boms will gain firm
greenish stones, costly micro-instruments, cheques and
negotiable instruments.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, mled by Sun,
the Leo asc boms are likely to receive advantages from
government in the form of subsidies, awards and savings, also
get benefited from financial departments and financial
institutions. They may hold diamonds, stamps and documents.
Sun is the lord of ascendant to Leo. So the Leo asc boms will
make money out of their own ideas and wil I remain independent
with their income; show their influences through money; change
Astrologies of kaalchakra

their minds for money, increase their activities with the use of
money and would like to enjoy themselves with their earnings
to fulfil their selfish motives.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Hastha, mled by Moon, the
Leo asc boms will have frequent incomes and would gain from
pearls and silver goods; increase their activities by using their
money. They may become counsellors to finance companies.
Moon is the lord of 12* house to Leo. So the Leo asc boms will
derive benefits and profits from their secret activities, plans and
articles, by losing organs in their body, through money lending,
savings and by regaining goods that were lost.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Chitra, mled by Mars, the
Leo asc boms will become spendthrifts, will not hesitate to lie
for financial benefits, become dishonest in money matters by
seizing articles of others , wi 1 1 possess jewelleiy , ruby and metals .
Leo asc boms will have the ability to speak courageously but
will at times become hoarse and indecent and use filthy language
and hurt the feelings of others.
Mars is the lord of houses 4 & 9 to Leo. So the Leo asc boms:
(i) will have excessive production of energy An the body,
will get benefits from their education, educational
centres and libraries, make profits from fruit farms, crop
fields and vegetables and by taking lease of ponds,
reservoirs and bridges.
( ii) will study agriculture, geology, mechanical engineering,
history, criminal law, archaeology and may become
judges, headmasters, transporters, landlords and
politicians.
Ill House : Libra
Libra, the seventh sign of Kaalchakra is the third house to Leo.
The Leo asc boms will be fearful towards opposite sex and
would always think about others. They would carry social
awareness and have good public relations.
Leo

As Libra is an* aiiy sign, the Leo asc boms are tension-prone
and always carry confusion in their minds; could perform only
after repeated attempts.
Libra, being movable sign, the communication and contacts,
writings and publications, public relations, sale of properties of
the Leo asc boms would be taking place fastly and effortlessly.
Libra is ahouse of Venus. The Leo asc boms willmostly receive
happy news , contacts and letters , enter into profitable agreements
and receive brokerage happily. They would be editors and
dialogue writers for films and dramas, excel in writing stories
and poems using pure imagination.
If the 3rd house falls in the star ofChitra, ruled by Mars, the
Leo asc bom will get involved fn false propaganda and forged
documents and may enter into illegal agreements and impose
unnecessary and harsh conditions in them.
Mars is the lord of houses 4 and 9 to Leo. So the Leo asc boms:
(i) will study certificate courses, involve in the sale of fruits,
vegetables, grains, seeds, seedlings and trees through
nurseries and farms, sale of livestock, notebooks, pencil,
paper and stationeries for schools, newspapers , utensils,
furniture , groceries , lands , buildings , vehicles , hardware ,
machineries and equipments for ponds, reservoirs and
bridges and would become brokers of real estates.
(ii) will enter into confident and reliable agreements and
money exchanges, enjoy name and fame, receive orders
to act in the capacity as leaders or heads, enter into
agreements for research and social endowments, easily
become closer to foreigners, act as mediators or senders
of messages and communicators to foreign nations,
involve government in religious endowments,
nationalise trusts, do transplantation of organs, will be
forced to submit sales tax accounts, will be clerks in
legal departments, take lease of the properties of temples
and religious centres and provide research information
about archaeological centres and ancient monuments.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

If the 3rd house falls in the star of Swathi, ruled by Rahu, the
Leo asc boms will work as clerks in embassies, ambassadors
and mediators and enter into international trade and foreign
agreements, receive communications from and provide
infonnation about foreign countries and will deal in foreign
goods.
(Readers may please refer and include the bhava significations
of Jupiter for Rahu.)
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Leo boms will deal with documents, stamp papers , cheques ,
legal notices, legal agreements and court orders.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 5 & 8 to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms:
(i) will be brokers in stock exchange and share market,
become writers 6f religious arid sports columns in
magazines, painters, sexy dancers, stage performers,
political analysts, preachers of religion and write love
letters, poems, stories and articles;
(ii) will seize properties by harassing, steal documents and
notes, spread rumours and illegal infonnation, sell old
goods, write obscene and threatening letters, receive
court orders as death-warrants , become inspectors in
mortuary or anti-corruption wing, doctors for postmortem of corpses, agents for bribery, clerks in accident
wards, enter into agreements for murders, illegally
supply photostat copies, write wills and charters, forge
documents and spoil reputation.
IV House : Scorpio
Scorpio the eighth sign of Kaalcbakra is the fourth house to
Leo. So the Leo asc boms will have to reside in dirty places or.
in old buildings. Murders, suicides or accidents may take place
near their residences. They may face accidents during
construction of their houses and may have to face problems
after problems in their properties and vehicles.
Teo

Scorpio is a watery and fixed sign. The Leo boms therefore
may meet with mishaps near ponds, drainage water pits or in
schools. They may like to five in residences which fall in central
part of a street having surplus water. Their lands, vehicles,
properties and machinery would remain for long.
Mars rules Scorpio. Mars would lead the Leo asc boms to
show interest in agriculture , lands , vehic les and properties . They
are natural landlords. They may hold agricultural farms and
poultries. They may take lease of maintaining or protecting major
industries, bridges and public toilets.
If the 4* house falls in the star of Vishakha, mled by Jupiter,
the Leo asc boms may hold legally valid properties like big
industries and educational centres. They may produce goods
that are required for temples and churches and may become
real-estate promoters, transporters, landlords, criminal judges
and lessors.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 5 and 8 to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms:
(i) will own company shares, involve in religious codes,
sports, love affairs, politics, arts and culture, produce
imaginary- goods of artistic values, may reside near
prostitution homes, cabaret clubs , auditoriums, religious
and sports centres and become teachers of arts and
00 will not hesitate to seize and encroach others' properties
by threatening, hold properties with encumbrances, may
reproduce with the use of scraps or pirated goods, may
reside near dirty or damaged buildings, operation
theatres, prisons or slaughter houses and may work in
accident wards, mortuary or anti-corruption wing. They
may gain properties through insurance or wills.
If the 4* house falls in the star of Anuradha, mled by Saturn,
the Leo asc boms may live near public lands, mines, ancient
buildings, own old goods and wooden or clay articles and would
benefit from oil seeds and black coloured materials.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

Saturn is the lord of houses 6 and 7 to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms:
(i) will excel in tailoring, catering and production of
medicines and medical -equipments; they may conduct
medical camps, centres for competitive examinations
and lodges; they tend to adopt the servants and would
do money lending on properties; they may become
accountants, tenants, purchasers, contractor on tenders
and milk vendors.
(ii) will mingle with society, guests and partners, reside in
government quarters or government lands and purchase
properties by acquiring loans, gain success by
convincing life partner to stay in joint family and hold
valid ration cards issued by government.
If the 4th house falls in the star of Jyeshta, ruled by Mercury,
the Leo boms will own different articles , machines, computers,
calculators, printers, micro instruments, electric and electronic
goods, spare parts, tiles and lodges . They may serve as checking
inspectors in transport organisations , assembler of machine parts
and manufacturers.
Mercury is the lord of houses 2 and 11 to Leo. So the Leo
boms:
(i) will hold valuable and useful articles, may purchase gold
out of their own money and may construct bungalows.
(ii) will be greedy in acquiring properties, construct
bungalow with all comforts with the help of societies,
organize clubs, gain fortunes at their residences, own
lucky goods, will be fond of purchasing gift-articles,
make achievements in production and will enjoy
frequent visits of their best friends.
V House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius the eleventh sign of Kaalchakra is the fifth house to
Leo. So the Leo asc boms will have faith in god and religious
services. They may fall in love especially with people who are
much younger to them at schools, colleges and temples and

would spoil the sanctity of these places.
Sagittarius is a fieiy and common sign; so the Leo asc boms
would force for love or would rape or would do prostitution or
perform obscene dances or give birth to a child with excessive
interest in sexual pleasures.
Sagittarius is a sign mled by Jupiter. So the Leo asc boms
will have religious contacts with faith in god; will become
priests, politicians, religious leaders, would be true to their love
affairs and will be fond of children.
If the 5* house falls in the star of Moola, mled by Ketu, the Leo
asc boms will involve in magics and black-magisc, may act as
pimps, will be brokers for illegal trades, will be politicians or
would become closer to persons with criminal intentions.
Ketu would act like Mercury, which is the lord of houses 2 and
1 1 to Leo. So the Leo asc boms will:
(i) buy artistic goods and musical instruments, gain
commissions, arrange things in an artistic manner, make
imaginary purchases and train themselves in meaningful
arts.
( ii ) learn arts zealously, open lodges or branches of societies,
enter into partnership with societies or agreements to
bring fortunes, win lotteries, make achievements in
rearing livestock and will show affinity towards friends.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Pcorvashada, mled by Venus,
the Leo asc boms, will show interest and excel in various fields
of arts and culture would become popular politicians, astrologers,
speakers or pundits and will not hesitate to involve in
prostitutions and obscene dances.
Venus is also the lord of houses 3 and 10 to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms:
(i) will receive happy news and enter into cordial
agreements, happily act as brokers, be imaginative in
writings and write verses, plays or screenplays.
fii) will gain status in various fields of arts and culture and
190 Astrologies ofkaalchakra

will profess in the fields of drugs, wine and women.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun,
the Leo asc horns will serve in government buildings, involve
themselves in politics, sports and religion, excel as chess players,
work in the field of art supported by government and would
receive subsidy.
Sun is the lord of ascendant to Leo. So the Leo asc horns will
excel in arts involving pure imagination, have independent
thoughts and approach, acquire immunity and broaden their
chests and enjoy proper functioning of heart, lungs and blood
cells.
VI House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the tenth sign of Kaalchakra is the sixth house to
Leo. So the Leo asc boms will win court cases in their profession.
They will be easily promoted in government service to gain
status and honour, get opportunities in their profession. They
would also suffer from profession related diseases and tend to
remain in the same service for a long period. They are also likely
to become debtors in their professions.
Capricorn is an earthy sign, so the Leo asc boms will suffer
from diseases like allergy caused by environmental pollution
leading to damages of neuro-system and shine in fields of
agriculture and geology.
Capricorn is a movable sign. So the dress and food habits,
digestive capacity, diseases, medicines, loans, litigations,
service, successes of the Leo asc boms Would naturally follow
a developing trend.
Capricorn is a sign ruled by Saturn. The Leo asc boms may
have to work as labourers with poor working conditions; serve
as assistants or peons in the fields of medicine, dresses, hotels
and law offices; may work as announcers; have the habit of
frequent borrowings of small amounts and may have to suffer
from skin diseases.
If the 6* house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun, the
Leo asc boms wilLsue against government but would enjoy
Leo 191

loan facilities from government. The Leo asc boms will be
provided With dresses, food and medicines by the government.
They may be employed in the government departments of food,
poultry, employment, agriculture and health.
Sun is also the lord of the ascendant to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms will develop with self-thoughts and with their practice of
developing their own skills of workmanship for successful acts.
They will suffer from diseases that would make them inactive,
impart frequent illnesses in stomach, intestines and digestive
organs of the body due to lack of immunity.
If the 6* house falls in the star of Shravana, ruled by Moon, the
Leo asc boms will work as labourers in ships, fish ponds and
grain fields. They serve as plumbers and would suffer from
diseases and become physically weak caused by contaminated
water.
Moon is the lord of 12* house to Leo. So the Leo asc boms will
borrow money through secret plans, clear previous loans by
acquiring additional loans, regain lost goods and investments,
will be sued by the separated partner, become weak due to ill
health, may become medical practitioners and spend all they
earn.
If the 6* house falls in the star of Dhanishta which is ruled by
Mars, the Leo asc boms will suffer due to muscle pains and
diseases caused by excessive heat in the body. They may work
as labourers in food processing or medical industries or as tailors
or cooks.
Mars is also the lord of houses 4 and 9 to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms will:
(i) work as contract laboureres in the fields of lands and
buildings, household artides,automobiles and transport,
macro industries, catering and as maintainers in
poultries; may work as school teachers, furniture
manufacturers and stage organisers for dramas and music
concerts.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

( ii ) will serve as contract labourers in ports and teachers of
high schools and in research centres, personnel
departments, import and export offices, trusts, temples,
courts, local bodies and in the offices of preservation of
ancient monuments.
VII House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the eleventh house of Kaalchakra is the seventh house
to Leo. So the Leo asc boms will show affinity and love towards
their life-partners. They tend to share their interests with business
partners and society especially towards aged people.
Aquarius is an airy sign. So the Leo asc boms will have
intelligent wives and business partners.
Aquarius is a fixed sign. The Leo asc boms will have everlasting
and permanent ties with their wives , business partners , customers
and people belonging to opposite sex.
Aquarius is ruled by Saturn making the Leo asc boms to have
wives or partners having immoral character, indiscipline,
doubting, untruthful and wavering natures.
If the 7th house falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars, the
Leo asc boms will have wife or partners with characteristics
like indiscipline and arrogance and may have to meet with liars
as customers, may have to deal with terrorists, arrogant bank
officials and disobeying children. They would be forced to
request for assistance from others.
Mars is also the lord of houses 4 and 9 to Leo. So the Leo asc
bom will:
(i) live with relatives, may be in the same compound, show
affinity towards neighbours who live in houses directly
opposite to them, have cordial relationships with people
who are deputed to manage their properties and macro
organisations, and
( ii ) have social contacts with leaders, foreigners, exporters,
judges, priests, trustees and teachers.
Leo

If the 7th house falls in the'star of Shathabisham, ruled by Rahu,
the Leo asc boms will many foreigners or have them as partners
or customers, show undue and perverted interests in sexual
pleasures with wavering minds and may become homosexuals.
(Readers may please refer and include the bhava significations
of Jupiter tor Rahu.)
If the 7th house falls in the star of Poorvabadra,mled by Jupiter,
the Leo asc boms will marry responsible and loving wives; may
also get partners and customers from popular persons of the
society.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 5 and 8 to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms will:
(i) meet and maintain social relationships with opposite
sex, artists, painters, singers, astrologers, teachers,
religious preachers, prostitutes and pimps, and
(ii) meet with persons like murderers, thieves, insurance
officers , brokers for bribes , cunning persons and persons
with criminal charges such as cheats and terrorists.
VIII House : Pisces
Pisces the twelfth sign of Kaalchakra is the eigth house to Leo.
So the worries and troubles of Leo asc boms will resut in losses
and they may be forced to Hve underground at times.
Pisces is a watery sign . So the Leo asc boms will face accidents
by water especially seas or oceans; They will be troubled by
rains and suffer due to infections in their urinary tracts.
Pisces is a common sign. Longevity, accidents, sorrows, pains
and stress, disrespect and agony of the Leo asc boms would see
fluctuating trends.
Pisces is the sign of Jupiter. So the Leo asc borns will be
punished and fined by law. They may lose gold and valuables
through illegal activities and may have to face legal threats for
seizure of properties.
If the 8th house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, mled by Jupiter,
194 Astrologies of kaalchakra

the lord of houses 5 and 8 to Leo, the Leo asc boms will:
( i) meet with accidents in drama or music stages, get injured
in sports and games, will not hesitate to rape, face
disrespect in love affairs and in the fields, of arts and
culture, will be punished in sports and games, will be
harassed in prostitution houses, enter into quarrels in
cabaret halls or liquor bars and damage the sanctity of
religious centres*
( ii) be murdered or hanged to death, face accidental deaths,
enter into quarrels, feel stress and pains, lose organs of
body, enter into anti-social activities, will not hesitate
to cheat, vengeful, believe in violence and will not
hesitate to involve in robberies and seizures.
If the 8* house falls in the star of Uttarabadra, ruled by Saturn,
the Leo asc boms will threaten and will be threatened and
boycotted; will be cowards; have loss of memory and wavering
minds, carry a poor sense of dressing , abscond, have a permanent
fear of death, face false allegations, meet with cruel accidents,
will not hesitate to violent mode of actions and would repair
old goods.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 6 and 7 to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms will have:
(i) problems in competition exam centres, increasing of
agony of disease through medical treatment, bungling
acts of nurses, wrong results of medicines, allergy
through food, acidic medicines and dresses, accidents
in the production of medicines, mistakes in medical
procedures, quarrels in courts, allegations in lodges.
(ii) immoral activities in social service centres , antagonising
government officials, corruptions in public welfare
centres, disappointments in marriages, partnership
cheatings, discredit and disgrace through spouse and
enemies, murder threats.
If the 8* house falls in the star of Revathi, ruled by Mercury,
the Leo asc boms will face troubles by way of cheques ,
Leo

documents, disconnection of electricity and telephones,
properties, surety, anonymous letters, miscommunication,
forgetfulness, loss of memory and neurological disorders.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 2 and 1 1 to Leo. So the Leo
asc horns will:
(i) enter into troublesome negotiations, suffer due to allergy,
have unexpected gains or gifts in the form of gold and
valuables, donate valuable gifts and tend to save beyond
their capacity.
( ii) struggle with greedy nature, will be harassed in lodges,
misappropriate funds in societies, face charges
challenging their integrity in societies, lose fortunate
opportunities, have unfortunate employments and face
troubles in service due to their self-interests and would
diagnose for vitamin deficiencies.
IX House : Aries
Aries the ascendant of the Kaalchakra is the ninth house of
Leo. So the Leo asc boms will win the confidence of others and
will be forced to complete their higher education. They will be
interested in the fields of teaching, agriculture and mechanical,
engineering and may get into troubles due to illegal affairs with
close relatives.
Aries is a fiery sign, so they will be intelligent enough in
academic pursuits, have strong faith in their religion and
administrative capabilities and may indulge in polygamy.
Aries is a movable sign. Higher education, journeys and life in
foreign countries, research, confidence and polygamy will be
imminent features in the life profile of a Leo asc boms.
Aries is a sign owned by Mars. So the Leo asc boms will study
agriculture, geology, mechanisms, history and archaeology and
may become head masters, political leaders, transporters,
landlords and judges in criminal courts.
If the 9* house falls in the star of Aswani, ruled by Ketu, the
196 Astrologies of kaalchakra

Leo asc boms will excel in their higher education with wisdom
and knowledge and would be educated in the fields of teaching;
they may become temple trustees, ambassadors, exporters,
professors and financial controllers of a state; they may involve
themselves in transforming law and moral codes of a society
and in religious rituals, customs and renovation works of
temples.
Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of houses 2 and 1 1 to
Leo. So the Leo asc boms will:
(i) be soft-spoken, gain ancestral properties and would be
able to receive gifts of all kinds .
(ii) complete diploma courses, hold honorary posts, achieve
success in research, earn name and fame, gain with
greedy attitude, maintain cordial relations and enter into
successful agreements with societies, have lucky
opportunities in life, find out right ways of doing things,
will be fond of taking fatty foods, always be joyful and
will not hesitate to have illegal affairs with unknown
persons of their choice.
If the 9* house falls in the star of Bharani, ruled by Venus, the
Leo asc boms will involve themselves in the research of arts
and culture, have higher education, become transporters, stage
decorators and may have affairs with foreigners or teachers.
Venus is also the lord of houses 3 and 1 0 to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms will:
( i ) think beyond their capacity, get press-publicity , publish
books on education , become as orators , communicators ,
mediators, researchers and informers; show interest in
the fields of mathematics with powerful memory and
enter into barter exchanges, and
(ii) serve in transport organisations, information and
communication departments, import export
corporations, ports, embassies, electricity, oil wells,
water supply, mines, teaching institutes, personnel

departments, temples, trusts, courts, panchayat offices
and in ancient monuments.
I f the 9* house fails in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the Leo
asc boms will serve in education and endowment departments,
embassies, government research centres and finance departments
and in foreign organisations.
Sun is the lord of ascendant to Leo. So the Leo asc boms will
research with self thoughts, show stability and independent
approach in their commitments, be knowledgeable and quiet
and calm in actions, have deep sleep and thoughts, get
transformations in the body structures, suffer due to malignant
growths and due to the changes in the functioning of the
productive organs of the body, become stout, face increase in
body functioning and have body that would adapt to the
requirements.
X House : Taurus
Taurus the second house of Kaalchakra is the tenth house to
Leo. Leo asc boms will serve in the fields wherein they use
their voice and have to speak. They will work in the fields of
banking, finance, jewellery and mortgage stores.
Taurus. is an earthy sign, so the Leo asc boms will show
professional interests in the fields of medicine, catering, dresses,
vegetables, grains and agriculture.
Taurus is a fixed sign. The Leo asc boms will be blessed with
stability in their profession, status, authority and posts. The
production in the body will remain constant and they have strong
thighs.
Taurus is a house of Venus. So the Leo asc boms will gain
status in the fields of arts and culture and would not hesitate to
involve themselves in the professions of drugs, wine and women.
If the 10* house falls in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the
Leo asc boms will be high officials or hold honorary posts in
government departments and work in government owned
commercial complexes, industrial, vocational or educational
centres and employment exchanges.
1 98 Astrologies of kaalchakra

Sun is the lord of ascendant to Leo asc boms. So they will use
their brains with independent thoughts in respectful professions
and may become industrialists; will suffer due to body
functioning and would be allergic to a set of food items; however
they tend to become more energetic and activei.
If the 10* house falls in the star of Rohini, mled by Moon, the
Leo asc boms will work in boats and ships, import-export
organisations, medical shops, fisheries, ports, pipes and wells
and work with white coloured articles and liquids.
Moon is also the lord of 1 2th house to Leo . So the Led asc borns
will do profession with secret links or secret things or research
as profession or would do two different professions; tend to
invest more on profession; may have secret affairs in profession.
If the 10* house falls in the star of Mrigasira, ruled by Mars,
the Leo asc boms will work in industries or in fire related
professions or in the fields of land and vehicles , police , militaiy,
administration, government documents with more
responsibilities.
Mars is also the lord of houses 4 and 9 to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms will:
(i) involve in the fields of manufacturing, agriculture,
construction, carpentry, automobiles, electricity, water
tanks, wood factories, fertilizers, boilers, grain fields,
farms, fruit gardens, godowns and house-keeping.
( ii ) serve in voluntary organisations, social service
institutions, export organisations, rocket launching
stations, marriage registrar office, research institutes,
embassies, agencies for foreign employment, transport,
communications, ports, electricity, water supplies,
mines , temples , trusts , courts, panchayat offices , ancient
monuments, teaching institutes like colleges and
universities and may hold honorary posts.
Leo

XI House Gemini
Gemini, the HI house of Kaalchakra is the XI house to Leo.
Leo asc boms will show more interest in the fields of information
and communication, negotiations, agreements and travels.
Gemini is an airy sign. The Leo asc boms will be happy with
fresh minds without bothering themselves with worries.
Gemini is a common sign. The desires, happiness and
expectations of the Leo asc borns would generally see
fluctuations.
Mercury rules this house. So the Leo asc boms will like micro
instruments and books and will have witty friends, daughtersin-law, sons-in-law and elder brother.
If the 11th house falls in the star* ofMrigasira, mled by Mars,
the Leo asc boms will have insincere friends, struggle for
success, will be greedy and have their desires fulfilled after
prolonged struggles.
Mars is also the lord of 4 and 9 houses to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms will:
(i) tend to purchase whatever they wish, own properties
with litigations, suffer due to frequent repairs in their
vehicles or belongings, and
(ii) have links with social-service institutions and voluntary
organisations, have relations with high officials and
foreign countries, undertake foreign journeys, study
accord i ng to their personal desires , enter into agreements
and may be polygynists.
If the l llh house falls in the star of Aradra, mled by Rahu, the
Leo asc boms will have foreign friends and sadistic attitudes
with a mind to enjoy cruelty and talk about social service with
selfish motives.
(Readers may please refer and include the bhava significations
of Jupiter for Rahu.)
If the 1 1 th house falls in the star of Punarvasu, mled by Jupiter,
200 Astrologies of kaalchakra

the Leo asc boms will gain friendship of sincere, generous,
truthful and intelligent friends and will expect things to happen
through legal means.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 5 and 8 to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms will:
(i) have happy and harmonious relations with friends and
would easily fall in love with opposite sex, will be
interested in the fields of macro-arts and culture and
enter into mutual and cordial agreements.
(ii) face troubles in their desires, have tensions, get
dissatisfactions and will be hasty in nature with wavering
minds.
XII House : Cancer
Cancer, the fourth sign of Kaalchakra is the twelfth house to
Leo. So the Leo asc boms will have benami properties like
lands, vehicles and machines.
Cancer is a wateiy sign. So the Leo asc boms will have the
ability to identify the water sources through research.
Cancer is a movable sign. So the secret activities, unnecessary
expenditures, capital investments and failures in the functioning
of the body of the Leo asc boms will get developed day by day.
Cancer is the house of Moon. So the Leo asc boms will spend
their money at a faster rate, undertake voyages, hoard liquid
articles and will have the pleasure of bed comforts.
If the 1 2th house falls in the star of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter,
the Leo asc boms will involve in illegal and secret activities
such as counterfeit, will be threatened and imprisoned legally
and secretly, get into income-tax troubles, lose properties to
government.
Jupiter is also the lord of 5 and 8 houses to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms will:
(i) face breach of harmonious relations and mutual

agreements and incur high expenditure in the fields of
arts and culture.
( ii) face problems in all their secret activities, make undue
expenditures to end in losses, attain disrespectful status,
fall in coma, will face seizures of properties, hastily
absconcl and will show wavering of minds.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Pushyam, ruled by Saturn,
the Leo asc boms will carry out their revenges secretly, will
involve in hoardings, adulterations and concealing, make secret
plans and involve in secret activities unworthy of their status.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 6 and 7 to Leo, So the Leo asc
boms will:
(i) have secret success , get into coma due to allergic foods ,
switch their profession as per their desires, suffer due to
inability to diagnose disease and gain success after
making undue expenditures.
(ii) marry foreigners, live in separation from the society,
hate others and will go for divorce.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Aslesha, ruled by Mercury ,
the Leo asc boras will invent micro instruments through secret
researches, have secret notes and accounts, maintain income
expenditure details, possess secret photographs and documents
and enter into secret agreements.
Mercury is the lord of houses 2 and 1 1 to Leo. So the Leo asc
boms will:
(0 get back outstanding amounts, invest in gold and
valuables, have secret sources of income and troubles
in eyes and disorders in digestive system.
(ii) become presidents of societies, enter into agreements
on behalf of societies, have lucky opportunities of
agreements and achievements, innovate and introduce
new methods and act secretly in all aspects of their life.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

Virgo
General nature of the sign Virgo
It is an earthy, common and feminine sign; even, barren, narrow
and short sign: single house, night times, end part of a street;
hospital; pharmacy; first aid; dress and food; grain godowns:
library: gardens; black or grey in colour; city; south west ill
direction; calm and semi -fruitful sign; human; shows affinity;
expertise. VI sign of KaaJchakra: house of Mercury. It denotes
Bhadrapatha in Saka and Purattasi in Tamil calendars.
ASCENDANT fefcLATED SIGNIFICATIONS OF VIRGO
(a) It is an Earthy sign :Soft natured body and mind, outspoken, plump body, active in nature, affinity towards
others, respectful.
(b) It is a Common sign .'Fluctuating body and mind, fast
changing structure, appearance and colour, changing
characters and acts, short living anger.
( c) It is a house of Mercury: Intelligent, quick in grasping,
estimating the situation and adjustable to circumstances,
mathematical brain with proper functioning of
neurological system, cunning, thinking twice before
doing once, lean and beautiful in structure, witty, quick
and fast, unstable in nature.
Virgo

(d) It is VI house ofKaalchakra: Interested in the fields of
diseases and medicine, dyes & chemicals, litigations,
dresses, food and service for fees.
In the same manner, the remaining significations of Virgo could
also be studied.
The sign Virgo lasts for three stars leading to the following
body natures.
L Uttar apalgiini: Owned by Sun : Body with strong bones.
2. Hastha: Owned by Moon : Body with mane water content.
5. Chitra : Owned by Mars :Stout body with muscles.
If the Asc falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun, the
Virgo asc boms will be majestic in appearance, have self-pride
and prestige, strong bones in body, generous behaviour, authority,
leadership and responsibilities.
Sun is also the lord of 12th house to Virgo; So the Virgo asc
boms will involve in secret activities, lose energy, abscond,
sacrifice, investigate, suffer due to secret troubles and face
failures and troubles.
If the Asc falls in the star of Hastha, ruled by Moon, the Virgo
asc boms will be calm in appearance, quick but fluctuating in
actions, adjustable, depending on others and unconscious about
prestige, carry confusions in mind with more thoughts and will
have a tendency to shirk their responsibilities.
Moon is the lord of the 11th house to Virgo: the Virgo asc
boms will be greedy, joyful, happy and selfish in nature, carry
more desires, will be counsellors to societies, have fortunes and
success, make achievements and will be co-operative with
others.
If the ascendant falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Virgo asc boms will be bold, proud, active and rough in
appearance, obstinate, selfish, immoral, arrogant, violent,
disobedient and short-tempered; will not respect the feelings of
others.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Mars is also the lord of houses 3 & 8 to Virgo. So the Virgo asc
boms will have,
( i) wisdom, capabilities, self-efforts, courage, intelligence,
informative, inclination towards education, selftransformation, self-confidence and interest in changing
of places.
(ii) pains and stress, disabilities, disrespects, threatening,
suicidal tendencies, mental agony and confusions,
mental retardation, being murdered, damaged or
punished and deadliness.
II House : Libra
Libra is the II house to Virgo. It is the VII house to Kaalchakra.
Hence the Virgo asc boms tends to talk more about women or
opposite sex, sexual pleasures, wife and others.
Since Libra is an airy and movable sign, the Virgo asc boms
tends to attract others in their speech. They speak in easy terms
but with self-pride; they tend to talk more about developments
but will indirectly hurt the feelings of others.
Since it is a house of Venus, the lord of houses 2 & 9 to Virgo,
the Virgo asc boms will speak with research data and in an
attractive manner with a touch of affinity
HI House : Scorpio
Scorpio, the VUI sign to Kaalchakra is the III house to Virgo.
So the Virgo asc boms will have a fear about others with
cowardliness and mental confusions. They carry fear of death
with tiredness in their agitated minds. They tend to suffer from
loss of memory and suicidal tendencies .
Scorpio is a fixed and watery sign; so the Virgo asc boms will
be pessimistic and masochistic in nature with wavering mind
and lack confidence; they will be afraid of water and will meet
with accidents in water.
Scorpio is a house of Mars, the lord of houses 3 & 8 to Virgo;
So the Virgo asc boms will have troubles out of their writings
and will have a cowardly mind full of confusions.
Virgo

IV House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the 9th house of Kaalchakra is the IV house to
Virgo, So the Virgo asc boms will excel in education in the
fields of transport, travels, finance, religion, research, teaching
and law.
Sagittarius is a common and fiery sign; so they may live in
small and congested houses situated in the end part of a street
and in the outskirts of city; may have to live in houses owned by
other community people; they will not stay long in the same
house; may complete their higher education after crossing over
quite a few barriers.
Since it is a house of Jupiter which is the lord of houses 4 & 7,
they will become successful in their fives through experience;
they will own vehicles and machinery.
V House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the X sign of Kaalchakra is the V house to Virgo;
so the Virgo asc boms tend to fall in love with elderly persons
or customers at offices or professional places with more interest
in sexual pleasures. Their love affairs will result in mental agony
to them.
Capricorn is an earthy and movable sign; so the Virgo asc
boms will progress in the fields of ancient arts, religion and
culture.
Capricorn is the house of Saturn which is the lord of houses 5
& 6. So Virgo asc boms can make gains in the fields of politics,
religion, astrology, prostitution, obscene dances and gambling.
VI House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI sign of Kaalchakra is the VI house to Virgo.
So the Virgo asc borus will have short legs; they will serve in
jobs with lesser workloads . They may have to face litigations in
professional life; they will.sufferdue to diseases due to vitamin
deficiency.
Aquarius is an airy and fixed sign; so the Virgo asc boms will
206 Astrologies of kaalchakra

suffer due to loss of weight and gastric problems in the body.
They will reach amicable solutions and gain success with
happiness.
Since it is a house of Saturn, the lord of houses 5 & 6 to Virgo,
the Virgo asc boms will suffer due to virus ’disorders or due to
leprosy; they may have to face disciplinary proceedings in their
service.
VII House : Pisces
Pisces, the XII house of Kaalchakra is the VII house to Virgo*
So the Virgo asc boms will have secret relations and problems
in the society to which they belong and they may be dissatisfied
in marital life.
Pisces is a common and wateiy sign; so the Virgo asc boms
will have double-minded persons as, life or business partners;
their friendships may not' last long.
It is a house of Jupiter, the lord of houses 4 & 7 to Virgo; so the
Virgo asc boms will have social affinity with their family but
their spouses may lack interest in sexual pleasures.
VIII House : Aries
Aries, the ascendant of Kaalchakra is the VIII house to Virgo*
So the Virgo asc bom tend to get dejected due to their hasty
decisions; have sleepless nights, head-aches, loss of memory
and energy etc.
Aries is a movable and fiery sign; so the Virgo asc bom will
meet with fire-accidents and they will have to face troubles in
the initial phases of all their ventures in life.
Aries is a house ru led by Mars which is lord of houses of 3 & 8
to Virgo; so the Virgo asc boms will get into mental agony in
one or other crisis; they often tend to lose their mental balance:
IX House : Taurus
Taurus , the II house of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Virgo. So
the Virgo asc boms will win confidence of others and would
permanently face financial crisis; have academic excellence in
Virgo

financial management; they would remain short in their physical
structure.
Taurus is a fixed but earthy sign; so the Virgo asc boms may
have to study at foreign places or nations; they will show
academic excellence in the fields of accountancy, auditing,
finance, banking, registration and sale of diamonds and gold.
Since Taurus is a house of Venus, which is the lord of houses 2
& 9 to Virgo, the Virgo asc boms will involve themselves in
the fields of foreign exchange, religious endowments, financial
managements and international affairs.
X House : Gemini
Gemini, the ED house of Kaalchakra is the X house to Virgo;
So the Virgo asc boms will gain status and respect in the
professions like courier, communications, posts & telegraphs,
radio & television, electrical & electronics fields, plumbing and
transports etc.
Since Gemini is a common and airy sign, the status and respect
of Virgo asc boms would not last long and they tend to influence
others with their status and respect only for their personal gains.
Gemini is a house of Mercury, which is the lord of houses 1 &
10 to Virgo. So the Virgo asc boms will gain respect and status
in their professional fields with their communication skills and
public relations.
XI House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV house to Kaalchakra is the XI house to Virgo.
So the Virgo asc boms will remain in the joint family and would
get into encumbrances in properties due to their greediness.
Cancer is a movable but watery sign; so the desires of the Virgo
asc boms will flow and recede as flood water.
Since it is a house of Moon, the Virgo asc boms will have the
satisfaction of owning numerous properties.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

XU House : Leo
Leo, the V Sign of Kaalchakra is the XII house to Virgo. So the
Virgo asc boms will maintain secrecy in their affairs of love
and romance, in the fields of sports and gambling and about
their children.
Leo is a fiery and fixed sign; so the Virgo asc boms will get due
returns to their capital through secret activities.
It is a house of Sun. So the Virgo asc boms will be in possession
of secret documents of the government or diaries of their fathers.
SIGNIFICATIONS OF VIRGO UNRELATED TO ASCENDANT ~
II House : Libra
Libra, the \TI sign of Kaalchakra is the II house of Virgo. So
the Virgo asc boms will gain Sum their wives , business partners ,
customers and through others’ assistance.
Libra is an airy sign; so the Virgo asc boms could make their
earnings in a speedy way. But in the same speed, they would
spend all their income.
Libra is a movable sign; so the Virgo asc boms will gain through
gold and other valuables.
Since Libra is a house of Venus, the Virgo asc boms will gain
in the fields of jewelleiy, cosmetics, silk garments, valuable
artistic goods and diamonds.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars , the
Virgo asc boms will be spendthrifts, will not hesitate to tell lies
for materialistic gains or to seize properties of others, dishonest
in financial matters, gain from metals and coral ornaments and
use filthy words to hurt others’ feelings.
Mars is the lord of 3rd & 8th houses to Virgo. So the Virgo
asc boms,
(i) will gain with skills of eloquence and in investigative
journalism, writings and courageous acts, information
Virgo

and communication, clever arguments and transfers,
change and transform themselves for monetary and
materialistic benefits, have confidence from their
financial backgrounds, always carry inclinations for
money and will work hard for financial benefits.
(ii) will not hesitate to venture into robbery by assaulting
or threatening others , will benefit out of old goods , gain
by working in dirty places or as a hangman in jails or a
worker in accident wards or mortuary in hospitals, gain
in defamation cases, illegal activities, forgery, ingratitude
acts , rapes and murders or by accepting bribery and gain
through insurance claims or wills.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Swathi, ruled by Rahu, the
Virgo asc boms will gain through foreign scholarships, subsidies
or as guides to foreigners and in international trade.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Vishakha, mled by Jupiter,
the Virgo asc boms will gain by speaking truth and by respecting
others in conversations, in teaching profession, in the fields of
cash transactions, banks and jewellery shops.
Jupiter is the lord of 4th & 7th houses to Virgo. So the Virgo
asc boms,
(i) will gain through experience and education, fruits,
vegetables, grain fields, farms, educational centres,
library and by taking lease of water reservoirs and ponds.
(ii) will gain from social relations, business and life partners,
banks, government subsidy , government recognition and
through tax-evasions.
HI House ; Scorpio
Scorpio, the VIII sign of Kaalchakra is the HI house to Virgo.
So the Virgo asc boms will face one or other kinds of problems
in their Communications, letters and information.
Scorpio is a watery sign; so the Virgo asc boms will always
carry wavering minds but will have a high degree of grasping
power.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Scorpio is a fixed sign. So the Virgo asc boms will naturally
have courage, confidence and intelligence. Body functions,
neurological system, writing skills, communications and public
relations would remain stable and last longfor Virgo asc boms.
Since Scorpio is a house of Mars , the Virgo asc boms tend to
be over-confident and courageous; they would not hesitate to
spread rumours and involve in forgery; include unwanted
conditions in their agreements and would enter into illegal
agreements.
If the yf house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Virgo asc boms will involve themselves in documents and
stamp papers and would enter into negotiations of money
transactions; rely on truthful information and enter into legally
valid agreements; expect favours from orders and notices of
courts of law
Jupiter happens to be the lord of houses 4 & 7. So the Virgo
asc boms,
(i) will be weak in physical energy, complete certificate
courses, will be vendors of fruits, vegetables, livestock,
accessories and stationeries to educational institutions
and involve themselves as brokers in the fields of lands,
vehicles, properties and machineries.
(ii) will get due recognition from society or government,
gain through recommendation letters, possess
documents and bank correspondences by way of their
spouses, enter into partnership deeds and receive notices
of tax reimbursements.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Anuradha, ruled by Saturn,
the Virgo asc boms will be fearful, undertake frequent short
journeys, have to walk a lot, will not hesitate to write anonymous
letters and to forge documents and make frequentself-changes.
Saturn is lord of the houses 5 & 6 to Virgo. So the Virgo
asc boms,
(i) will involve in share-market, will have the ability to
write in the fields of sports, religion, arts, culture and
Virgo 211

politics and will develop and broaden their wisdom and
knowledge.
(ii) will be successful in competitive exams, will be labtechnicians, serve in the fields of garments, food,
medicine, house-keeping and law, work in accounts and
auditing offices and will be collecting agents of house
rent and lease amounts.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Jyeshta, ruled by Mercury,
the Virgo asc boms will have the capabilities to write stories,
poems and essays, will become registration or recording clerks,
postmen, messengers, electricians, ambassadors, advertisers, tax
collectors, proof-readers, brokers and will have fluctuating
minds.
Mercury is lord of houses 1 & 10 to Virgo. So the Virgo
asc borns,
(i) will record their self and independent thoughts, show
courageous attitude and power, tend to act according to
will and pleasure and have strong physique with normal
functioning of neurological and blood systems in the
body along with ear, nose and throat.
(ii) will receive orders for honorary posts, will do business
with status, render responsible advice, information and
counselling, receive appreciations for administrative
abilities, earn advertisements through name and fame
and will take oath to hold high posts.
IV House : Sagittarius
The IX house of Kaalchakra is the IV house to Virgo. So the
Virgo asc boms will reside near temples, schools, colleges, law
offices, post offices, telephone exchanges and government
offices.
Sagittarius is a fiery sign; so the Virgo asc boms may have to
live in traffic congested places. It is also a common sign; so the
Virgo borns will not permanently keep their lands, vehicles,
properties and machineries in possession.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

It is a house of Jupiter; so the properties of Virgo asc boms
will legally hold their lands, houses, vehicles and properties
and may become real estate owners, land inspectors and produce
food articles.
If the 4* house falls in the star.ofMoola, ruled by Ketu, the
Virgo asc bomns will illegally hold lands, house, vehicles and
properties and forge goods, produce sub-standard goods and
drugs.
Ketu would act like Mercury. Mercury is the lord of houses 1
& 1 0 to Virgo. So the Virgo asc boms,
(i) will show courage in their acts, make independent
purchases and increase their own strength.
(ii) will become landlords, own industries and have vehicles
by holding responsible and administrative posts.
If the 4* house falls in the star of Poorvashada, ruled by Venus,
the Virgo asc boms will own forts and palaces, flower gardens,
vegetable forms and art schools and will become manufacturers
of cosmetics, films, plastics and glassware.
Venus also happens to be the lord of houses 2 & 9 to Virgo. So
the Virgo asc boms,
(i) will make purchases of valuable and costly goods, own
bungalows, store and keep stock of goods and tend to
keep things in their personal custody.
(ii) will enter into contracts on properties, barter exchanges,
imports and exports, fomi endowments, make organs
for transplantation, earn foreign subsidy, and maintain
relationships with foreigners.
If the 4* house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun, the
Virgo asc boms will reside in government quarters, gain
government pattas, will encroach government lands and own
ponds or wells.
Sun happens to be the lord of 1 2th house to Virgo. So the Virgo
asc boms will plan secretly for lands, house, vehicles and
mm i
Virgo

properties, regain lost goods, stabilize income into properties,
live in hide-outs and rejoin their joint family.
V House : Capricorn
Capricorn , the X house to Kaalchakra is the V house to Virgo.
So the first child of Virgo asc boms will suffer due to ill health
and the Virgo asc boms would never succeed in their love affaire
and excel in art fields but do jobs of easy nature.
Capricorn is an earthy sign; so the Virgo asc boms will show
commitment in their love affaire and carry interest in the fields
of arts and culture.
Capricorn is also a movable sign; so the Virgo asc boms tend
to develop their love affairs and belief in god and will have ever
growing wisdom and artistic talents.
Since it is a house of Saturn, the Virgo asc boms will have lazy
children and sexual pleasures with people who belong to lower
strata, become sanyasis or guards in temple ponds and excel in
sober characters in films and dramas.
If the 5* house fallsin the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun, the
Virgo asc boms will be interested in politics and would
frequently participate in government functions and will be expert
in playing chess.
Sun happens to be the lord of 12* house to Virgo. So the Virgo
asc boms will have secret plans in their love affaire , fail or cany
lack of interest in love affaire, secretly give birth to illegitimate
child, get into compromise with separated partner, regain power
and strength and secretly protect their child.
If the 5* house falls in the star of Shravana, ruled by Moon, the
Virgo asc boms will excel in performing character roles, become
poets and thinkers; have quick and happy copulations, visit
recreation clubs, will be fond of playing cricket and have
intelligent children.
Moon happens to be the lord of 11th house to Virgo. So the
Virgo asc boms will be induced to learn arts with envy and
greed, own lodges, open branches of societies enter into
Astrologies of kaalchakra

partnerships with societies, have fortunate agreements, have
frequent and favourable opportunities and will be happy in the
company of friends.
If the 5* house falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars, the
Virgo asc boms will be rough during copulations, have children
with undue interest in sexual pleasures, will be atheists,
sculptors, play boxing and will not hesitate to perform vulgar
dances.
Mars happens to be the lord of houses 3 & 8 to Virgo. So the
Virgo asc boms,
(i) will find themselves amidst press publicity about their
artistic performances, publ ish books on arts and culture,
enter into agreements for artistic performances, excel
in art fields wherein imagination of mind play a vital
role and make changes in their transfer orders.
( ii) will involve in rape and spoil self-respect and reputation,
face seizures, repair old music instruments, lead dirty
life, will be cheated and punished.
VI House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI house of Kaalchakra is the VI house to Virgo.
So the Virgo asc boms will be successful in their professional
fields; win litigations in courts and capable of changing
circumstances to their favour.
Aquarius is an airy sign; so the Virgo asc boms will suffer due
to respiratory problems and work in the fields of airlines, air
force, radio, petrol or gas companies , research centres or dyeing
factories.
Aquarius is a fixed sign; so the dress, food, diseases and
medicines, digestive system of the body, service, loans,
litigations and success of the Virgo asc boms will remain more
or less permanent.
Aquarius is a house of Saturn; so the Virgo asc boms will
have to undertake cheap works as daily labourer, work as office
Virgo

boys in garment shops, law offices, medical shops and hotels,
acquire short term loans, suffer due to skin diseases and serve
as announcers.
If the 6* house falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars, the
Virgo asc boms will suffer due to muscle pains, work in
factories, become medical practitioners or produce medicines,
undertake physical labour and may become cooks or tailors.
Mars happens to be the lord of houses 3 & 8 to Virgo. So the
Virgo asc boms,
(i) will serve in the fields of information, communication,
publicity and advertising, publish books on profession,
work to their strength, enter into agreements will serve
as clerks and receive orders of appointments or transfers.
(ii) will be prepared to render hard labour, undertake jobs
of hard labour, disrespect and dishonour; repair old
goods and work under poor conditions with heavy
workload.
If the VI house falls in the star of Shathabisham, ruled by Rahu,
the Virgo asc boms will suffer due to respiratory disorders, will
be gluttons, work in drug centres or as anaesthetists, manufacture
respiratory aids, involve in the fields of liquors, narcotics and
spices.
(Readers may please refer and include the house significations
of Jupiter for Rahu.)
If the 6* house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, mled by Jupiter,
the Virgo asc boms will work in big organizations, banks,
medical shops, nutrition department and law offices, will avail
loans with the recommendation of popular personalities, lead
feasts and festivals, will be fond of fatty foods and suffer due to
cholesterol and tissue disorders.
Jupiter happens to be the lord of houses 4 & 7 to Virgo. So the
Virgo asc boms,
(i) will serve in the fields of lands, house, vehicles &
properties, food processing, livestock, schools,
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

household articles and furniture and will be energetic.
(ii) will serve in social institutions and voluntary
organizations, will be agents for government servants,
become marriage brokers and will serve in labour
welfare offices.
VII House : Pisces
Pisces, the XII sign of Kaalchakra is the VH house to Virgo* So
the Virgo asc boms tend to spy their spouses or business partners;
relationships between the partners would carry fluctuations; their
business partner would maintain secrecy towards Virgo asc
boms.
Pisces is a watery sign; so the Virgo asc boms will have spouses
or business partners who would have a tendency to change
themselves according to situations.
Pisces is a common sign; so life partners of Virgo asc boms
will have fluctuating relationships with spouses or business
partners or with their customers.
Pisces is a sign of Jupiter; so the Virgo asc boms will have
understanding and flexible life partners, business partners,
customers and popular persons of society.
If the 7* house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter,
the Virgo asc boms will have cordial and hannonious social
relationships and may live in a big joint family.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 4 & 7 to Virgo* So the Virgo
asc boms,
(i) will have social relationships with relatives and the
neighbours and will leave their lands, vehicles and
properties at the care and maintenance of relatives.
(ii) will frequently meet with unknown persons, social
workers, agents for government, marriage brokers,
public works contractors, public relations officer and
customers.
If the 7* house falls in the star of Uttarabadra, ruled by Saturn,

the Virgo asc boms will have indisciplined, untruthful, doubtful,
wavering natured spouses, business partners and customers.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 5 & 6 to Virgo* So the Virgo
asc boms,
(i) will have social relationships with lovers, artists,
painters , singers , astrologers , religious servants , priests ,
prostitutes, pimps and hermits.
( ii) will have social relationships with bank officers,
bankers, servants, patients, doctors, cooks, lawyers,
separated persons and suflfer due to contagious diseases.
If the 7* house falls in the star of Revathi, ruled by Mercury,
the Virgo asc boms will have witty, cunning and researchoriented spouses and partners; have social relationships with
mediators & educationists.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 1 & 10 to Virgo. So the
Virgo asc boms,
(i) will submit themselves to collective thoughts and listen
to others, will be successful in teamwork, become weak
due to lack of immunity, face stiff oppositions, dependent
on others in actions, suffer due to problems in lower
abdomen and uterus and. have frequent social
relationships with known persons.
( ii) will have social relationships with colleagues, executive
officers, bureaucrats, persons with authority and power,
trade unionists and dealers.
VUI House : Aries
Aries, the first sign of Kaalchakra is the VUI house to Virgo.
So the Virgo asc boms will frequently be threatened or charged
with allegations or betrayed or confused or put into disrespect.
Aries is a fiery sign leading to damages in muscles to the Virgo
asc boms; they may face assaults or meet with accidents or
commit suicide or may become mad and violent.
Aries is a movable sign; so the Virgo asc boms will have long
218 Astrologies of kaalchakra

life; their sorrows, pains, stress, problems, disrespect and
meeting with accidents would last reasonably for a longer
period.
Mars is the lord of Aries; so the Virgo asc boms will involve
themselves in petty quarrels, riots, struggles, violent activities,
false allegations, cruel accidents, raping and murders, robbery
and thefts, forgery, cheating, suicides, bomb blasts and handling
weapons besides troubles caused by their brothers.
If the 8* house falls in the star of Aswani, ruled by Ketu, the
Virgo asc boms wi 11 get into troubles by way of illegal activities;
they may also be punished by law; they tend to cause troubles
to others by black-mailing, harassing and by spreading rumours.
Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of houses 1 & 10 to
Virgo; so the Virgo asc boms,
(i) will lose self-thoughts and mental balance leading to
inactiveness, enter into struggles, suffer due to allergy,
stress, pain or amputation, will become dependent to
act and will have dejections and dissatisfactions.
(ii) will face allegations in service, become corrupt in high
posts and administrative capacity but would not hesitate
to commit cheatings and forgery; lose name and fame
and will have troubles in getting due promotions.
If the 8th house falls in the star of Bharani, ruled by Venus, the
name and feme of Virgo asc boms will be damaged by women;
involve in threatening, kidnapping and raping of women leading
to troubles and disrespect; will receive bad news hum women.
Venus happens to be the lard of houses 2 & 9 to Virgo. So the
Virgo asc boms,
(i) will get into troubles thru their speech; suffer from
allergy and will unexpectedly donate gold, valuables
and money beyond their capacity.
( ii) will be troubled in port contracts, imports and in teaching
profession, meet with fire accidents in research centres;
wind up trust and endowments, do forgery in temple
Virgo

properties, will be punished by court and the transfer
orders of Virgo asc boms will be stayed.
If the 8* house falls in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the
properties of Virgo asc boms will be seized or get damaged,
will be punished by the government, their encroachments of
common and government lands will be removed by authorities,
involve in criminal actions and meet with fire accidents.
Sun is also the lord of 12* house to Virgo. So the Virgo asc
boms will be troubled in secret plans, get dejected or cheated,
become incapable of recovering back their capitals, fall
unconscious in hospital, face break-even in financial status and
will be troubled by separated partners.
IX House : Taurus
Taurus, the II sign of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Virgo. So
the Virgo asc horns will not stick to honesty in spite of their
attempts to win confidence of others in conversations; get into
troubles with their ancestral properties and always find
themselves amidst financial troubles and worries.
Taurus is an earthy sign; so the Virgo asc boms will not like to
disclose their knowledge to the world in spite of deep knowledge
and research capacity; they will maintain relationships and
communications with foreigners and may end up as polygynists.
Taurus is a fixed sign; so the higher education, travels, life at
foreign country, research ventures, polygamy, levels of
confidence of the Virgo asc boms will remain steady and stable.
T aurus is a house of Venus: so the Virgo asc boms will involve
themselves in the fields of transport, higher education and
research of arts and culture; will arrange stages for festivals and
will have illegal affairs with foreigners or teachers.
If the 9* house falls in the star of Krittiga, mled by Sun, the
Virgo asc boms will involve themselves in the fields of religion,
departments of higher education, foreign embassy, government
research centre, finance departments and foreign organisations.
Sun is also the lord of 12* house to Virgo. So the Virgo asc
220 Astrologies of kaalchakra

boms will incur expenditure in secret affairs and new ventures;
face financial crisis, spend money on religious endowments,
become incapable of liquidating their capital, find hidden things
and study research education.
If the 9* house falls in the star of Rohini, ruled by Moon, the
Virgo asc boms will be quick in their research capacity, have
affairs with widows, find new things in research, involve
themselves in shipping or money lending and may become as
professors.
Moon is also the lord of 1 1 * house to Virgo. So the Virgo asc
boms will study post-graduate courses, hold comfortable and
honorary posts, gain success in research attempts with burning
desires, make achievements in research fields, will be fond of
taking fatty food, gain name and fame, will be active in
associations and have fortunate opportunities in life.
If the 9* house falls in the star of Mrigasira, ruled by Mars , the
Virgo asc boms will learn and study agriculture, geology,
mechanical engineering, history, archaeology, and politics and
will become head masters, transport owners, landlords and
judges on criminal litigations.
Mars is also the lord of houses 3 & 8 to Virgo . So the Virgo asc
boms,
(i) will think beyond their capacity, get press publicity to
earn goodwill, involve in the fields of information and
communication, publish books on education, show
interest in mathematics , have deep memory power, make
barter exchanges and will become mediators.
( ii ) will be threatened in illegal affairs, get cheated in their
ancestral properties, commit mistakes in research, find
difficulties in higher education, will be disturbed by
foreign agencies, fail in accords and agreements and
will be troubled in foreign journeys.
Virgo

X House : Gemini
Gemini, the III house of the Kaalchakra is the*X house to Virgo.
So the Virgo asc boms will excel in their professional life and
in the fields of communication, information, advertising,
publicity and electrical engineering.
Gemini is an airy sign; so the Virgo asc boms will serve in jobs
wherein presence of mind is a prime requirement and in the
fields of airlines, radio & TV.
Gemini is a common sign; the profession, status, honour, higher
posts of the Virgo asc boms will see many fluctuations'.
Gemini is a sign of Mercury; so the Virgo asc boms will do
business With green coloured articles, handle micro instruments
and computers, sell stationeries and notebooks, handle
measuring instruments, mercury and weighing scales, pipes, rods
and wires.
If the 10* house falls in the star of Mrigasfra, the star of Mars ,
the Virgo asc boms will hold responsible and administrative
posts in industries, fire-related professions, lands, buildings,
police and militaiy.
Mars is also the lord of houses 3 & 8 to Virgo. So the Virgo asc
boms,
(i) will be in those professions which require application
of mind beyond their capacity, act as brokers, will be in
the fields of communications and agreements and will
become printers, publishers, plumbers and electrical
staff.
(ii) will involve in criminal proceedings, deal in scraps,
modify and repair old goods and involve in thefts and
rapes.
If the 10* house falls in the star of Arudra, the star of Rahu, the
Virgo asc boms will be investigation officers: work in prisons
or foreign exchange centres or foreign employment agencies,
will be translators, magicians, shoe-makers or computer hackers.
(Readers may please include and refer the house significations
222 Astrologies of kaalchakra

of Jupiter for Rahu.)
If the 1 0th house falls in the star of Punarvasu, the star of Jupiter,
the Virgo asc boms will hold responsible and honoraiy posts in
macro-organisations, banks, child welfare organisations,
currency notes printing division, ancient memorials or gold
mines.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 4 & 7 to Virgo. So the Virgo
asc boms,
(i) will manufacture goods, will be agriculturists or
labourers in buildings and factories, will become
carpenters, cleaners and Will involve with vehicles and
automobiles, water tanks, fertilizers, grain fields, fruit
gardens, farms and godowns;
( ii) will serve in voluntaiy and social service organisations ,
will become marriage brokers or labour contractors and
will do partnership ventures.
XI House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house of Virgo. So
the Virgo asc boms will cany unlimited desires of their own
and may create litigations in their properties .
Cancer is a watery sign; so the Virgo asc boms will tend to
help others and would maintain affinity towards others besides
being joyous personalities.
Cancer is a movable sign; so the desires, happiness and
expectations of the Virgo asc boms will have multiplying and
growing in nature .
Cancer is a house of Moon; so the Virgo asc boms will have
many friends with confusing nature; will become satisfied
cheaply, will be selfish and fond of drinks.
If the 1 1 th house falls in the star of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter ,
the Virgo asc borns will have truthful, generous and
knowledgeable friends or sons-in-law and daughters-in-law and
will expect and fulfil their desires only through legal means.
Virgo

Jupiter is also the lord of houses 4 & 7 to Virgo; so the Virgo
asc boms,
(i) will make purchases according to their desires, face
litigations in their properties and frequent break-downs
in their vehicles and the articles purchased by them
would soon end up as useless.
(ii) will select spouse of their choice to many, have social
affinity and frequently meet with people of their choice.
If the 1 1th house falls in the star of Pushyam, ruled by Saturn,
the Virgo asc boms will have lazy, undisciplined, dishonest and
untruthful friends or sons-in-law; acquire properties with
litigations and would get things through dishonest means.
Saturn also happens to be the lord of houses 5 & 6 to Virgo; So
the Virgo asc boms,
(7) will have cordial relationships, enter into mutual
agreements and will be interested in the fields of arts
and culture.
(ii) will gain success in fulfilling their desires; suffer due to
vitamin deficiencies; join in the job of their choice and
will always have opportunities of success.
If the 1 1 lh house falls in the star of Aslesha, ruled by Mercury,
the Virgo asc boms will have witty friends; like micro
instruments and will read books of their choice.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 1 & 10 to Virgo. So the
Virgo asc boms,
(i) will always think about themselves with pride and have
growing desires, happily show their commitments; have
independent opinions and imaginations and will be
gluttons.
(ii) will become leaders of societies, have fortunate
opportunities and agreements, maintain secrecy in doing
things and make innovations and achievements.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

XE[ House : Leo
Leo, the V house of Kaalchakra is the XII house to Virgo, So
the Virgo asc boms will spend on secret love affairs, their
children and for drug and liquor addictions.
Leo is a fieiy sign; so the Virgo asc boms will have secret
interests, will not hesitate to involve in sabotages and will
become masochists.
Leo is a fixed sign; so the secret activities , expenditures , capital,
bed comforts and failure of metabolism of the Virgo asc boms
would remain stable.
Leo is a sign of Sun. So the Virgo asc boms will serve in the
departments of investigation, customs and excise, sales tax,
prison, audit, health, mortuary and in the offices of enforcements,
punishments and seizures.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Makha, ruled by Ketu, the
Virgo asc boms will have secret interests in illegal activities,
will carry out secret plans and secretly show their vengeance.
Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of houses 1 & 10 to
Virgo. So the Virgo asc boms,
(i) will lose physical energy, have pessimistic approach,
show frustrations in their jobs, suffer due to allergy, will
not care about self, lack imagination and will take pains
in their jobs.
(ii) will hold responsible posts secretly, accept works with
heavy workload and undertake works of dual nature.
If the 12* house falls in the star of Poorvapalguni, ruled by
Venus, the Virgo asc boms will have secret marriage or affairs,
have secret and unwritten agreements with women and will hide
things.
Venus is also the lord of houses 2 & 9.to Virgo, So the Virgo
asc boms,
Virgo

( i) will be able to collect outstanding money, suffer due to
eye-diseases and digestion problems, invest in gold and
valuables and will have secret sources of income.
(ii) will spend on social and voluntary organisations; have
secret links with foreign countries or high officials;
secretly become polygynists, have difficulties in
continuing higher education and involve in research
activities.
If the 12* house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Virgo asc boms will incur losses in their secret activities;
will become incapable of recovering their capital, benanii
properties and outstanding money; maintain secret interests and
will continue with their research activities.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Libra
General nature of the sign Libra
It is an airy, movable, masculine, singular sign; golden in colour;
long ascension; intelligent and understandable nature; It denotes
kidney and uterus in the body; semi-fruitful, higher planes and
windy places, lifeless, moving natured, early mornings, main
roads, commercial streets, popular persons, womanisers,
literature, music and drama, research, self-pride, VII sign of
Zodiac, west in direction, Ashwina in Saka or Aippasi in Tamil
calendars.
ASCENDANT RELATED SIGNIFICATIONS OF LIBRA
(a) It is an airy sign: Self-pride, sportive in nature & lack
of seriousness, lean structured, acting as if affectionate.
(b) It is a movable sign: Developing nature in anger, talents,
structure and appearance of the body, memory power,
activeness, colour and beauty.
(c) It is a house of Venus: Beautiful, attractive and glamorous
in appearance, fond of cosmetics and perfumes,
collection of gold and valuables, interested in selfbeautification and having a high sense of touch.
(d) It is VII house of Kaalchakra : Thoughtful about the
society, dependent on others, thinking always about
others and the opposite sex.
Libra

In the same manner, the remaining significations of Libra could
also be studied.
The sign Libra extends over three stars leading to the following
body natures.
L CUitra Owned by Mars: Heat borne body
2. Swath i :Owned by Rahu: Tall and broad appearance
3. Vishakha : Owned by Jupiter: Stout and fleshy body
If the asc falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the Libra
asc boms will be bold in their activities, short tempered with
self pride, will not give due respect and would not listen to others;
will be rough in appearance; will become immoral and arrogant.
Mars is also the lord of houses 2 & 7 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms,
(i) will be naturally talented with eloquent speech, will
improve their capacity and will adapt to circumstances.
(ii) will have social relations, gain social recognitions,
depend on others and will be bound by law.
If the asc falls in the star of Swathi, ruled by Rahu, the Libra
asc borns will have the habit of great thinking and acts will
suffer due to respiratory disorders, fond of excessive intake of
food, liquor, drugs and women and will become fatty with
dissimilarities in the organs of the body.
Since the node Rahu does not own any sign in Zodiac, we can
include the house significations of Jupiter for comprehension.
If the Asc falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter, the
Libra asc boms will have true and honest thoughts, will be
obedient and intelligent, earn status, will be self-confident and
will be flexible with others.
Jupiter happens to be the lord of houses 3 & 6 to Libra. So the
Libra asc boms,
(i) will have intelligence and capacity, show self-efforts
with confidence, have courage, will be informative, will
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

become messengers, have inclination towards education
and will not hesitate to adapt to the requirements.
(ii) will become successful in efforts, may face marital
separation, will have sound health, practice medicines,
exercise personal labour and exhibit style in dressing
and dining.
II House : Scorpio
Scorpio, the VIII sign of Kaalchakra is the II house to Libra.
So the Libra asc boms tend to use vulgar words; get into troubles
by way of their controversial, self-contradictory, untruthful and
irritating speech.
Scorpio is a watery and fixed sign; so the Libra asc boms will
be artificial in their speech and dominantly try to establish false
things as truth with their eloquent speech.
Since it is a house mled by Mars, the Libra asc boms will not
hesitate for wordy duels and involve in false propaganda about
others.
III House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the IX sign of Kaalchakra is the HI house to Libra.
So the Libra asc boms will become more social and will have
more public relationships.
This house is a common and fiery sign; So the Libra asc boms
will show arrogance in their behaviour, will face instability in
communications and will enter into short-term agreements.
Since Sagittarius is a house of Jupiter, the Libra asc boms
will have needed courage and confidence for success and will
be interested in martial arts.
IV House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the X sign of Kaalchakra is the IV house to Libra.
So the Libra asc boms will show interest in studying about
lands, vehicles, machineries, manufacturing, automobiles and
education.
Tibra

Since it is an earthy and movable sign, the Libra asc boms will
show increased interest in their studies.
It is a house of Saturn . So the Libra asc boms will excel in arts
and beautician courses.
V House : Aquarius
Aquarius , the XI house of Kaalchakra is the V house to Libra .
So the Libra asc boms tend to fall in love with elderly persons
or with people living in the same apartments or compounds or
with people within family or sub-sect; they may have frustrations
in their sexual life and they tend to be indecent and perverted in
sexual affairs.
Since this is an airy and fixed sign, the Libra asc boms will
show interest with greediness and will not be sincere to others.
It is a house of Saturn. So the Libra asc boms will have
dissatisfactions in many aspects of their life and would like to
lead their life like a sanyasi.
VI House : Pisces
Pisces, the XU house of Kaalchakra is the VI house to Libra.
So the Libra asc boms will have short legs and suffer due to
vitamin deficiencies or in service-related diseases; they may
fail in court cases regarding their service matters and serve in
posts with easy workload.
This is a watery and common sign. So the Libra asc boms will
suffer due to excessive fats or liquids in the body; gain success
but only after undue expenditure and show fluctuations and
uncompromising attitudes in their activities.
Since it is a house of Jupiter, the Libra asc boms will suffer
due to secret diseases in nerves and blood vessels; enter into
litigations in their professions and in investments.
VII House : Aries
Aries, the I sign of Kaalchakra is the VE house to Libra. So the
Libra asc boms will have social relations with popular persons
Astrologies of kaalchakra

and people belonging to higher status; they will have dominating
spouses/business partners and will depend on others.
This house is a movable and fiery sign; so the Libra asc boms
will have long standing relations and will deploy their spouses/
business partners to administer and assist in their ventures.
Since Aries is a house of Mars, the Libra asc boms will torture
their life partners or people belonging to opposite sex; expect
undue gains from their life partners and will lack social
discipline.
Vin House : Taurus
Taurus, the II sign of Kaalchakra is the VIII house to Libra. So
the Libra asc bom will suffer due to eye-diseases and will always
have troubles in the matters of money and valuables.
Taurus is a fixed but earthy sign. So the Libra asc boms will
have to face problems of one kind or the other and will not
hesitate to commit forgery.
Taurus is a house of Venus; so the Libra asc boms will show
anger and hastiness and will tend to get confused by taking
personal pains.
IX House : Gemini
Gemini, the HI sign of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Libra. So
the Libra asc boms will excel in higher studies and in the
faculties of information and communication, accounting and
auditing, transport, imports and exports.
Since Gemini is a common and airy sign, the Libra asc boms
will study at foreign countries. They will excel in advertising,
research education, accountancy and auditing, will become
writers and will enter into agreements full of fluctuations.
Since Gemini is a house of Mercury, the Libra asc boms will
excel in the fields of trade and foreign exchange, financial
management, international affairs and religious endowments.
Libra

X House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV house of Kaalchakra is the X house to Libra.
So the Libra asc boms will gain status and respect in the fields
of land, transport, automobile, machinery, agriculture, farms,
gardens, wells and water reservoirs.
Cancer is a movable and watery sign; so the Libra asc boms
will use their influences of status, respect and authority for their
professional needs.
Cancer is the house of Moon. So the Libra asc boms will gain
status through sudden professional ventures.
XI House : Leo
Leo, the V house of Kaalchakra is the XI house to Libra. So
the Libra asc bom will become polygynists and will have desires
in art, culture and sports fields.
Leo is a fixed and fiery sign; So the Libra asc boms will have
never ending sexual desires.
Since Leo is the house of Sun, the Libra asc boms will find
many friends among government servants.
XII House : Virgo
Virgo, the VI house of Kaalchakra is the XII house to Libra.
So the Libra asc boms will become debtors due to secret
activities and suffer due to secret diseases.
Since Virgo is an earthy and common sign, the Libra asc boms
will show fluctuations in their secret activities and will show
interest in archealogy and m finding the secrets of nature.
Virgo is a house of Mercury. So the Libra asc boms will visit
many foreign countries, spend on religious matters, have illegal
and multiple affairs and will have research minds.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

SIGNIFICATIONS OF LIBRA UNRELATED TO ASCENDANT
II House : Scorpio
Scorpio, the VHI sign of Kaalchakra is the II house to Libra.
So the Libra asc boms will be troubled frequently in their
financial matters; they would not hesitate to accept bribes and
would improve their financial status against moral codes.
Scorpio is a watery sign; so the Libra asc boms would easily
be able to mobilize finance from multiple sources.
Since Scorpio is a fixed sign, gold and other valuables,
diamonds, documents and money would remain permanent in
the hands of Libra asc boms.
Since Scorpio is a house of Mars, the Libra asc boms are
spendthrifts, will not hesitate to tell lies for financial gains,
dishonest in financial matters, like to wear coral ornaments and
possess valuable metals.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Libra asc boms will have See flow of finance, disclose
truth in financial matters, have jewellery shops, run private banks
and own gold and other valuables.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 3 & 6 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms,
(i) will gain through writings and publications of religious
and medical articles, gain through courage and
intelligence, gain confidence through money, change
themselves for want of money and gain through
infonnation, communications and transfers.
( ii) will gain by winning competitions, get medical subsidy
or claims, gain through food articles, tailoring, rents,
hire articles, manufacturing of medicines, court cases,
salary and manual labour and in money exchanges.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Anuradha, ruled by Saturn,
the Libra asc boms will be misers, gain small and meagre
amounts and like to seize valuables from others.
Tibia 233

Saturn is the lord of houses 4 & 5 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) gain through education, vegetables and fruits, grain
fields, farms and by taking lease of ponds and water
reservoirs.
(ii) gain through shares, religious rituals and devotional
services, arts, cultural activities, sports, intelligence,
imagination, prostitution, beauty and in love affairs.
If the II house falls in the star of Jyeshta, ruled by Mercury, the
Libra asc boms will gain through witty speeches, mimicry and
by rendering commentaries , green ish stones , micro-instruments
and negotiable instruments.
Mercury is the lord of houses 9 & 12 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms,
(i) will gain from ancestral properties, name and fame,
honesty, education, leadership, research, foreigners,
sending messages, religious service, endowments,
transplantations , legal proceedings , agreements , temple
properties and ancient monuments.
( ii) will gain in secret activities or by hoardings or through
their own savings, regain properties that were lost, will
be able to recollect outstanding amounts and by losing
organs.
Ill ’House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the IX house to Kaalchakra is the ED house to Libra.
So the Libra asc boms will think much about informations,
communications and illegal affairs.
Sagittarius is a fiery house, the Libra asc boms will be bold,
courageous and confident in communications but will also be
arrogant in actions.
Sagittarius is a common sign, the Libra asc boms will see
fluctuations in their courage, confidence, communications, blood
vessels, writings, intelligence and transfers.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Sagittarius is a house of Jupiter, the Libra asc boms will enter
into legal agreements, issuance of legal notices and legal orders;
deal in documents, stamps and cheques.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Moola, ruled by Ketu, the
Libra asc boms will involve in forging documents and cheques,
spreading rumours, filing criminal cases, misappropriation of
accounts and writing anonymous letters.
Ketu, the node does not own any sign; it acts like Mercury, the
lord of houses 9 & 12 to Libra. So the Libra asc boms will,
(i) enter into reliable agreements and money exchanges,
get certified in higher education, enjoy fame, receive
orders for holding higher posts, maintain affinity towards
foreigners, send messages, involve in government
religious endowments, make transplantation of organs,
have international contacts, become clerks in legal
departments, negotiate for endowments, act as guides
in ancient monuments and take lease of temple
properties.
( ii ) gain information in secret activities , lose physical energy,
lose evidences that were kept secret, gain documents
for outstanding money, lose documents against savings,
lose belongings and will permanently separate from
family subsequent to temporary separations.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Poorvashada, ruled by Venus,
the Libra asc boms Will get happy information, contacts , letters ,
agreements and brokerage, write with imagination and involve
in cine fields.
Venus is also the loid of houses I & 8 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) record self-thoughts in diary, have courageous thoughts,
excellent functioning of nerves , blood vessels and ENT,
show their physical strength and will perform as they
wish.
(ii) seize properties through harass ments, steal documents
and research notes, sell old articles, write obscene or
Libra

threatening letters, enter into agreements to murder,
work in accident wards or hospital mortuary, accept
bribes, work in anti-corruption wing, provide false
information, have sudden mental changes subsequent
to black-magic and cheatings, will involve in insurance
documents.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Uttaiashada, ruled by Sun^ the
Libra asc boms will involve in government orders, serve in
government departments of information and communication,
have authority to represent government and will have the details
of the state/country.
Since Sun is also the lord of the 1 1th house to Libra, the Libra
asc boms will keep things greedily, receive happy news, involve
in happy discussions, get due recognition through societies, have
personal likings, get fortunate information, get certified for
success and achievements and will be blessed with friends of
their choice.
IV House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the X house of the Kaalchakra is the IV house to
Libra. So the Libra asc boms will find their professions in the
fields of land, house, buildings, vehicles, machinery and
manufacturing; mostly they will live in or near their professional
addresses and in the first part of commercial streets.
Capricorn is an earthy sign; so the Libra asc boms will do
agriculture and will have pet animals.
Capricorn is a movable sign meaning the developments of
education, house, lands, vehicles, machinery and belongings of
the Libra asc boms.
Saturn is the lord of the sign, Capricorn. So the Libra asc
boms will own mines, old buildings, village common lands,
wooden articles, black coloured articles, oil seeds and clay
articles.
If the 4* house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun, the
Libra asc borns will live in government buildings, have
Astrologies of kaalchakra

government vehicles, study in government institutions, own
village common lands, may work in forest departments,
automobile divisions of the government, take lease of common
ponds, wells, water tanks; have government machinery,
properties, agricultural lands or godowns for storing grain fields.
Sun is the lord of 1 1 th house to Libra, So the Libra asc boms
will accumulate properties with greediness, build bungalows,
organise clubs, construct buildings through societies or unions,
have fortunate house or articles, get gift articles through success,
make achievements in productions and will enjoy the visits of
dear friends.
If the 4* house falls in the star of Shravana, ruled by Moon, the
Libra asc boms will live near water reservoirs and dams,
agricultural lands; will own boats, refrigerators; produce
vegetables and fruits with excessive water content.
Moon is the lord of the 10th house; so the Libra asc boms will
be landlords; own industries, will be responsible for government
documents, hold responsible posts in administrative capacity
and will earn name and fame.
If the 4* house falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars, the
Libra asc boms will have to be forced during primaiy education
and will be interested in land, house and vehicles, will be
interested in agriculture and production of livestock and will
work with chemicals and fertilizers.
Mars is also the lord of houses 2 & 7 to Libra, So the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) purchase valuable and household articles, purchase gold
and other valuables, construct bungalows and will
possess things as personal.
( ii) become a member of society, live in quarters, get lands
or houses as donations from government, have
understanding spouse in joint family, purchase properties
through loans fiom banks and will rejoin with guests or
partners.
Tibra

V House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI sign of Kaalchakra is the V house to Libra.
So the Libra asc boms will have healthy children, cordial love
affairs and will excel in the fields of arts and culture.
Aquarius is an airy sign; so the Libra asc boms will excel as
comedy artists, story-wr iters, spoilsmen and riddle-makers.
Aquarius is a fixed sign; so the number of blood cells, wisdom
and knowledge, artistic interests, children, faith in god of the
Libra asc boms would remain stable and steady.
Since Saturn is the lord of this sign, the Libra asc boms will
have sexual affairs with people belonging to lower strata, become
insincere in love affairs, will not hesitate to involve in
prostitution, become sanyasis, excel in sober characters, have
lazy children and may become guards at temples and ponds.
If the 5* house fells in the star of Dhanishta, mled by Mars , the
Libra asc boms will be arrogant m sexual affairs, have children
with unusual sexual interests, act with obscenity, will not have
faith in god and may become sculptors, painters, boxers or filthy
dancers.
Mars is also the lord of houses 2 & 7 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) purchase artistically valuable goods, musical records or
useful musical instruments or golden ornaments, gain
commissions, maintain and arrange house or office or
things in an artistic manner and learn arts without any
purpose.
(ii) maintain cordial relations with society, live in
government quarters for artists, get musical instruments
as donations from government, have guest houses,
associate in voluntary organizations , rejoin with partners
and would go for love marriage.
If the 5* house falls in the star of Shathabishamr mled by Rahu,
the Libra asc boms will have sexual affairs with foreigners,
will do prostitution in foreign countries, have intentions to
Astrologies of kaalchakra

gamble, become swimmers or sprinters and may become
addicted to drinks.
( Since Rahu does not own any house , the significations of house
owned by Jupiter could be included for comprehensive study)
If the 5* house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter,
the Libra asc boms will have religious interests, faith in god,
god-fearing children with discipline, will be true to their love
affairs, become priests, politicians or religious servants, excel
in arts with intuition and wisdom and cany blessings of god.
Jupiter is the lord of the houses 3 & 6 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) get press publicity, publish books on arts, serve in
advertising agencies; will be educated and qualified in
the fields of arts and culture, get transfer Orders of their
choice, excel in artistic fields wherein mind plays a vital
role and will become doctors for artificial fertilization.
(ii) run competitive centres of arts and culture, become
paediatricians, involxe in diagnosis of blood ceHs,
become nurses or servants in cinema theatres, prepare
feasts, become costume designer, manufacture natural
medicines, work for commissions, reside in lodges and
become orators.
VI House : Pisces
Pisces, the XII sign of Kaalchakra is the VI house to Libra. So
the Libra asc boms will make undue expenditures in their
professional fields, clear debts through additional borrowings
and will have to acquire loans to meet out expenditures regarding
court cases, diseases and on behalf of their servants.
Pisces is a watery sign leading to water-borne diseases to Libra
asc boms; they may serve in the fields wherein liquids are used.
Pisces is a common sign; so the libra asc boms will experience
fluctuations in the fields of food, dresses, medicines, debts,
success, litigations, service conditions, diseases and functioning
of digestive system.
Libra

Pisces is house of Jupiter. So the Libra asc boms will serve in
big organisations, banks, medical institutions and legal
departments; frequently attend feasts, fond of fatty foods, suffer
due to cholesterol and cell diseases, get loans through
recommendations of popular persons and have opportunities to
preside over public functions.
If the 6th house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter,
the lord of houses 3 & 6 to Libra, the Libra asc boms will,
(i) get publicity about their success, publish books on
profession, work (may be as clerks) in the fields of
infomiation, communication and advertising, enter into
professional agreements, get appointment or transfer
orders, work in fields of their personal choice and will
confidently increase production.
(ii) serve in centres for competitive examinations or in
hospitals, will do tailoring or weaving or become chefs,
serve in lodges or in legal departments (labour courts).
If the 6* house falls in the star of Uttarabadra, ruled by Saturn,
the Libra asc boms will do subordinate or class IV jobs, work
for daily wages or as office boys in tailoring shops, textile shops,
medical shops and law offices, become announcers, suffer due
to skin diseases and could get loans only in small amounts.
Since Saturn is the lord of houses 4 & 5 to Libra, the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) serve mostly for daily wages in the fields of lands,
houses, livestock, vehicles and buildings, become cooks,
teachers, household manufacturers, furniture makers and
will arrange stages for music and dance programs.
(ii) serve in stock exchanges, chant Vedas on the occasions
of religious rituals, manufacture sports goods, become
pimps or proof readers of books on arts, serve in sports
centres or auditoriums, marriage registration offices or
prostitution dens or in liquor bars.
If the 6th house falls in the star of Revathi, ruled by Mercury,
240 Astrologies ofkaalchakra

the Libra asc boms will serve mostly as accountants in
commercial centres; become collectors of money or taxes,
contractors for labour, computer operators , neurologists, printers
and hire-purchase agents.
Mercury is the lord of houses 9 & 12 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) become contractors in ports, work in personnel or
research departments, become educationists or priests
and may serve in trusts, temples, foreign agencies, courts
of law, panchayat offices or archaeological offices.
(ii) acquire loans through secret plans, clear debts by
acquiring further loans, regain what was lost, serve in
hospitals, become inactive due to diseases, have
breakeven in income and expenditures and will be sued
by separated partner.
VII House : Aries
Aries, the first sign of Kaalchakra is the VII house to Libra. So
the Libra asc boms will show more affinity towards their
spouses and would mostly depend on them adding to the selfpride and egoistic attitudes of their spouses and business partners.
Aries is a fiery sign; so the spouses and business partners of
Libra asc boms would mostly be with immoral characters with
excessive interest in sexual affairs.
Aries is a movable sign; it reflects the developments of spouses ,
business partners and customers; it also ensures a high sense of
touch for Libra asc boms.
Aries is the sign of Mars. So the Libra asc boms will have
immoral and arrogant spouses and business partners who will
threaten public and will be compelled to seek assistance foam
others.
If the 7th house falls in the star of Aswani, ruled by Ketu, the
Libra asc boms will have spouses and business partners with
cunningness and meet with criminals.
Libra

Ketu does not own any sign but will act like Mercury, the lord
of houses 9 & 12 to Libra. So the Libra asc boms will,
(i) have social contacts with politicians, foreigners,
exporters, judges, priests, trustees and teachers and with
people of lower social standing.
(ii) often meet with thieves, with people who know the
secrets of Libra asc boms and would be threatened by
them, have social contacts with people who are going
to cause losses and with people who would help them
in investments.
If the 7* house falls in the star of Bharani, ruled by Venus, the
Libra asc boms will have attractive spouses and business
partners, meet with persons of joy and have enthusiastic
customers or women.
Venus is the lord of houses I & 8 to Libra. So the Libra asc
boms will,
(i) abide by collective thoughts and become successful,
listen to others, suffer due to contagious diseases in
kidneys, uterus and abdomen regions, inactive due to
deficiency of immunity power, face growing
oppositions, lack independence in actions , bring enmity
in their actions and often meet with persons known to
them.
(ii) meet with cheating criminals, enemies, murderers,
thieves, terrorists, agents for bribery and insurance
officials.
If the 7* house falls in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the
Libra asc boms will mostly meet with government officials
and public servants and will have life/business partners with
arrogance and self-pride.
Sun is the lord of 11th house to Libra. So the Libra asc boms
will meet with people of their choice, have true and sincere
friends and meet with elderly people who would show interest
, HI personal developments of Libra asc boms.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

VIII House : Taurus
Taurus , the II sign of Kaalchakra is the VIII house to Libra. So
the Libra asc boms will face threatening, allegations, disrespect,
confusions in financial matters.
Taurus is an earthy sign. So the Libra asc boms will face
dejections in family relations and face troubles due to natural
calamities such as earthquakes, landslides etc.
Taurus is a fixed sign; so the Libra asc boms will have long
life but will permanently be endangered with accidents, stress,
pain, disrespect and worries.
Taurus is a house of Venus. So the Libra asc borhs will be put
into disrespect by women, threaten and be troubled by women,
lose happiness and abduct women.
If the 8* house falls in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the
Libra asc boms will seize government documents, their
properties will be seized by government, live in government
buildings, will face damages to properties , will be punished by
government, involve in criminal activities or may get into fireaccidents.
Sun is also the lord of 1 1th house to Libra. So the Libra asc
boms will suffer due to greediness, will be harassed in lodges,
misappropriate funds in societies, have troubles in fulfilling
desires, experience turn of fortunes into misfortunes, misfortunes
in their employment opportunities and will face dejections in
their desires.
If the 8* house falls in the star of Rohini, ruled by Moon, the
Libra asc boms will face mental distress , become unconscious,
have lack of knowledge and education, will be troubled by water,
suffer due to water-borne diseases, lose sense and will involve
in immoral activities.
Moon is also the lord of !0tH house to Libra. So the Libra asc
boms will be alleged in service, become corrupt while holding
high offices, have administrative capacity, will do forgery, lose
name, fame and status in service and will be blocked in getting
promotions.
TibFa " ~ 535

If the 8th house falls in the star of Mrigasira, ruled by Mars, the
Libra asc horns wi 1 1 enter into quarrels, riots, struggles, violence,
terrorist activities, make false allegations, will suffer police or
military actions, will be troubled by brothers, handle weapons
and will be injured in bomb blasts and will not hesitate to murder,
rob, cheat or commit suicides.
Mars is also the lord of houses 2 & 7 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) have troubles in talks, suffer due to allergy and will
donate money, gold and other valuables beyond their
capacity.
(ii) involve in immoral activities and corruption in voluntary
and social institutions, invite enmity from officials, face
marital dejections, will be cheated by partners, will be
put into disrespect by enemies or spouses and face threats
on life.
IX House : Gemini
Gemini, the III sign of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Libra. So
the Libra asc boms will pose as reliable persons, may have
illegal affairs with neighbours, excel in transports, agreements,
negotiations and may not possess their ancestral properties for
long.
Gemini is an airy sign; so the Libra asc boms will excel in
higher education, have research capacity and will be professors,
teachers and transporters.
Gemini is a common sign. So the Libra asc boms will see
fluctuations and instability in their higher education, research
and confidence; will make frequent foreign trips.
Gemini is a sign of Mercury. So the Libra asc boms will mostly
become clerks in research centres, teachers in high schools,
counsellors, lawyers, mathematicians, import & export agents,
statisticians and will serve in foreign embassies.
If the 9* house falls in the star of Mrigasira, ruled by Mars, the
Libra asc boms will excel in agricultural education, geology,
Astrologies of kaalchakra

mechanical engineering, history, and archaeology and may
become politicians, head masters, transport owners, landlords,
criminal lawyers and judges.
Mars is also the lord of houses 2 & 7 to Libra, So the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) be soft-spoken with understanding, gain ancestral gold
and valuables as money and will get money or valuables
as gifts.
(ii) show affinity towards officials and show morality and
discipline in social institutions, get government
recognition to their social institutions, may go for second
marriage, may have affairs with younger sister of wife
and will be seduced to immoial affairs by the opposite
sex.
If the 9* house falls in the star of Arudra, ruled by Rahu, the
Libra asc boms will be researchers of drug addictions, experts
of transplantation surgeries, implant artificial organs, will be
preachers of religion, work in grain godowns belonging to
foreign countries, involve in institutes of international cultural
activities and will teach foreign languages.
( Since the node Rahu does not own any sign of Zodiac, the
significations of houses owned by Jupiter could be included for
a comprehensive study)
If the 9* house falls in the star of Punarvasu, mled by Jupiter,
the Libra asc boms will excel in higher education, teaching
profession, become professors, financial controllers, temple
executive officers, ambassadors, temple trustees and exporters,
redefine religious, moral and legal practices, perform
reincarnation rites with wisdom and knowledge.
Jupiter is also the loid of houses 3 & 6 to Libra, So the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) think beyond their capacity, publish books on education,
show interest in mathematics, have memory power,
make barter exchanges, have excessive growth in body
organs, involve in the fields of information and
Tibra

communication and become mediators or researchers.
(ii) be supervisors for competitive exams, suffer due to
hereditary disorders, illegal affairs and malfunctioning
of medicines, become medical personnel, have excessive
food intakes, do joint ventures in medical research, make
mutual agreements with multi-national organisations,
divorce second wife or disconnect illegal affairs and face
allegations while residing in lodges.
X House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Libra* So
the Libra asc boms will excel in professional fields of land,
vehicle, automobile and machinery.
Cancer is a watery sign; so the Libra asc boms would work in
the fields of ports, bridges, water reservoirs and agriculture.
Since Cancer is a movable sign, profession, status, honour and
authority of the libra asc boms will always show an upward
trend.
Cancer is a house of Moon; so the libra asc boms will involve
in the professional fields of water, liquids, medicines, ports,
shipping , boating , plumbing , fishing , imports and exports , retail
sales and in wells.
If the 1 0th house falls in the star* of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter,
the Libra asc boms will hold responsible posts, serve in
childrens’ welfare societies, hold honorary posts and serve in
gold mines and centres of ancient monuments and national
museums.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 3 & 6 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) do those.professions in which they have to apply their
thoughts beyond their capacity, involve in the fields of
brokerage, infonnation & communications, printing &
publishing; accountants and bill collectors, electricians,
plumbers, messengers, sellers of goods and assistants
etc.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

(ii) serve in competitive centres, become doctors, nurses,
medical examiners, manufacturers of medical goods,
food processors, dress ‘makers, lawyers, livestock
producers, daily labourers or financiers.
If the 1 0th house fails in the star of Pushyam, ruled by Saturn,
the Libra asc boms will work as office boys especially in police
or militaiy , come up in life from lower stages and will deal with
old goods.
Saturn is the lord of houses 4 & 5 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) become manufacturers, agriculturalists, construction
workers, factory workers, carpenters, drivers, cleaners,
electricians, fertilizer makers, boiler workers, workers
in grain fields, farms, Suit gardens or godowns.
(ii) become pimps, priests, tour planners for pilgrimages,
religious preachers , actors , astrologers , singers , painters
and gynaecologists.
If the 10th house falls in the star of Aslesha, ruled by Mercury,
the Libra asc boms will do business in the fields of micro
instruments, scales, pipes, rods, wires, greenish articles,
stationery, calculators and computers.
Mercury is the lord of houses 9 & 12 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) serve in social service institutions, voluntary
organisations, trusts, temples, courts, ports and foreign
embassies, enter into agreements with governmentofficials, will be exporters, judges, leaders, professors,
teachers, scientists, researchers, religious servants and
communication experts etc.
(ii) do business with s^creL contacts, will do dual and
research oriented professions, spend for and invest in
professions and ^eret interests in new professions.
Libra

XI House : Leo
Leo, the V sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house to Libra. So the
Libra asc boms will give importance only to their personal
satisfactions. They tend to show more interest in festivals, feasts
and romance etc.
Leo is a fiery sign. So the friends of Libra asc boms will have
self-pride and arrogance. The Libra asc boms will be greedy in
their needs.
Leo is a fixed sign. So the desires, happiness and expectations
of the Libra asc boms will remain static and permanent.
Leo is ruled by Sun. So the Libra asc boms will involve in
government societies, friendship forums, feasts, guest houses
and co-operative societies, and get government recognitions and
subsidies and will encourage and assist others.
If the 1 1th house falls in the star of Makha, mled by Ketu? the
Libra asc boms will fulfil their desires through illegal means,
cany expectations, have criminals as friends, sons-in-law and
elder brothers.
Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of houses 9 & 12. So the
Libra asc boms will,
(i) have contacts with social service institutes and higher
officials, undertake foreign journeys and higher
education of their choice have international contacts and
enter into agreements.
(ii) be happy by way of secret contacts, invest in the fields
of their choice, have secret interests through friends,
disclose (ruths and will gain success in research fields.
I f the 1 ! * house falls in the star of Poorvapalguni, ruled by Venus,
the Libra asc boms will become the happiest persons and have
happiest persons as friends, sons-in-law and elder brothers.
Venus is also the lord of houses 1 & 8 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms will,
(i) think much about themselves, have excessive vitamins,
Astrologies of kaalchakra

selfish and greedy, have self-pride, show happy and
harmonious interests, have independent thoughts and
imagination, change themselves in actions and enjoy
tasting food.
(ii) have problems and troubles in their interests, will be
tense , have dejections and will be hasty with wavering
minds.
If the 1 1th house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun, the
Libra asc boms will involve in government societies, friendship
forums, feasts, guest houses and co-operative societies, get
government recognitions and subsidies and encourage and assist
others.
Sun is the lord of 1 1th house to Libra. So the Libra asc boms
will become leaders in societies, enter into agreements in
societies, have fortunes and fortunate agreements, maintain
secrecy in their activities, develop new and novel methods and
thus would make achievements.
XII House : Virgo
Virgo, the VI sign of Kaalchakra is the XII house to Libra. So
the Libra asc boms will spend on their investments, litigations,
medical expenses by acquiring loans. They will always have a
breakeven in their income and expenditure.
Virgo is an earthy sign; so the Libra asc boms will have to
spend on litigations, loans and medical treatments.
Virgo is a common sign; so the Libra asc boms will spend on
secret activities; their expenses, investments, body functions
would carry fluctuations.
Virgo is a sign of Mercury. So the Libra asc boms will invent
micro-instruments, keep secret notes, accounts, photographs and
documents and will never hesitate to involve in adulterations
and secret agreements.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, mled by Sun,
the Libra asc borns will serve in the departments of
investigations, customs, sales tax, auditing and accounts, prisons,
Tibra 249

government hospitals, mortuary and public seizure.
Sun happens to be the lord of 1 J * house to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms will show secret activities in societies, fail in their
achievements, hide new and novel methods and will see failures
in agreements with societies.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Hastha, ruled by Moon, the
Libra asc borns will make fast and quick expenditures,
undertake sea-journeys and hoard liquid articles.
Moon is the lord of X house to Libra. So the Libra asc boms
will hold offices with secret responsibilities and heavy woik
load with multiple job natures.
If the XU house falls in the star of Chitra, mled by Mars, the
Libra asc boms will involve in immoral activities such as
hoardings; adulterations, prostitution and smuggling etc. They
may work in operation theatres or in investigation departments.
Mars is also the lord of houses 2 & 7 to Libra. So the Libra
asc boms will,
( i) regain outstanding money, suffer due to d iseases in eyes
and digestive system, invest in gold and valuables and
have secret sources of income .
( ii) live away from society, separate from opposite sex and
have a despicable attitude towards others. They may
marry foreigners.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

Scorpio
General nature of the sign Scorpio
It is a watery, fixed and feminine sign; even sign; black in colour;
long ascension; calm, authority and pride, intelligent and
grasping in nature; capability of expression to share knowledge;
It denotes the sexual organs of the body; fruitful, lively sign,
multi-legged, compound walls and toilets in the buildings, wells,
drainage channels, muddy places, butchery, slaughter houses,
meat markets, graveyard, iron godown, chemical laboratory,
operation theatre, VIII sign of Zodiac, west in direction, noon
of the day, Karthika in Saka or Karthigai in Tamil calendars.
ASCENDANT RELATED SIGNIFICATIONS OF SCORPIO
(a) It is a Watery sign t Result-oriented thoughts and acts,
mentally committed to their deeds, could not be
understood by others, composed as a puzzle in nature.
(b) It is a fixed sign : Take concrete decisions and mental
strength.
(c) It is a house of Mars :Fond of sex, rough and violent in
appearance, short-tempered, disrespect to others,
arrogance, addiction to drugs, argumentative.
(d) It is VIII house ofKaalchakra .‘Opposite and perverted
thoughts and acts, creating fear by way of appearance,
criminal intentions, excessive interest in sexual
pleasures, addictions to bad habits, pain and stress in
Scorpio
t

the body, short-tempered and have suicidal tendencies
and revengeful nature.
In the same manner, the remaining significations of Scorpio
could also be studied.
The sign Scorpio extends over three stars leading to the
following body natures.
1. Vishakha: Owned by Jupiter; Fatty body.
2. Annradha: Owned by Saturn: Rough skin and strong hair.
3 . Jyeshta: Owned by Mercury: Strong nerves and lean body.
If the asc falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter, the
Scorpio asc boms will excel in religious preaching, arts and
songs, will be calm in nature and soft and divine in appearance
and will be fair-complexioned.
If the asc falls in the star of Anuradha, mled by Saturn, the
Scorpio asc boms will be crude in their appearance, will be
black-complexioned, will be lazy and cowardly, doubtful and
unhesitant to tell lies, will carry mental inclination towards
education and may remain as atheists.
If the asc falls in the star of Jyeshta, ruled by Mercury, the
Scorpio asc boms will be witty, dangerous and selfish in nature,
easily depressed during failures and might attempt to commit
suicides.
There is a set of significations in each house that is
complementary to asc as given below:
II House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the IX house of Kaalchakra is the II house, the
Scorpio asc boms will mostly speak truth and their blessings
would be treated by others as holy sayings. The Scorpio asc
boms will have capability to express in research fields with
authority and will have fatty eyes.
Sagittarius is a fiery sign; so they tend to change voice or tones
and will be good in mimicry.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Since Sagittarius is a common sign, the Scorpio asc boms will
be eloquent with witty and double-meaning speech with a high
degree of modulation.
Since Sagittarius is a sign of Jupiter, the lord of houses 2 & 5
to Scorpio, the Scorpio asc boms will excel in the fields of arts
and find themselves among the company of popular saints and
personalities.
Ill House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the X house of Kaalchakra is the ID house; the
Scorpio asc boms will be courageous in their professional
ventures.
Since Capricorn is an earthy sign, the Scorpio asc boms will
make professional publicity through their courage and
confidence.
Since Capricorn is a movable sign, their courage and confidence
will grow day by day.
Since it is a house of Saturn, the Scorpio asc boms will at
times become cowards, show fluctuations of mind and have
needed inclination towards education.
IV House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI house of Kaalchakra is the IV house to
Scorpio. So the Scorpio asc boms will be educated in their
fields of interest .
Since it is an airy sign, the Scorpio asc borns will be interested
in the fields of science and mathematics.
Since it is a fixed sign, the Scorpio asc boms will show strenuous
and consistent efforts in education.
Since it is a house of Saturn, the ruler of houses of 3 & 4 to
Scorpio, the Scorpio asc boms will complete their education
only after facing a few difficulties and discontinuities.
Scorpio

V House : Pisces
Pisces, the XII house of Kaalchakra is the V house to Scorpio.
So the Scorpio asc boms will have secrecy with their own
children and in their love affairs; have capabilities to undertake
research in the fields of arts, culture, theology, astrology and
literature.
Pisces is a watery sign, so the Scorpio asc boms will get fruitful
results in their fields of research.
Pisces is a common sign, the Scorpio asc boms will have a
mind to spend too much of their time and energy to make changes
in their fields of research.
Since it is a house of Jupiter, ruler of houses 2 & 5 to Scorpio,
the Scorpio asc boms will establish cordial relationships with
popular saints and will have eloquence in the field of theology.
VI House : Aries
Aries, the first sign of Kaalchakra, is the VI house to Scorpio.
So the Scorpio asc boms will become successful through selfefforts and are generally disease-prone to lose energy in their
painful self efforts.
Since Aries is a fiery sign, the Scorpio asc boms will generally
suffer due to diseases caused by excessive heat and could win
only after prolonged struggles .
Aries is a movable sign, their diseases would grow at a faster
rate.
Since it is a house of Mars, the ruler of houses 1 & 6 to Scorpio ,
the Scorpio asc boms will suffer due to muscle pains, swellings
and growths.
VU House : Taurus
Taurus, the II sign of Kaalchakra is the VII house to Scorpio.
So the Scorpio asc boms will often meet with gold and diamond
merchants, financiers, bankers, treasurers.
Astrologies of kaalch akra

Taurus is an earthy sign, so the persons who meet the Scorpio
asc boms will be adjustable and flexible and will show affinity
towards them.
Taurus is a fixed sign, so the social relationships of the Scorpio
asc boms would last long.
Taurus is a house of Venus, the ruler of honses 7 & 12, so the
Scorpio asc boms will often be troubled by secret enemies.
VIII House : Gemini
Gemini, the III sign of Kaalchakra is the VIII house to Scorpio.
So the Scorpio asc boms will always carry mental depressions
and dejections. They may meet with accidents during short or
return journeys.
Since Gemini is an airy sign, the Scorpio asc boms will often
be troubled by gas problems and will ipse respect due to selfpride.
Since it is a common sign, the troubles and mental worries of
the Scorpio asc boms would not be constant.
Since Gemini is house of Mercury, the ruler of houses 8 & 1 1
to Scorpio, the Scorpio asc boms will have sudden pleasures
and pleasant surprises. Since Mercury is the Karaka planet for
uncles, the reputation of the Scorpio asc boms would be
damaged by them.
IX House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV house of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Scorpio.
So the Scorpio asc boms will face difficulties in continuing
their higher education; they may face threats in their illegal
affairs.
Since Cancer is a movable and watery sign, the Scorpio asc
boms will be benefited through their higher studies. They tend
to continue their studies for long.
Since Cancer is the house of Moon, the Scorpio asc boms will
get informations at a faster speed and undertake speedy journeys
and research attempts.
Scorpio 255

X House : Leo
Leo, the V sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Scorpio. So the
Scorpio asc boms will gain respect and professional status in
the fields of arts and culture.
Leo is a fixed sign; so the Scorpio asc boms will stabilize their
professional status.
Since Leo is also a fiery sign, the professional status could be
gained by the Scorpio asc boms only after prolonged struggles.
Leo is the house of Sun. So the Scorpio asc boms will get
professional status through government officials.
XI House : Virgo
Virgo, the VI sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house to Scorpio. So
the Scorpio asc boms will achieve success in the fields of their
interest but would suffer due to vitamin deficiencies.
Since Virgo is a common sign, the Scorpio asc boms tend to
show fluctuations in their desires; since it is also an earthy sign,
they would show patience in fulfilling their desires.
Since it is a house of Mercury, the mler of houses 8 & 1 1 , the
Scorpio asc boms will have explicit desires and would fulfill
them only after intermittent struggles.
XH House : Libra
Libra, the VII house of Kaalchakra is the XH house to Scorpio;
the Scorpio asc boms will have more number of secret enemies/
partners.
Since Libra is an airy sign, the Scorpio asc boms will become
spendthrifts in cosmetics and because it is also a movable sign,
they will indulge in extravagant expenditures.
Since Libra is a house of Venus, the mler of houses 7 & 12 to
Scorpio, the Scorpio asc boms will face problems and conflicts
from opposite sex.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

SIGNIFICATIONS OF SCORPIO UNRELATED TO ASCENDANT
II House ; Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the IX house of Kaalchakra is the II house to
Scorpio* So the Scorpio asc boms will gain financially from
father and in the fields of government, religion, temples,
transport, education and law.
Since Sagittarius is a fiery sign, the Scorpio asc boms may
possess lethal weapons and would be spendthrifts.
Since Sagittarius is a common sign, the financial status of the
Scorpio asc boms would often see fluctuations.
Since it is a house of Jupiter, the mode of income of the Scorpio
asc boms would be lawful and within the boundary of ethics.
They would be profited from self-discipline, arts, culture, sports
and love affairs.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Moola, ruled by Ketu, the
Scorpio asc boms will not hesitate to hold narcotic drugs, may
possess diamonds; adopt illegal means for making money with
their cunning speech and create problems for material gains.
Ketu would act like Mercury, which is the lord of houses 8 &
1 1 to Scorpio. So the Scorpio asc boms will,
(i) make profits by all kinds of illegal means such as
harassments, rapes, threats, magic, cheatings,
ingratitude, forgery, murders, thefts, robbery etc, make
profits out of scrapped goods, gain by serving in dirty
places, by accepting bribery at accident wards and
mortuary, gain through defamation suits and will have
income in insurance sectors or through wills and
charters.
(ii) gain through greedy nature, gain from easy and happy
means, gain from societies, friends and clubs, success
and achievements, through romance and by entertaining
others.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Poorvashada, ruled by Venus,
Scorpio 257

the Scorpio asc boms will gain through gold and valuables,
cosmetics, valuable and costly artistic goods, silks, cinema and
by attractive and entertaining speeches.
Venus is the lord of houses 7 & 12 to Scorpio. So the Scorpio
asc boms,
(i) gain with assistance ftom others and social relationships,
life or business partners, gain through banks or
government and by evading taxes or firm subsidies or
recognitions from government.
( ii ) gain through secret activities and plans or by hoarding
essential goods or through returns from investments or
savings and will regain lost goods or outstanding money.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Uttarashada, mled by Sun, the
Scorpio asc boms will gain firm government and financial fields
of stamps, documents, treasury and orders.
Sun is the lord of 10th house to Scorpio. So the Scorpio asc
boms will gain through honorary or responsible posts, status,
name, fame, leadership, administrative capacity and in
counselling.
Ill House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the X house of Kaalchakra is the III house to
Scorpio. So the Scorpio asc boms will undertake frequent
professional journeys, supplement their professions with more
communications, publications and informations.
Since Capricorn is an earthy sign, a touch of intimacy will be
there in the communications of Scorpio asc boms and they will
be flexible during negotiations.
Since Capricorn is a movable sign, the process of negotiations
will have a speedy flow; the Scorpio asc boms will be fast in
their communications and they will undertake Sequent changes.
Since Capricorn is a sign of Saturn, the Scorpio asc boms
will not hesitate to make false propaganda about others, forging
Astrologies of kaalchakra

documents and will change stands in the process of negotiations
and walks long distances.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun, the
Scorpio asc boms will have to interact more with the information
and communication departments of the government and will
deal with the government documents like stamp papers.
Sun is the lord of 10* house to Scorpio. So the Scorpio asc
boms will get government orders for holding honorary posts,
will do business with status, have the responsibility to counsel,
will be appreciated for their administrative capacities and will
enjoy good publicity.
If the 3 rd house falls in the star of Shravana, ruledby Moon, the
Scorpio asc boms will be speedy communicators, write with
great imaginations and description and will prefer faster modes
of travel.
Moon is the lord of 9* house to Scorpio. So the Scorpio asc
boms will confidently enter into agreements and exchanges,
get speedy publicity, enter into agreements for research, establish
contacts with foreigners and foreign countries, become
messengers or tourist guides, act as mediators, will be clerks in
law departments, become auditors, will be certified for higher
education and could receive orders to act as leaders.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Dhanishta, mled by Mars , the
Scorpio asc boms will make bold and courageous agreements,
send false informations, enter into unethical agreements and
will dominate with physical strength during negotiations.
Mars is the lord of houses 1 & 6 to Scorpio. So the Scorpio asc
boms will,
(i) record their self-thoughts in diaiy, have independent
thoughts in negotiations, show their strength and publish
about themselves.
(ii) attain success in competitive fields, render medical
counseling, make research attempts, sellers of food
items , will be tailors , house-keepers , lawyers , postmen ,
Scorpio

caller for tenders, lessors, accountants, money-lenders
or medical representatives.
IV House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI house of Kaalchakra is the IV house to
Scorpio; the Scorpio asc boms will have litigations and troubles
in their lands, house, vehicles and machinery. They tend to reside
in colonies or nearby lodges; they will generally reside at the
central part of a street or a road.
Since Aquarius is an airy sign, the Scorpio asc boms will reside
in an airy but noisy and spacious house; since it is also a fixed
sign, the belongings and properties would remain forever with
them.
Since Saturn is the lord of die 4* house, the Scorpio asc boms
will usurp village common lands, own mines, old buildings,
scrap materials, wooden or clay articles, oil seeds and black
coloured articles.
If the 4* house falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars, the
Scorpio boms will be interested more in the fields of automobile,
machinery, agriculture, livestock, chemicals, fertilizers and
macro industries.
Mars is the lord of the houses 1 & 6 to Scorpio. So the Scorpio *
asc boms will,
(i) do manufacturing with dieirown ideas, improve their
strength by making independent purchases and make
courageous self-decisions in matters of lands, vehicles
and properties
( ii) own laboratories, organise medical camps, prepare food
items, will do tailoring, produce medicines or medical
equipments, finance on properties, serve in purchase
departments, will be milk vendors, lodge-owners or
accountants.
If the 4* house falls in the star of Shathabisham, ruled by Rahu,
the Scorpio asc boms will often use professional vehicles, reside
in quarters or near prisons or grave-yards, serve in embassies or
260 Astrologies of kaalchakra

ancient palaces and manufacture drugs, forged goods and
adulterated goods.
(Readers may please refer the house significations of Jupiter
for Rahu.)
If the 4* house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ru led by Jupiter,
the Scorpio asc boms will legally own properties like macroindustries, educational institutions, or manufacturers of silk,
cotton and turmeric goods or work as surveyors.
Jupiter is the lord of the houses 2 & 5 to Scorpio. So the Scorpio
asc boms will,
(i) own valuable and useful goods, gold and valuables,
construct bungalows, store things and personally own
things.
(ii) own company shares, become sports trainers, own
auditoriums or prostitution dens and will produce artistic
goods with great imagination.
V House : Pisces
Pisces, the XII house to Kaalchakra is the V house to Scorpio.
So the Scorpio asc boms will keep their love affairs in great
secrecy, but will fail in them and their first child may not have
a long life.
Pisces is a watery sign; so the Scorpio asc boms will excel in
the fields of arts and theology.
Since Pisces is a common sign, their knowledge and wisdom
would remain incomplete. Love affairs, life of their first child,
faith in god of the Scorpio asc boms will see fluctuations.
Pisces is ruled by Jupiter. So the Scorpio asc boms will have
faith in God, will be true to their love affairs, become priests
and will excel in arts with great intuition.
If the 5* house fal Is in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter,
the Scorpio asc boms will have faith in god, will be true to their
love affairs, become priests and will excel in arts with great
Scorpio

Jupiter is the lord of houses 2 & 5 to Scorpio. So the Scorpio
asc boms will,
(i) hold artistically valuable goods, own musical
instruments, earn commissions, keep things in an artistic
manner and will spend more time in learning arts.
( ii ) act as share brokers , will be Vedic chanters , will be fond
of sports, write poems and short-stories, will be
interested in politics and own auditoriums.
If the 5* house falls in the star of Uttarabadra, ruled by Saturn,
the Scorpio asc boms will have sexual affairs with people
belonging to lower strata, will be untruthful in their love affairs,
turn into sanyasis, have lazy children, excel in sober characters
in films or dramas or serve as security guards for temple ponds.
Saturn is the lorcfof 3 &4* houses to Scorpio. So the Scorpio
asc boms will,
( i) publish books on arts and culture, receive press publicity
for their artistic performances, serve in advertising
departments, enter into agreements for artistic
performances and could obtain changes in their transfer
orders.
( ii) involve in the fields of arts and culture as academically
qualified persons , manufacture nutritious food, develop
livestock, produce films , cosmetics , musical instruments
and journals and will be stage managers of dramas and
music concerts.
If the 5* house falls in the star of Revathi, mled by Mercury,
the Scorpio asc boms will be singers, comedy actors, debaters,
painters, sculptors, commission agents, artists, cultural teachers
and chanters of Vedas.
Mertury^ is also the lord of houses 8 & 1 1* to Scorpio. So the
Scorpio asc boms will,
(i) repair musical instruments, live in dirty places, face
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

punishments, seizures or cheatings, get their reputations
spoilt and will not hesitate to rape.
( ii ) learn arts with greedy nature, construct lodges , organize
branches for societies, have fortunate opportunities,
spend time with friends of their choice and win lotteries.
VI House : Aries
Aries, the first sign of Kaalchakra is the VI house to Scorpio.
So the Scorpio asc boms will serve in responsible posts, gain
success through service and serve in the fields of military,
railways, police, fire service and industries.
Aries is a fiery sign. So the Scorpio asc boms will Serve in the
fields wherein fire is used. Since it is also a movable sign, they
will serve for a longer period of time. Their borrowings and
court cases would always be in an upward trend.
Since Aries is a house of Mars, the Scorpio asc boms will
work in industries and in the fields of medicine, catering,
tailoring and garments and will have to render hard labour in
their jobs.
If the 6* house falls in the star of Aswani, ruled by Ketu, the
Scorpio asc boms will acquire loans with an intention to cheat,
undertake criminal activities, anti-social & illegal activities and
serve in the field of acids .
Since Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of houses 8 & 1 1
to Scorpio, the Scorpio asc boms will,
(i) render hard labour, serve in severe working conditions,
do repairing jobs , have heavy work load and may work
in dirty places.
(ii) gain success only after prolonged struggles, serve in
societies, win litigations against societies, get fortunate
opportunities repeatedly, make achievements in service
and will be capable of diagnosing diseases correctly.
If the 6* house falls in the star of Bharani, mled by Venus, the
Scorpio asc boms will serve in the fields of arts and culture,
Sr a rain-

tailoring, vegetable stores, fruit stalls, hardware, paints,
glassware, plastic, silks, food articles and weaving etc.
Venus is the lord of houses 7 & 12 to Scorpio. So the Scorpio
asc boms will,
(i) . serve in social service institutions and voluntary
organisations, agents for government officers, will be
marriage brokers, labour contractors or labour welfare
officers.
( ii) acquire loans through secret plans, clear debts by more
borrowings, liquidate investments, become doctors, may
become inactive subsequent to ill health, face breakeven
of income & expenditures and have to face court case
filed by separated partner.
If the 6* house falls in Krittiga star, mled by Sun, the Scorpio
asc boms will get government loans, may have to face court
cases filed by the government, have government servants for
attending their personal needs, get free uniform, medicines and
food from government and work in government departments of
employment, investigation, cattle development, agriculture and
health.
Sun is the lord of the 1 0th house to Scorpio. So the Scorpio asc
boms will get permanent and easy jobs with administrative
powers and status with promotion avenues.
VQ House : Taurus
Taurus, the II sign of Kaalchakra is the VII house to Scorpio.
So the life partners of the Scorpio asc boms would be greedy
after money, will be interested more in accumulating gold and
valuables Or will belong to higher socio-economic class.
Taurus is an earthy sign. So the Scorpio asc boms will have
disciplined and affectionate life partners.
Since Taurus is also a fixed sign, the Scorpio asc boms will
have long standing relationships with their spouses /business
partners and with customers.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Taurus is a house of Venus, So the Scorpio asc boms will have
attractive and beautiful wives or handsome husbands. Their
business partners and customers will always get satisfied through
the Scorpio asc boms.
If the 7* house falls in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the
Scorpio asc boms will have life/business partners with selfpride; they will often have to meet officers and welfare
department officials.
Since Sun is the loid of the 10th house to Scorpio, the Scorpio
asc boms will often spend more time with colleagues, executive
officers, trade union leaders, persons with status, dealers and
customers in their professional life.
If the 7* house falls in the star of Rohini, ruled by Moon, the
Scorpio asc boms will have young-looking wife with wavering
mind, customers with unstable minds and active partners.
Since Moon is also the lord of the 9* house, the Scorpio asc
boms will often meet with leader's, foreigners, judges, priests,
trustees, teachers and also with people who could not get due
social recognition.
If the 7* house falls in the star of Mrigasira, ruled by Mars, the
Scorpio asc boms will have undisciplined and arrogant wife
and liars as customers, often meet with terrorists or arrogant
bank officials and will be forced by circumstances to seek
assistance from others.
Mars is the lord of 1 & 6 houses to Scorpio. So the Scorpio asc
boms will,
(i) abide by collective decisions, listen tp others, attempt
successful joint ventures, face undue oppositions due
to their over-activeness, will lack in taking independent
decisions and suffer due to diseases in kidney, uterus
and abdomen regions.
(ii) often meet with bank officers, money lenders, servants,
patients, doctors, caterers, lawyers and suffer due to
contagious diseases.
Scorpio

Vm House : Gemini
Gemini, the III house to Zodiac is the VIII house to Scorpio.
So the Scorpio asc boms will get into troubles due to writings,
agreements, surety, documents and due to loss of memory.
Since Gemini is an airy sign, the Scorpio asc boms may get
into accidents due to air pressure* bomb blasts and natural
calamities.
Gemini is a common sign. So life, accidents, stress, pain,
disrespect , sorrows of the Scorpio asc boms will not remain
stable for long.
Gemini is a house of Mercury. So the Scorpio asc boms will
get into troubles by way of cheques, documents, disconnection
of power supply or telephone, negotiations, anonymous letters,
forgetfulness, miscommunication of messages and in their
neurological system of the body.
If the VIII house falls in the star of Mrigasira, mled by Mars,
the S corpio boms will get into troubles in quarrels , riots , revolts ,
struggles, terrorism, besieges, false allegations, police or military
actions , weapons , bomb blasts , cruel accidents , rapes , murders ,
robbery, forgery, cheating, suicide squads and also due to their
brothers.
Mars is also the lord of houses 1 & 6 to Scorpio. So the Scorpio
boms will,
( i) lack in self- thoughts, have to struggle in actions, remain
inactive, suffer stress and pain in working capacity, face
dejection and suffer due to failure of functions in the
body.
(ii) face problems in competitive centres, suffer due to
increase in diseases subsequent to wrong medical
treatment and due to side-effects of medicine or allergy,
accidents in the production of medicines and face false
allegations in lodges.
If the 8* house falls in the star of Arudra, ruled by Rahu, the
Scorpio asc boms will face imprisonment, become addicted to
A strologics ofkaalclt akra

wine and women, will be punished in foreign countries, face
troubles in blood vessels or lack of protein and face seizures of
their properties.
(For the house significations of Rahu, please take the house
significations of Jupiter, as given below)
If the 8* house falls in the star of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter,
the Scorpio asc boms will be punished by law, lose gold and
valuables, face legal threatening or seizures, act against law
and produce damaged goods.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 2 & 5 to Scorpio. So the Scorpio
asc boms will,
(i) invite troubles by way of their tone of conversations
and loose talks, suffer due to allergy and will
unexpectedly donate gold and other valuables even
beyond their capacity.
( ii) face accidents in music or dance concerts, sports, games,
involve in raping to spoil reputation, will be punished
in sports, spoil reputation in auditoriums, face
harassments in prostitution dens, quarrel in bars, cause
damage to the purity of the sanctum sanctorum, lose
reputation in love marriages, will be discredited in
stories, essays, and in politics.
IX House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV sign of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Scorpio.
So the Scorpio asc boms tend to involve in extra-marital affairs,
have shorter span of life, gain ancestral properties, lose their
father at their early ages, will get troubles through foreign
contacts and in research attempts.
Cancer is a watery sign. So the Scorpio asc boms will excel in
higher education and will be preachers and show excessive
interest in sexual pleasures.
Cancer is also a movable sign. So the Scorpio asc boms will
quickly gain in confidence, may become polygamists, undertake
frequent journeys, excel in higher education and will enjoy their
Scorpio

successful research developments in foreign countries.
Cancer is a house of Moon. So the Scorpio asc boms will excel
in their higher education, have extra-marital affairs with widows,
have contacts through borrowings, run private research centres,
find new things and will have a fast and quick reaction of mind.
If the 9* house falls in the star of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter,
the Scorpio asc boms will have higher education, qualify in
teaching and preaching, will be professors, financial advisers,
temple trustees, ambassadors and exporters; modify rituals and
customs of law, rehgion and moral codes.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 2 & 5 to Scorpio. So the
Scorpio asc boms will,
(i) be flexible during talks or negotiations, get ancestral
properties and get things only as donations.
( ii ) undertake religious service and pilgrimage; have faith
in god; get rid of diseases by the grace of god and will
often tend to resign their jobs .
If the 9* house falls in the star of Pushyam, ruled by Saturn, the
Scorpio asc boms will study science; lack mental inclination
towards higher education; research about accidents; run a
medical laboratory and may own oil wells.
Saturn is also the loid of houses 3 & 4 to Scorpio. So the
Scorpio asc boms will,
( i) think beyond their capacity, receive press publicity about
their achievements, publish books on education, will
be messengers, undertake barter exchanges, have
excessive growths in organs of the body, will be
interested in mathematics, involve in the fields of
infonnation and communication.
(ii) qualify in teaching, gain ancestral properties, own
properties abroad, run schools, have temple properties
at their disposals, involve in the fields of productions or
automobiles and own grain godowns.
If the 9* house falls in the star of Aslesha, ruled by Mercury,
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

the Scorpio asc boms will work as clerks in research departments
will be teachers for higher classes, counsellors, lawyers,
mathematicians, statisticians, representatives of information &
communication, international trade and accountants in treasuiy .
Mercuiy is also the lord of houses 8 & 1 1 to Scorpio. So the
Scorpio asc boms will,
( i ) face threatening to life in illegal and extra-marital affairs ,
commit forgeiy in ancestral properties, comm it mistakes
in research attempts, face hurdles in higher education
and difficulties in foreign journeys and failures in
agreements.
(ii) study certificate courses, hold honorary posts, make
achievements in research fields, fond of fatty food, have
fortunate opportunities fiom agreements, succeed in
agreements with societies, gain name and fame and will
always remain joyful.
X House : Leo
Leo, the V sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Scorpio. So the
Scorpio asc boms will work in the fields of arts, culture and
sports.
Since Leo is a fieiy sign, the Scorpio asc boms may hold
responsible posts in industries. Leo is also a fixed sign. So the
status, honour, profession and posts of the Scorpio asc boms
will remain steady.
Leo is a sign owned by Sun. So the Scorpio asc boms will
become government officers, serve in government commercial
centres, industrial centres, vocational training institutes,
employment exchanges and will be honoured by government.
If the 1 0,h house falls in the star of Makha, ruled by Ketu, the
Scorpio asc boms will involve in illegal activities using their
status, gain status and respect through illegal means and will
never get satisfied with anything.
Ketu would act like Mercury in house significations. Since
Scorpio

Mercury is the lord of houses 8 & 11 to Scorpio, the Scorpio
asc boms will,
(i) involve in all kinds of illegal professions and deal in
old goods or repair and modify old goods.
( ii ) serve in societies, enter into agreements for societies,
do profession of their choice, make professional
achievements and will modernize their professional
fields.
If the 10* house falls in the star of Poorvapalguni, ruled by
Venus, the Scorpio asc boms will gain status and respect in the
fields of arts and culture, will be in the professions of wine and
women and will become entertainers.
Venus is the lord of houses 7 & 12 to Scorpio. So the Scorpio
asc boms will,
(i) serve in social service or national service organisations
become marriage brokers or labour contractors, do joint
ventures and will be orators in clubs and parties.
(ii) do business with secret contacts, do dual-natured
profession, spend and invest more on profession, do
secret things as profession, do research as profession
and establish secret relationships in profession.
If the 10* house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Scorpio asc boms will be government officers, serve in
government commercial centres, industrial centres, vocational
training institutes, employment exchanges and will be honoured
by government.
Sun is also the lord of 10* house to Scorpio. So the Scorpio
asc boms will hold top and leading posts with power, authority,
name and fame, responsibility and honour; they may woik in
the government departments of customs, income-tax and sales
tax.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

XI House ; Virgo
Virgo , the VI sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house to Scorpio . So
the Scorpio asc boms will become successful in their fields of
interest through self-efforts.
Virgo is an earthy sign. So the Scorpio asc boms will be greedy
but will have affectionate friends.
Virgo is a common sign. So the desires of the Scorpio asc boms
will change and see fluctuations in the process of fulfillmentof
their desires.
Virgo is a house of Mercury. So the Scorpio asc boms will
have witty friends, sons-in law, elder brothers; like to handle
micro instalments and have a chance to go through books of
their choice.
If the 1 1 * house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Scorpio asc boms will have opportunities to become part of
government bodies, societies, friendly forums, and feasts, will
be honoured by the government with medals or subsidies or
scholarships and show interest in the field of politics.
Sun is also the lord of 10* house to Scorpio. So the Scorpio
asc boms will hold honourable posts with name and fame to
suit their desires.
If the 1 1th house falls in the star of Hastha, ruled by Moon, the
Scorpio asc boms will have friends who tend to confuse them,
will easily and cheaply get satisfied, will have more number of
friends, will become selfish and will be fond of liquors.
Moon is also the lord of the 9th house.* Sothe Scorpio asc boms
will establish contacts with social service institutions, voluntary
organisations and higher officials, may become polygamists,
undertake foreign journeys of their choice, study courses of their
choice, have international contacts and enter into research.
If the 1 1th house falls in the star of Chitra, mled by Mars, the
Scorpio asc boms will have untruthful and insincere friends,
sons-in-law, daughters-in-law, become successful in fulfilling
their desires only after prolonged struggles , will be greedier with
arrogance.
Scorpio 271

Mars is also the lord of houses 1 & 6 to Scorpio. So the Scorpio
asc boms will,
(i) always think about them, carry self-pride, have
independent opinions, imagination, like to make changes
in their activities , have excellent functioning of the body,
happily involve in things and will be greedy.
(ii) win in the fields of their choice, join in service of their
choice, have favourable scopes for success and have the
capability to diagnose diseases correctly.
XII House : libra
Libra, the VH sign of Kaal chakra is the XII house to Scorpio.
The Scorpio asc boms will be troubled by women, partners and
enemies frequently.
Libra is an airy sign. So the Scorpio asc boms will undertake
secret investigation, research on ancient things and in
educational research fields.
Libra is a movable sign. Their secret activities, losses,
investments and expenditures would grow day by day.
Venus is the lord of Libra. So the Scorpio asc boms will involve
in secret love affairs, secret marriage, make secret plans and
involve in hoarding things.
If the 12* house falls in the star* of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Scorpio asc boms will serve in government departments of
investigation, health, customs and excise, sales tax, prisons,
postmortem divisions, acquisition or seizures of lands or
properties.
Mars is the lord of houses 1 & 6 to Scorpio. So the Scorpio asc
boms will ,
(i) be masochists, have inferiority complex, under-estimate
their own strength and potential, have unsatisfactory
relations, lack interest and imagination, face hurdles in
their efforts and suffer due to allergy.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

(ii) have secret success, change their seats in their offices
as desired, gain success only after extravagant
expenditures, suffer due to wrong diagnosis of diseases
and will be troubled by their servants.
If the 12* house falls in the star of Swathi, ruled by Rahu, the
Scorpio asc boms will make secret investigations, work in the
fields of software, atomic energy, bombs, anaesthesia, artificial
respiration, prisons and may involve in hijacking of airplanes.
(For the house significations of Rahu, please refer to the house
significations of Jupiter, as below)
If the 1 2th house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Scorpio asc boms will do secret activities in the banner of
law, suffer due to secret troubles by way of law, will be raided
by the income-tax department, will face seizure of their
properties by the government, imprisonment by courts, conduct
secret financial reviews and may print fake currency.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 2 & 5 to Scorpio. So the Scorpio
asc boms will,
(i) regain outstanding money, suffer eye-diseases due to
vitamin deficiency, invest in gold and valuables and have
secret sources of income.
(ii) have breach of cordial and harmonious relationships,
forcibly have sexual pleasures, face hurdles in mutual
relationships of peace and make undue expenditure in
the fields of arts and culture.
Kindly include the karakas of nesidentship of the planets for a
more comprehensive study.
Scorpio

Sagittarius
General nature of the sign Sagittarius
It is a fiery, common and masculine sign; odd sign; red and gold
in colour; long ascension; anus in the body, semi-animal and
semi-human, barren, dry sign, house of Jupiter, multi-storied
buildings, arms godown, schools and colleges, temples, religious
centres, courts, branch of a street, places surrounded by trees
and plants, suburban areas, outskirts of a city or village, battle
fields, angry in nature and delay in understanding, IX sign of
Zodiac, north west in direction, nights of a day, Margashira in
Saka or Margazhi in Tamil calendars.
ASCENDANT RELATED SIGNIFICATIONS OF SAGITTARIUS
(a) It is a fiery sign : Short temper, lack of affection,
arrogance in appearance and character & self-pride.
(b) It is a common sign : Fluctuating body and mind, fast
changing structure, appearance and colour, changing
characters and acts, short-living anger.
(c) It is a house of Jupiter :Sincere, honest, self-thoughts,
obedient, prestige, self-confidence, intelligence,
calmness' adjustable to others.
(d) It is IX house of Kaalchakra : Honesty and credibility,
fond of education, research capability, faith in god,
trustees, ambassadors, interest in the fields of law,
Astrologies of kaalchakra

travels, undertaking visits to1 outstations and foreign
countries.
In the same manner, the remaining significations of Sagittarius
could also be studied.
The sign Sagittarius extends over three stars leading to the
following body natures.
7. Moola: Owned by Ketu: Excessive acidity in the body
2. Poorvashada : Owned by Venus: Water-borne body
3 . U ttarashada : Owned by Sun: Strong body with calcium .
If the asc falls in the star of Moola, ruled by Ketu, the Sagittarius
asc boms will have appearance with lean body or hunch-back,
acidify in the body, criminal and greedy natured.
Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of houses 7 & 10 to
Sagittarius. So the Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) have multiple social relations duly recognized by the
society, abide by laws and have legal bondages, tend to
depend on others.
{ii) gain status and prestige as senior officers, will be leaders
with administrative capacity, hold honorary posts and
as responsible counsellors, have dissatisfactions and earn
name and fame.
If the asc falls in the star of Poorvashada, ruled by Venus, the
Sagittarius asc boms will appear as attractive*, beautiful, sexy
and handsome, attract others through their activities, have selfpride, like self-beautifi cat ion, fond of cosmetics and collection
of gold and other valuables.
Venus is also the lord of houses 6 & 11 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) gain success, face separation in marital life, have sound
health, faith in labour, extra-ordinaiy sense of taste in
dressing and patience in nursing.
(ii) be greedy and selfish in nature, happy and harmonious,
counsellor to societies, have fortunes, successful, make
Sagittarius 275

achievements, adapt to the requirements of situations
and towards others.
If the Asc falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun, the
Sagittarius asc boms will be majestic in their appearance, proud,
generous, have strong bones, commanding in nature with
leadership qualities.
Sun is also the lord of 9th house to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will win confidence of others; earn name,
fame; have capabilities of undertaking research work, faith in
god, will be trustees, educationists, obedient to laws, god and
to society; conservationists; affinity towards foreigners;
ambassadors, have changes in physique and would like to
contribute for endowments.
EL House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the X house of Kaalchakra is the II house to
Sagittarius. So the Sagittarius asc bom tends to speak in a
proud and commanding tone; excel in professional
conversations; their eyes will be fleshy.
Since Capricorn is an earthy sign, they tend to talk in a pleasing
tone with affinity towards others. It is also a movable sign. So
they tend to speak slowly and steadily.
Since it is a house of Saturn, the lord of houses 2 & 3 to
Sagittarius, the Sagittarius asc boms will talk what they think.
They never hesitate to tell lies and exaggerate things.
Ill House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI house to Kaalchakra is the II! house to
Sagittarius. So the Sagittarius asc boms will work in the fields
of their interest with enthusiasm. They are courageous and
confident in fulfilling their desires and actively involve
themselves in the fields of communications and entertainments.
Since Aquarius is an airy sign, they have wavering minds but
with imagination and enthusiasm. It is also a fixed sign. So they
have the will and strength in spite of mental oscillations.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Since Aquarius is a house of Saturn, the ruler of houses 2 & 3
to Sagittarius, the Sagittarius asc boms will have fluctuating
minds and are doubtful in nature. They are mostly pessimistic.
IV House : Pisces
Pisces, the XII house of Kaalchakra is the IV house to
Sagittarius. So the Sagittarius asc boms could not get benefits
out of their studies and academic qualifications. They may face
difficulties in their primary education or they may lack needed
inclination towards primary studies. They may be benefited
through undue investment on their education in an unusual
manner.
Since Pisces is a watery sign, the Sagittarius asc boms will
grasp things quickly with their academic qualifications and they
will not be reluctant to share their knowledge with others. Pisces
is a common sign meaning that the Sagittarius asc boms will
undergo frequent changes, ups and downs; they have a fair
chance of studying at far-off places or abroad.
Since Pisces is a house of Jupiter, the lord of houses 1 & 4 to
Sagittarius, they will have dissatisfactions in their studies and
would be worried by their first child.
V House : Aries
Aries, the first sign of the Kaalchakra is the V house to
Sagittarius. So the Sagittarius asc boms will show pride and
authority in the fields of arts, culture and religion. They are
dominant and possessive in then* love affairs.
Since Aries is a fiery sign, they tend to show arrogance with
anger and dissatisfaction towards, their first child and in their
love affairs. They will carry dissatisfactions in the fields of arts
and culture.
Aries is a movable sign. So the Sagittarius asc boms will have
a mind to indulge in unnecessary expenditure for making
Sequent changes in the fields of arts, culture and religion; they
are extravagant in their love affairs and for the cause of their
first child.
Sagittarius

Since Aries is a house of Mars, they are fast and arrogant during
copulation and they are bold in disclosing their love affairs but
will also face troubles and dejections.
VI House : Taurus
Taurus, the II sign of Kaalchakra is the VI house to the
Sagittarius. So the Sagittarius asc boms will have diseases in
eyes, teeth and mouth.
Taurus is an earthy sign; so the Sagittarius asc boms will suffer
due to climatic changes, diseases caused by environment or
allergy and in neurological system. They will win over others
by way of their affectionate attitude and love towards them.
Since it is also a fixed sign, their ailments and sufferings would
last long; they have a steady approach towards success.
Since it is a house of Venus, the lord of houses 6 & 11 to
Sagittarius , the Sagittarius asc boms will suffer due to vitamin
deficiencies; they will succeed in their life through their self
endeavours:
VII House : Gemini
Gemini, the III house to Kaalchakra is the VH house to
Sagittarius; they are communicative in their social relations.
They will maintain harmonious relationships in married life with
an open mind.
Since Gemini is an airy sign, they gain more information by
way of their public relations.
Since Gemini is also a common sign, they frequently make
changes in their attitude towards others.
Since it is a house of Mercury, they tend to be friendlier with
families of their spouses and in the course of their self and
professional ventures.
VIII House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV sign of Kaalchakra is the VIII house to
Sagittarius; the Sagittarius asc boms will get injured in chest.
2 78" ~~ Astrologies of kaalchakra

The organs in the thoracic regions may fail or would lead to
sufferings due to malfunctioning.
Since Cancer is a watery sign, the Sagittarius asc boms may
suffer due to water-borne diseases. They may meet with
accidents in water or caused by liquids.
Since Cancer is a movable sign, the troubles to Sagittarius asc
boms would get multiplied.
Since it is a house of Moon, the karaka planet for mother, the
Sagittarius asc boms will be troubled by their mother. They
will suffer due to cool articles and liquids.
IX House : Leo
Leo, the V sign of Kaalchakm is the IX house to Sagittarius.
So the Sagittarius asc boms will excel in their higher education
especially in the fields of arts, culture and religion.
Since Leo is a fiery sign, they would show strong commitment
towards their higher studies. They may suffer from irritations
during long distance travels.
Since Leo is a fixed sign, their faith in god and higher education
would remain unchanged. They may live at a foreign place for
long.
Since Leo is the house of Sun, they may study in government
institutions by getting scholarships; will be inclined towards
politics. They are best counsellors.
X House : Virgo
Virgo, the VI sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Sagittarius.
So the Sagittarius asc boms will become successful in their
professional fields. They can gain status and prestige in the fields
of textiles, catering, drugs, chemicals, law and money fending.
Since Virgo is a common sign, the status and prestige of the
Sagittarius asc boms would not remain stable and permanent.
Since Virgo is an earthy sign, they tend to gain their status and
prestige through proper means.
Sagittarius

Since Virgo is a house of Mercury, they will be glorified by
their spouses, the society and their business partners.
XI House : libra
Libra, the VII sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house to Sagittarius.
So the Sagittarius asc boms will 1'ulfil their desires through spouses;
have sexual affaiis as per their desires or with people of their choice.
Since libra is an airy sign, they will have a generous attitude
with mental satisfaction. Since it is also a movable sign, they
tend to preserve their happy mind and show patience in attaining
their goals.
Since Libra is a house of Venus, the lord of houses 6 & 1 1 to
Sagittarius, the Sagittarius asc borns will get mental
satisfaction by listening to music and by spending time in the
field of arts.
XII House : Scorpio
Scorpio, the VIII sign of Kaalchakra is the XH house to
Sagittarius, the Sagittarius asc boms will be punished and
troubled due to secret and illegal planning and for cruelty.
Since the Scorpio is a watery sign, the Sagittarius asc boms
will be troubled by liquors, liquid fuels and spurious medicines.
Scorpio is a fixed sign. So they tend to get involved in secret
criminal activities permanently;
It is a house of Mars , the lord of houses 5 & 1 2 to Sagittarius.
So the Sagittarius asc boms will behave arrogantly in their
love affairs and towards their children.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

SIGNIFICATIONS OF SAGrTTARIUS UNRELATED TO ASCENDANT
II House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the X sign of Kaalchakra is the II house to
Sagittarius. So the Sagittarius asc boms will make financial
and monetary gains in their professional ventures and by way
of their prestige, promotion and status.
Since Capricorn is an earthy sign, the Sagittarius asc boms
will develop their financial position and would preserve their
income through savings.
Capricorn is a movable sign; so financial status and flow of
income of the Sagittarius asc boms would always be in an
upward trend. Diamonds, documents, costly and valuable articles
and paper currency of the Sagittarius asc boms will be of
multiplying nature.
Since it is a house of Saturn, the Sagittarius asc boms are
basically misers; the amount and denomination of income would
remain low; they will not hesitate to seize belongings of others.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Uttarashada, mled by Sun, the
Sagittarius asc boms will deal with and gain from financial
institutions, government orders, savings and financial details of
the nation.
Sun is also the lord of 9th house to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will benefit out of ancestral properties,
credibility, higher education, leadership, research, foreigners,
information and communication, devotional services,
endowments and through transplantation of organs, legal
departments, agreements, ancient monuments and from life at
foreign countries.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Shravana, mled by Moon, the
Sagittarius asc boms will have frequent income, act as advisers
to financial institutions, and hold pearls and silver goods.
Moon is the lord of 8th house to Sagittarius. So the Sagittarius
asc boms will derive benefits out of thefts , harassments , robbery ,
rapes, murders, cheatings, forgery, magic, threatening, bribeiy
to&ttariiTs " 28 1

and all other illegal and anti-social means; gain firm insurance,
wills, old goods and scraps, service at dirty places or accident
wards or mortuary in hospitals.
If the 2nd house falls in the star pf Dhanishta, ruled by Mars , the
Sagittarius asc boms will hold valuable ornaments made up of
ruby and costly metals. They become spend-thrifts, dishonest
and tell lies for financial benefits. They use rough and filthy
language to threaten others for financial gains.
Mars is also the lord of houses 5 & 12 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will make financial gains from,
(i) devotional services, arts and culture, sports, intelligence,
imagination, religious rituals, prostitution and in love
affairs.
(ii) secret activities, investments, money lending, savings
and hoardings. Further the Sagittarius asc boms will
be able to regain their lost goods and to reunite with
separated member of their family.
Ill House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI house of Kaalchakra is the III house to
Sagittarius . So the Sagittarius asc boms wiH feel happy through
information and communication, agreements and travels.
Since Aquarius is an airy sign, the Sagittarius asc boms will
have to make repeated attempts to complete a work. They are
tension-borne and get confused while undertaking travels.
Aquarius is a fixed sign. So the Sagittarius asc boms will be
firm, clear and concrete in their communications and
publications.
Since Aquarius is a house of Saturn , the S agittarius asc boms
will undertake frequent short-journeys, often have to walk,
frequently change their stands, write anonymous letters and forge
documents.
If the 3 1-d house falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars , the
Sagittarius asc boms will communicate on behalf of his
organisation or serve in information and Communication
&F““‘ Astrologies of kaalchakra

departments such as posts & telegraphs, telecom, AIR, television,
statistical departments, field publicity offices or in advertisement
agencies.
Mars is also the lord of houses 5 & 12 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
( i) communicate and publish about share market, religion,
sports, politics, arts & culture and will like to perform
obscene and filthy dances.
(ii) communicate through secret sources, lose evidences,
gain documents against loans, lose savings documents,
permanently lose their goods, get permanent separation
from their family and gain information for their secret
plans.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Shathabisham, ruled by Rahu,
the Sagittarius asc boms will work as clerks in embassies,
become as mediators, enter into agreements with foreigners,
establish international contacts and will be fond of foreign goods
and articles.
(Readers may please include the house significations of Jupiter
for Rahu.)
If the III house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter,
the Sagittarius asc boms will involve and deal in stamps;
documents, legal agreements, legal orders, legal notices, true
and correct information and negotiations on financial matters.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 1 & 4 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) record their thoughts, do as they wish, have independent
thoughts, tend to show their strength, will have proper
functioning of their neurological and blood circulatory
system.
(ii) lose physical energy, will be certified in education, do
business in the fields of fruits, vegetables, farms,
livestock, seeds, nurseries, trees, educational goods,
stationery, newspapers, vessels, furniture, groceries,
Sagittarius

lands, vehicles, hardware, machineries and accessories
and will take lease of ponds and bridges.
IV House : Pisces
Pisces, the XII sign of Kaalchakra is the IV house to Sagittarius .
So the Sagittarius asc boms will like to invest in lands, house,
vehicles, machineries, and manufacturing. They will like to
reside in bungalows with all comforts. They will live in
individual houses in the end part of a main road or a street.
Pisces is a watery sign. So the Sagittarius asc boms will change
their residences to occasions, will excel in education and
teaching and will involve in agriculture and water reservoirs.
Pisces is a common sign. The properties, lands, houses, vehicles
and machineries would not last long with Sagittarius asc boms.
Since Jupiter is the lord of Pisces, the Sagittarius asc boms
will legally own properties such as big industries; will become
real estate owners or manufacturers of food items, silk, cotton
materials, turmeric and livestock.
If the 4th house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter,
the Sagittarius asc boms will legally own properties like big
industries; become real estate owners and manufacturers of food
items, silk, cotton materials, turmeric and livestock.
Jupiter is the lord of houses I & 4 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
( i) produce with own ideas, have surplus energy production
in the body, purchase th ings on their own, increase their
strength and have proper functioning of lungs and heart.
(ii) have excessive energy production in the body, act
according to their academic qualifications, involve in
manufacturing fruits, vegetables , farms, livestock, seeds,
nurseries, trees, educational accessories, stationery,
newspaper, vessels , furniture, groceries , lands , vehicles ,
hardware, machineries and spares.
If the 4,h house falls in the star of Uttarabadra, ruled by Saturn,
the Sagittarius asc boms will usurp village common lands; own
284 Astrologies of kaqlchakra

mines; possess old buildings, scraps and old goods, wooden or
day articles, oil seeds and black coloured materials.
Saturn is also the land of houses 2 & 3 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) own valuables and utility-oriented goods, old
bungalows, keep things as their own or at their personal
custody and like to store things in excess.
(ii) leave their native places, have information about
production processes, limit his production and publish
books on manufacturing methods.
If the 4th house falls in the star of Revathi, ruled by Mercury,
the Sagittarius asc boms will possess micro instruments like
computers, calculators, printers, electrical & electronic goods,
spares, tiles and lathes etc; may assemble parts of machineries;
may serve as ticket inspectors in transports.
Mercury is the land of houses 7 & 10 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) reside in government quarters, will become members
of ration cards, purchase properties by acquiring loans
from banks and will be members of societies and clubs.
(ii) render honorary service, will be landlords, industrial
owners, will be responsible for government documents
and earn name and fame.
V House : Aries
Aries, the first sign of Kaalchakra is the V house to Sagittarius.
So the love affairs of Sagittarius asc boms will be full of
struggles with ego-clashes. They will give birth to first child by
Caesarean; they tend to make extravagant expenditures in the
fields of arts and culture.
Aries is a fiery sign. So the Sagittarius asc boms will forcibly
involve in love affairs, sexual pleasures, rapes, prostitution,
obscene dances; their first child will be vigourous in sexual
pleasures.
Sagittarius

Aries is a movable sign. So the Sagittarius asc boms will develop
themselves day by day in intelligence, knowledge, arts and culture,
religious faith and with increasing number of red blood cells.
Mars is the lord of Aries, So the Sagittarius asc boms will
show arrogance in sexual affairs; they may become atheists,
painters of vulgar drawings, sculptors, dancers or singers of filthy
and obscene dances or songs, boxers and folk artists and may
have children with excessive interest in sexual affairs.
If the 5* house falls in the star of As ward, ruled by Ketu, the
Sagittarius asc borns will involve themselves in magics,
mythical stories and prostitution. They ace criminals in politics
and would gain commissions through illegal trades.
Ketu would act like Mercury, which is the lord of houses 7 &
10 to Sagittarius. So the Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) have harmonious relationships in societies and clubs,
live in quarters for artists, get musical instruments as
government donations, own guest houses, serve in
voluntary organisations and marry persons of their
choice.
(ii) hold honorary posts as artists, manufacture artistic
goods, become responsible for temples, become
administrators in artistic fields and earn professional
name and fame.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Bharani, mled by Venus, the
Sagittarius asc boms will show interest in the fields of arts and
culture, will excel as orators, politicians, astrologers, will act in
vulgar roles and will perform glamourous dances.
Venus is the lord of houses 6 & 11 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) run competitive examination centre for arts and crafts,
become gynaecologists, lab technicians, nurses, feastcooks, tailors and costume designers, producer of herbal
medicines; commission agents and servants in lodges
and cinema halls.
n
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

(ii) learn arte with commitment, construct lodges, form
branches of unions, make joint ventures with societies,
enjoy fortunes and favours, make achievements in
production of livestock and like to be in the company of
Mends for pleasures.
If the 5th house falls in the star ofKrittiga, ruled by Sun, the
Sagittarius asc boms will serve in government temples,
government auditoriums, government sports functions, will
become politicians, like to play the game of chess and provide
details of government subsidy and welfare schemes.
Sun is the lord of 9th house to Sagittarius. So the Sagittarius
asc boms will enter into contracts for artistic performances, earn
name and feme in higher education of arts and culture, hold
responsible and honorary posts in the fields of arts and culture,
become teachers of arts and culture, import artistic goods, run
institutes of arts and culture, maintain temples, become members
of village panchayat, protect ancient monuments, collect taxes
for temples, will do clowning and have illegal affairs with
foreigners.
VI House : Taurus
Taurus, the II sign of Kaalchakra is the VI house to Sagittarius.
So the Sagittarius asc boms will serve in the fields of finance,
gold, silver, mortgage shops, hanks, treasury, documents and
litigations.
Taurus is a fixed sign. So their service, borrowings, litigations,
diseases, consumption of medicines, food, dresses and the
digestive system are of permanent nature with steady and slow
progress.
Taurus is an earthy sign; so the Sagittarius asc boms will serve
in the departments of health. They love to serve with devotion
and commitment
Taurus is a sign ruled by Venus. So the Sagittarius asc boms
will serve in the fields of arts and culture, weaving and tailoring
and in vegetable stores, fiuit stalls, paint shops, cosmetic stores,
glassware, plastic industries, silk stores, and sweet stalls.
Sagittarius

If the 6th house falls in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the
Sagittarius asc boms could avail government loans and help
horn government servants, face court cases tiled by government,
get government uniforms and serve in employment exchanges,
food cells, poultry and departments of agriculture and health.
Sun is the lord of 9th house to Sagittarius. So the Sagittarius
asc boms will win contracts in ports, work in personnel and
training departments , research centres , import sections , temples ,
endowments, courts, panchayat offices, ancient monuments,
trusts and international organisations.
If the 6thh house falls in the star of Rohini, ruled by Moon, the
Sagittarius asc boms will serve as daily labourers in water
reservoirs, ships, and in the departments of fisheries, plumbing
and in grain fields. They may suffer due to diseases caused by
water and wifi soon lose physical energy due to diseases.
Moon is the lord of 8th house to Sagittarius. The Sagittarius
asc boms will have to render hand physical labour, serve under
poor working conditions with heavy workload and work in repair
shops. Their diseases may later lead to surgery.
If the 6,hhouse falls in the star of Mrigasira, ruled by Mars, the
Sagittarius asc boms will suffer due to muscle pains and heatborne diseases, serve in factories or in hospitals, will become
hard labourers in the fields of tailoring and catering and will
produce food and medicines.
Mars is also the lord of houses 5 & 12 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) serve in stock exchanges, cabaret clubs, liquor bars,
prostitution dens, marriage registration offices or sports
centres, chant mantras in religious rituals, produce sports
goods and become pimps, proof-readers of political or
sports articles.
( ii ) acquire loans through secret plans , repay loans by further
borrowings, liquidate investments, serve in hospitals,
will be breakeven with income and expenditures,
become inactive due to ailments and diseases and will
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

face litigations filed by the separated life/business
partners.
VII House : Gemini
Gemini, the 111 sign of Kaalchakra is the VII house to
Sagittarius. So the spouses of Sagittarius asc boms will be of
generous attitude with interest in the fields of information &
communication and are cautious with pre-planning in all walks
of life.
Gemini is an airy sign; so the spouses, business partners or
customers of the Sagittarius asc boms will be intelligent. It is
also a common sign; there may be fluctuations in the
relationships with spouses, business partners and customers;
Sagittarius asc boms may also suffer due to problems in kidneys.
Gemini is a house of Mercury; so the spouses of Sagittarius
asc boms will be witty in nature with cunningness and research
capabilities. They will often meet well educated and intelligent
persons.
If the 7th house falls in the star of Mrigasira, ruled by Mars, the
Sagittarius asc boms will have undisciplined spouses/business
partners; they will often meet with bars, anti-social elements
and arrogant bank-officials. They will be forced to request
assistance of others.
Mars is also the lord of houses 5 & 1 2 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
( i) often have to meet with lovers, artisans, painters, singers,
astrologers, teachers, religious servants, priests, saints,
prostitutes and pimps.
(ii) often meet the following persons: secret planners,
subversive activists, thieves, collectors of loan
installments; will be raided or threatened by others by
knowing the secrets of Sagittarius asc boms to cause
losses to them.
If the 7th house falls in the star of Arudra, ruled by Rahu, the
Sagittarius boms will many non-relatives and persons who may
Sagittarius

be lesbians/homosexuals or impotents and show arrogance in
copulations,
(For the house significations of Rahu , kindly include the house
significations of Jupiter,)
If the 7* house falls in the star of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter,
the Sagittarius asc boms will many persons who are calm, quiet,
responsible, adjustable natured. Their business partners and
customers would also be of same nature.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 1 & 4 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) abide by collective thoughts, listen to others, become
successful in joint ventures, suffer due to diseases in
kidneys, uterus and abdomen regions, face oppositions,
lack ability to make independent decisions, invite
troubles by way of their actions from well-known
persons.
(ii) live with relatives, many among relatives or persons
living in same compound or apartments and often meet
persons who manage the properties of the Sagittarius
asc boms.
VSH House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV house of Kaalchakra is the VIII house to
Sagittarius. So the Sagittarius asc boms will get into troubles
and worries caused by their mothers, properties, lands, vehicles,
household appliances and in accidents.
Cancer is a watery sign; so the Sagittarius asc boms will meet
with accidents in water reservoirs and in rainy seasons and suffer
due to urinary infections.
Cancer is a movable sign; so the life of Sagittarius asc boms
are long but with prolonged troubles like accidents, pains, stress,
disrespect and disputes etc.
Moon is the lord of the 8th house. So the Sagittarius asc boms
will suffer due to mental dejections, loss of consciousness, loss
290 "AsTrologTcs of kaalchakra

of memory, lack of education, accidents in water and due to
anti-social thoughts.
If the 8th house falls in the star* of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter,
the Sagittarius asc boms will be punished by law, do illegal
activities, have to face lawful threatening, face seizures and fines
by court to lose properties and valuables.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses I & 4 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) lose self-thoughts, become inactive and have to snuggle;
face stress and pains, get dejected, suffer due to allergy,
inability to take independent decisions and have to face
heavy workload.
(H) suffer due to loss of organs in the body, meet with
accidents, face troubles in lands, vehicles and in
buildings, hurdles in education and frequent troubles in
house-hold appliances and furniture.
If the 8th house falls in the star f Pushyam, ruled by Saturn, the
Sagittarius asc boms will suffer due to disrespect, will be
threatened, will become cowards, suffer due to loss of memory,
abscond, have fear of death, mental oscillations^ face false
charges, modify old goods and involve in cruel activities.
Saturn is the lord of houses 2 & 3 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
( i) lead to controversies during talks, suffer due to allergy,
unexpectedly gain gold and valuables and donate money
or valuables beyond their capacity.
(ii) become notorious, publish books on crimes, make
mistakes in mathematics, spread rumours, suffer due to
loss of memory and bone erosions , lose belongings , face
hurdles in transfer orders, punishment in service, earn
bad name and face troubles in service in communication
and information departments.
If the 8th house falls in the star of Aslesha, ruled by Mercury,
the Sagittarius asc boms will face troubles in negotiable
Sagittarius

instruments, documents, electrical and telephone connections,
negotiations, anonymous letters, surety, absence of mind and
neurological system.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 7 & 10 to Sagittarius. So
the Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) show indiscipline and do corruption in social and
voluntary organisations, invite opposition of government
officials, face dejections in married life, will be cheated
and threatened and put into disrespect by opponents and
partners.
(ii) face allegations in profession; become corrupt in
profession and responsible posts, face disrespect in
profession, and will be deprived of promotions.
IX House : Leo
Leo, the V sign of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Sagittarius.
So the Sagittarius asc boms may have illegal affairs; their
ancestral properties will be passed on to their children; their
fathers will have a long life; they will win benefits through
international relations and research attempts.
Leo is a fiery sign. So the Sagittarius asc boms will have needed
intelligence for higher education, have strong faith in their
religions, become polygamists and may lack in administrative
capability.
Leo is a fixed sign; so the Sagittarius asc boms will have
stability in their foreign life; win confidence and credibility;
have pennanent ties in illegal affairs; have smooth journeys and
trouble-free higher education.
Leo is ruled by Sun. So the Sagittarius asc boms will have
faith in religious rituals and practices; involve in embassies and
foreign organisations, government departments of research and
finance.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Makha, ruled by Ketu, the
Sagittarius asc boms will become judges in criminal courts,
forensic researchers, investigators in criminology, involve in
TaT
Astrologies of kaalchakra

subversive activities in foreign nations, trainers for illegal
activities and smugglers.
Ketu would act like Mercury as far as significations of houses
are concerned. Mercury is the lord of houses 7 & 10 to
Sagittarius, So the Sagittarius asc horns will,
(i) become disciplined and sincere workers in social service
or voluntary organisations, gain friendships with
government officials, get due recognition from
government for their voluntary organisations; marry
second time, may have affairs with the younger sister of
wife and have illegal or extra-marital affairs.
(ii) involve or serve in communication, transport, imports
& exports , mines , ports , electricity , plumbing , oil wells ,
personnel departments, teaching, research centres,
international relations, temples, endowments, courts,
collection of temple taxes, trusts, panchayat offices and
ancient monuments
If the 9th house falls in the star of Poorvapalguni, ruled by Venus,
the Sagittarius asc boms will involve in research fields of arts
and culture, higher education, transport and feast halls; may
have illegal affairs and have relationships with foreigners or
teachers.
Venus is the lord of houses 6 & 11 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
( i ) become supervisors of competitive exam centres , nurses ,
medical examiners, suffer* due to increase in hereditary
disorders or side-effects of medicines or excessive
consumption of food and due to acidity, successful in
joint ventures in medicines, get separated from second
wife, get rid of illegal affairs, get employment
opportunities on heirship, face allegations in lodges,
enter into mutual agreements in international
organisations and find themselves amidst illegal affairs
during research assignments.
Sagittarius

(ii) study diploma courses, hold honorary posts, complete
research process, earn name and fame, take oath of
service , always remain happy and harmonious , have cooperation and win agreements with societies, have
fortunate opportunities, make achievements in research
fields, find right approach and will be fond of fatty food
items.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Sagittarius asc boms will have faith in religious rituals and
practices; involve in the fields of foreign embassies and
organisations, government research centres and finance
departments.
Sun is also the ford of 9th house to Sagittarius. So Sagittarius
asc boms will become national leaders, excellent researchers,
ambassadors, judges and involve themselves with embassies,
religious institutions and government finance departments.
X House : Virgo
Virgo , the VI sign of Kaalchakra is the X house of Sagittarius .
So the Sagittarius asc boms will serve in the fields of dress,
catering, chemicals, dyeing, medicines, and printing etc.
Virgo is an earthy sign; so the Sagittarius asc boms will deal
in the fields of medicine, food, dress, vegetables, agriculture
and vessels for storing grains;
Virgo is a common sign; so the status, profession, prestige and
posts of the Sagittarius asc boms will see fluctuations.
Virgo is a sign of Mercury. So the Sagittarius asc boms will
do business and deal with micro-instruments, scales, pipes, rods,
wires, greenish articles, stationeries, note books, calculators and
computers.
If the 10th house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Sagittarius asc boms will become higher officials or hold
honorary posts in the government and serve in government
offices, industrial centres, vocational guidance institutes,
employment exchanges and government commercial complexes.
2M ““ ““ — — — — cF/Xoa/c/zoArra

Sun is also the lord of 9lh house to Sagittarius; So the
Sagittarius asc boms will serve in social service institutions or
voluntary organisations or marriage registration offices, export
organisations, educational institutions, research departments,
religious departments, transport organisations, communication
and information departments, electricity or water departments,
oil wells, space research centres, trusts, temples, courts,
panchayat offices, ancient monuments, foreign embassies and
political parties, enter into agreements with government officials
and will become leaders, honorary officials, judges and
ambassadors.
If the I Oth house falls in the star of Hastha, ruled by Moon,
Sagittarius asc boms will wohk m the fields of water and liquids,
medicines, white coloured articles, retail sales, imports and
exports, ships, ports, fishing, boats, pipes and wells.
Moon is also the lord of 8th house to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will do illegal and anti-social professions,
modify old goods and become professional criminals.
If the 1 0th house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Sagittarius asc boms will work in industries, in the fields
wherein fire is used or in construction fields or in the offices of
police, military and administration; become responsible officers
for government documents.
Mars is also the lord of houses 5 & 12 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) serve in religious rituals, arrange pilgrimages, become
pimps, priests, sanyasis, prophets, religious preachers,
astrologers, actors, singers, poets, artisans,
gynaecologists and manufacturers of medicines.
(ii) do business with secret contacts; work in two fields,
spend or invest on profession, have secret contacts in
new profession and do research work.
Sagittarius

XI House : libra
Libra , the VII sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house of Sagittarius .
So the Sagittarius asc boms will fulfil their desires only through
their spouses or partners; win in joint ventures and win friendship
with love and flexibility.
Libra is an aiiy sign; so the Sagittarius asc boms will always
remain happy and free firm worries and will be enthusiastic
and joyful.
Libra is a movable sign; so the ambitions, happiness and
expectations of the Sagittarius asc boms will always be on the
increasing side.
Libra is a house of Venus;' so the Sagittarius asc boms will
always be persons of joy and happiness; they will always expect
happy things and occasions in their life; have cordial and
harmonious relationships with friends, elder brothers, sons-inlaw and daughters-in-law.
If the 1 1th house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Sagittarius asc boms will have insincere friends, elder brothers,
sons-in-law and daughters-in-law; have to struggle for
fulfillment of their desires and ambitions and will remain greedy.
Mars is also the lord of houses 5 & 12 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) have happy and harmonious relationships, have sexual
pleasures with persons of their choice, enter into mutual
agreements for peace and will be interested in arts and
culture.
( ii ) become happy in secret contacts , invest in desired fields,
disclose and expose secret matters; succeed in research
attempts and have secret interests through friends
If ihe 1 1th house falls in the star of Swathi, ruled by Rahu, the
Sagittarius asc boms will maintain friendships with foreigners,
hide selfish motives in the name of public interest and they like
sadistic pleasures.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

(For the house significations of Rahu, kindly include the
significations of Jupiter.)
If the 1 1th house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Sagittarius asc boms will expect things legally, limit their
desires within the boundary of law, have true, sincere and
intelligent friends, sons-in-law or daughters-in law.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 1 & 4 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) always think about themselves, greedy, selfish, like to
taste variety of foods, have independent thought and
imagination and will make novel changes in their
activities.
(ii) purchase things as desired, purchase properties with
encumbrances; have frequent repairs in vehicles and
their belongings would get damaged.
XII House : Scorpio
Scorpio, the VIII sign of Kaalchakra is the XII house to
Sagittarius. So the Sagittarius asc boms will lose money and
valuables lent to others and will incur losses in investments.
Scorpio is a watery sign; so the Sagittarius asc boms will have
the capability to find water sources through research and would
like to invest on liquid articles.
Since Scorpio is a fixed sign, the Sagittarius asc boms will
permanently have links for secret activities, permanently lose
money or capital, make speedy and unexpected expenditure and
pennanently become inactive due to diseases.
Scorpio is. a house of Mars. So the Sagittarius asc boms will
involve in secret and illegal activities, adulteration, hoardings,
surgery in hospitals, service at prostitution dens, investigation
and smugglings.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Sagittarius asc boms will get troubles and worried in legal
surveillance, legal notices and threatening, income-tax raids,
seizure ofbenami properties by government, legal imprisonment,
Sagittarius 297

printing of fake currency and secret financial auditing etc.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 1 & 4 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will,
(i) lose physical energy, have inferiority complex, underestimate themselves, lack interest in materialistic things,
suffer due to allergy, lack imagination and self-care, face
hurdles in actions and cany memories of sad incidents
for long.
(ii) invest in things of their choice, have excellent vehicles
and tend to keep belongings in safe custody and in
secrecy.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Anuradha, ruled by Saturn,
the Sagittarius asc borns will take secret revenges,
misappropriate and hoard things , undertake secret and subversive
plans, do adulterations and go to the worst extent in their secret
activities.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 2 & 3 to Sagittarius. So the
Sagittarius asc boms will;
(i) regain outstanding money, suffer due to eye diseases
and digestive disorders; invest in gold and valuables and
will have secret sources of income.
(ii) make false propaganda and damaging publications in
magazines, lose energy, face breach of agreements and
negotiations, sell books, make mistakes in accounting,
lose memory power and will not get due information.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Jyeshta, ruled by Mercury,
the Sagittarius asc boms will improvise micro instruments
through secret research, keep secret notes and accounts, possess
secret documents and photographs and enter into secret
agreements.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 7 & 10 to Sagittarius. So
the Sagittarius asc boms will,
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

(i) choose foreigners as life/business partners, live in
separation from relatives, hate others and keep away
from opposite sex,
(ii) hold posts with secret responsibilities; undertake works
with heavy workloads and jobs with dual nature
(telephone operator cum receptionist, for example).
Besides the above, the residentships of planets could also be
included for comprehensive study.
Sagittarius

Capricorn
General nature of the sign Capricorn
It is an earthy, movable and feminine sign; even sign; white in
colour; semi-fruitful sign; short ascension; denotes thighs in body
parts; affectionate and shows love towards others; quick in
grasping, coward, self-pride, selfish, excessive interest in sexual
pleasures by nature, seas, private and isolated places, slums,
dirty & congested places, hospitals, graveyards, jails, mortuary,
cattle shops, caves & pits: X sign of Zodiac, house of Saturn,
north in direction, early mornings of a day, Pausa in Saka and
Thai in Tamil calendars*
ASCENDANT RELATED SIGNIFICATIONS OF CAPRICORN
(a) It is an earthy sign : Affectionate and would be affected
by sentiments.
(b) It is a movable sign : Intelligent, high and dignified
thoughts and active.
(c) It is a house of Saturn : Tend to tell more lies and
imaginary stories; obedient and sincere.
(d) It is X house of Kaalchakra .‘Naturally gain status and
prestige; dissatisfactions in sexual pleasures, inferiority
complex, self-pride and fond of publicity.
In the same manner, the remaining significations of Capricorn
could also be studied,
A stro/ogics of kaalchakra

The sign Capricorn extends over three stars leading to the
following body natures.
1 . Uttarashada : Owned by Sun: High percentage of calcium.
2. Shravana : Owned by Moon: Waterborne body
J. Dhanishta: Owned by Mars: Fleshy with excessive heat
in the body
If the Asc falls in the star of Uttarashada, the Capricorn asc
boms will be majestic in appearance with self-pride, prestige,
strong bones in the body, authoritativeness, leadership and
generosity.
Uttarashada is the star of Sun which is the lord of 8th house to
Capricorn. So the Capricorn asc boms will suffer due to stress
and pains, mental worries and agony, become inactive, face
disrespect, threatening, attempt suicide or murders, will be
punished or face damages in the organs of the body.
If the Asc falls in the star of Shravana, ruled by Moon, the
Capricorn asc boms will remain calm in appearance, quick
but inconsistent in actions, have fluctuating minds, have
excessive content of water/liquids in the body, have more
thoughts, reluctant to assume responsibilities, flexible, never
bother about false prestige and will carry team spirit.
Moon is the lord of 7th house to Capricorn. So the Capricorn
asc boms will depend on others, get due social recognition and
social relations and will abide by rules and conventions.
If the Asc falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars, the
Capricorn asc boms will be bold and courageous in their
actions, short-tempered and violent, will not respect others,
selfish, arrogant in appearance, rough and uncompromising, will
not listen to others, proud and will lack in discipline.
Mars is the lord of houses 4 & 1 1 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) show interest in education, have inclination to run
educational centres or libraries, show interest in grain
Capricorn

fields, gardens and like to maintain ponds or water
reservoirs.
(ii) be selfish, greedy, happy and joyful, counsellor of
societies, enjoy fortunes, gain success and would make
achievements, remain happy and flexible with others.
II House ; Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI sign of Kaalchakra is the II house to
Capricorn. So the Capricorn asc boms will tend to express
their pride, selfish attitude and greedy nature in their
conversations.
Aquarius is an airy sign. So the words and assurances given by
the Capricorn asc boms would not remain constant and would
fly in the direction of opportunistic winds. They would not stick
to their words by way of their self-pride.
Aquarius is a fixed sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will be
adamant and inflexible in their conversations.
Since Aquarius is a house of Saturn, the Capricorn asc boms
tend to speak lies fieely without any hesitation or being guiltyconscious.
Ill House : Pisces
Pisces, the XII sign to Kaalchakra is the ID house to Capricorn .
So the Capricorn asc boms will have secret mental worries;
have a tendency to leave home and family, have secret
communications and their minds will wander into secret things.
Pisces is a watery sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will have
fluctuating and wavering minds.
Pisces is a common sign meaning that the Capricorn asc bom
will have oscillating minds and will lack in needed courage.
Since Pisces is a house of Jupiter, the lord of houses 3 & 1 2 to
Capricorn, the Capricorn asc boms tend to face huge losses
due to their fluctuations of mind and by way of leaving their
residences.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

IV House : Aries
Aries, the I sign of Kaalchakra is the IV house to Capricorn.
So Capricorn asc boms will gain status by way of their
education and will excel in their education.
Aries is a fiery sign. So the behaviour of Capricorn asc boms
will not reflect the standards of their education.
Since Aries is a movable sign, the Capricorn asc boms will
show progress in their education and will gain authority through
their education.
Aries is a sign of Mars; so the Capricorn asc boms will face
struggles and hardships during the course of their studies but
will show arrogance and commitment towards their studies.
V House : Taurus
Taurus, the II sign of Kaalchakra is the V house to Capricorn.
So the Capricorn asc boms will be money-minded in the fields
of arts and culture and even in their love affairs and towards
their children.
Since Taurus is an earthy sign, the Capricorn asc boms will
be possessive and affectionate towards their children and in love
affairs; will show excessive interest in the fields of arts, culture
and theology.
Taurus is a fixed sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will be
blessed with children with long life and they will show sustained
interest in the fields of arts and culture. TheTrlove affairs would
last long.
Since Taurus is a house of Venus, the lord of houses 5 & 1 0 to
Capricorn, the Capricorn asc boms will gain status and prestige
in the fields of arts and culture but would be dissatisfied by
their children and love affairs.
VI House : Gemini
Gemini, the ID sign of Kaalchakra is the VI house to Capricorn.
So the Capricorn asc boms will have diseases in sensory organs,
Capricorn

blood vessels and in nerves; gain success through confidence
and courage.
Since Gemini is an airy sign, the Capricorn asc boms will
suffer due to respiratory disorders. They will gain success with
pride.
Since Gemini is a common sign, the Capricorn asc bpms may
have to face frequent litigations and problems of ill health.
Since Gemini is a house of Mercury, the lord of houses 6 & 9
to Capricorn, the Capricorn asc boms will suffer due to
physical changes and litigations in religious service and may
have affairs with servants.
VII House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV sign of Kaalchakra is the VI l house to Capricorn.
So the Capricorn asc boms will often meet with persons
belonging to higher social strata such as landlords, influential
persons and academicians.
Since Cancer. is a watery sign, the Capricorn asc boms will
get desired benefits out of opposite sex..
Cancer is a movable sign; so the Capricorn asc boms will
tend to maintain sustained and prolonged social relationships.
Since Cancer is a house of Moon, the Capricorn asc boms
will often meet with persons of wavering minds.
VIII House : Leo
Leo, the V sign of Kaalchakra is the VI II house to Capricorn.
So the Capricorn asc boms will face disrespect in the fields of
arts and culture and in love affairs.
Since Leo is a fieiy sign, the Capricorn asc boms will be shorttempered, arrogant, meet with fire accidents and face problems
subsequent to quarrels.
Leo is a fixed sign; so the problems of the Capricorn asc boms
will remain unsolved for long.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Since Leo is a house of Sun, the Capricorn asc boms will face
problems or disrespect by government and they will be troubled
by excessive heat in the body.
IX House : Virgo
Virgo, the VI sign of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Capricorn;
the Capricorn asc boms wifi become successful in their higher
studies and especially in the fields related to traditions, culture
and management.
Since Virgo is an earthy sign, the Capricorn asc boms will
have research mind and extract work from their sub-ordinates
by encouraging them and through pleasant manners.
Virgo is a common sign; so the Capricorn asc boms will
frequently undertake journeys and research ventures.
Since Virgo is a house of Mercury, the ruler of houses 6 & 9,
the Capricorn asc borns will not hesitate to assume
responsibilities, have international contacts, become lawyers
and counsellors and will study medical sciences.
X House ; Libra
Libra, the VII sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Capricorn,
So the Capricorn asc boms will gain status through public
relations, through wife and business partners.
libra is an airy sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will earn
name and fame, status and prestige but would show self-pride
in their professional fields.
libra is a movable sign. So the status and prestige of the
Capricorn asc boms will always be in an upward trend.
Since it is a house of Venus, the ruler of houses 5 & 1 0 to
Capricorn , they will get due social recognition in the fields of
arts and culture.
Capricorn

XI House : Scorpio
Scorpio, the VIII sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house to
Capricorn; so the Capricorn asc boms will fulfil their desires
only after prolonged struggles*
Scorpio is a watery sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will get
unexpected gains in the process Of fulfilling their ambitions and
desires.
Scorpio is a fixed sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will carry
long standing desires permanently.
Since Scorpio is a house of Mars , the locd of houses 4 & 1 1 to
Capricorn, the Capricorn asc boms will give displeasures
during sexual relationships.
XII House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the, IX sign of Kaalchakra is the XII house to
Capricorn. So the Capricorn asc boms will have a mind to
illegally possess and hoard gold and valuables and will have
secret illegal affairs.
Sagittarius is a fiery sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will be
arrogant in their illegal activities.
Sagittarius is a common sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will
spend too much for endowment services and for maintaining
temples.
Since Sagittarius is a house of Jupiter, the lord of houses 3 &
12, the Capricorn asc boms may be imprisoned due to illegal
affairs.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

SIGNIFICATIONS OF CAPRICORN UNRELATED TO ASCENDANT
II House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI sign of Kaalchakra is the II house to
Capricorn. So the Capricorn asc boms will be greedy in
financial matters. They tend to earn as they wish and would
always be money minded. They will try to justify and establish
false ideas into real.
Aquarius is an airy sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will tend
to make money out of their skill of eloquence. They are very
clear in their speech regarding financial matters.
Aquarius is a fixed sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will
permanently hold gold, valuables, diamonds, money, costly
articles and documents.
Aquarius is a house of Saturn. So the Capricorn asc boms
will remain as misers, belong to salaried class, will not hesitate
to tell lies in financial matters, have a tendency to seize
belongings of others and possess costly but ancient wooden
articles.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars, the
Capricorn asc boms will tell lies, will be spendthrifts, dishonest
and intend to seize others’ money, courageous or arrogant in
conversations, hurt the feelings of others in their speech and
make false remarks by using filthy and arrogant language.
Mars is the lord of the houses 4 & II to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) have excessive productions in the body and gain from
education, fruits and vegetables, grain fields, farms,
educational centres, libraries and leases of ponds and
water reservoirs.
( ii) make profits with greedy nature and in easy means; gain
out of societies, achievements, romance, fortunes,
success and by entertaining and engaging others.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Shathabi sham, ruled by Rahu,
Capricorn "307

the Capricorn asc boms will speak calmly by assuming
themselves as experts in their respective fields, possess money
of foreigners or foreign exchange, guide foreigners and will get
foreign scholarships.
(Rahu would act like Jupiter in the house significations.)
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter,
the Capricorn asc borns will earn money in higher
denominations, will be paid higher salaries, possess gold and
valuables and may become bankers or jewellery shop owners.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 3 & 12 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) speak intellectually, gain through writings and
publications, courageous acts, intelligent arguments,
information, negotiable instruments and transfers; gain
from works of their mental inclination, show interest in
monetary profits, gain self-confidence, adapt themselves
for economic gains.
( ii) get profits out of secret activities, gain by way of losing
organs or by donating blood, gain through savings,
investments, secret plans and treasures and regain lost
goods.
HI House : Pisces
Pisces, theXII sign of Kaalchakra is thedll house to Capricorn.
So the Capricorn asc boms will carry secret mental worries,
maintain secrecy in information and communication,
agreements, letters and in journeys.
Since Pisces is a watery sign, the Capricorn asc boms will
quickly grasp things but with fluctuating minds.
Pisces is a common sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will have
fluctuations in their courage and confidence, intelligence,
functioning of the body, sensory organs and blood vessels,
informations and communications, transfers and writings.
Since Pisces is a sign of Jupiter, the Capricorn asc boms will
308 Astrologies of kaalchakra

deal in documents , stamps , cheques , monetary negotiations , true
information, legal agreements, legal orders and notices.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Poorvabadra mled by Jupiter,
then the Capricorn asc boms will deal in documents, stamps,
cheques, monetary negotiations, true information, legal
agreements, legal orders and notices.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 3 & 12 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) get press publicity, clearly show intelligence and mental
attitude in their writings, express own thoughts, have
debating talents, encourage others through their writings
and will show confidence and mental stability.
( ii) communicate on secret activities, enter into agreements
for donating organs of the body, lose evidences kept in
secret, receive documents against borrowings, lose
savings certificates, get details for secret activities, lose
their own properties and permanently get separated from
their family.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Uttarabadra, ruled by Saturn,
the Capricorn asc boms will be fearful, undertake short
journeys, become writers, write anonymous letters, forge
documents, change themselves and may have to walk long
distances.
Saturn is the lord of houses 1 & 2 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) record their self-thoughts, have courageous thoughts and
actions, proper functioning of sensory organs, blood
vessels and neuro system, have physical strength, have
independent thoughts and would like to show their
strength.
(ii) have writing skills, write truths, possess grasping power
and deal in negotiable instruments.
If the 3rd cusp falls in the star of Re vathi, mled by Mercury, the
Capricorn asc boms will write stories and articles and will be
Capricorn

document writers, advertisers, postmen, clerks, ambassadors,
communicators, electricians, tax collectors, proof readers &
brokers.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 6 & 9 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) gain success in competitive examinations, render
medical counselling, sell food items, medicines, medical
equipments, sellers or tailors of garments, housekeepers,
lawyers, pay-bill clerks, rent collectors, accountants,
postmen and lessors.
(ii) enter into honest agreements, earn fame, exchange
money, get certificate for higher education, will become
messengers, sign agreements for research works,
negotiate for endowment works, have international
contacts, will become clerks in legal departments, work
as mediators, give guidance about ancient monuments,
work for sales-tax accounts and have government
contacts in religious services etc.
IV House : Aries
Aries, the first sign of Kaalchakra is the IV house to Capricorn.
So the Capricorn asc boms will lead in the fields of lands,
houses, vehicles, education, production and machinery; like to
install huge industries; may live in apartments and in the first
part of amain road.
Aries is a fieiy sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will woik
with fire and live in congested places and fiercely involve in
their studies.
Aries is a movable sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will have
consistent development and improvement in their education,
lands, vehicles, machinery, houses and belongings.
Aries is the house of Mars; So the Capricorn asc boms will
fiercely involve themselves in studies, show more interest in
holding properties and may own agricultural lands, cattle,
machineiy used for chemicals , fertilizers and huge industries.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

If the 4,h house falls in the star of Aswani, ruled by Ketu, the
Capricorn asc boms will own properties with litigations seize
others’ properties or treasures and manufacture forged or
substandard goods or drugs.
Ketu would act like Mercury. Mercury is the lord of houses 6
& 9 to Capricorn. So the Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) run centres for competitive examinations and medical
laboratories, undertake caterings or tailoring, produce
medicines or medical equipments, become money
lenders against properties, accountants, purchasers,
lessors, sellers of hide and wool, organize medical
camps and live in rented houses.
( ii) gain contracts against properties, earn fame in education,
enter into barter exchanges, become teachers for higher
classes, importers, maintain relationships with
foreigners, run research centres, produce artificial
organs, gain foreign subsidy, form trusts for maintaining
temple properties, serve as clerks in courts or panchayat
boards and become protectors of ancient monuments.
If the 4* cusp falls in the star of Bharani, ruled by Venus, the
Capricorn asc boms will own forts, palaces, flower or vegetable
gardens, manufacture cosmetics, glassware, plastics and films,
run schools for constructions, vehicles, arts and culture.
Venus is also the lord of houseS 5 & 10 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(7) deal in company shares, Vedic, spiritual granthas,
politics, sports, poems, stories, articles, trainings in the
fields of arts and culture, sports centres, auditoriums,
marriage registration offices, manufacturing of artistic
goods, prostitution dens or asylums and places of
religious rituals.
(ii) hold honorary, administrative and responsible posts,
become industrial owners, in-charge of government
documents, earn name and feme in professional fields
and heads of departments.
Capricorn

If the 4th house falls in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the
Capricorn asc boms will live in government quarters, serve in
government buildings, possess village common lands, get
government pattas, possess government vehicles, own
agricultural lands, wells, ponds, water tanks, grain fields, take
lease of hills, forests, serve in housing or automobile divisions
of the government.
Sun is the lord of 8th house to Capricorn. So the Capricorn
asc boms will seize properties by harassing others, have
litigations in properties, indulge in robberies, reproduce with
scraps, own damaged buildings, live in dirty places, work at
operation theaters, slaughter houses, accident wards,
mortuary, graveyards, anti-corruption wings, vehicle
insurance sector, forged goods etc.
V House : Taurus
Taurus, the n sign of Kaalchakra, is the V house to Capricorn.
The Capricorn asc boms will gain from their love affairs,
through their children and in religious activities; however they
will never get satisfied. Their first child will suffer due to health
problems.
Since Taurus is an earthy sign, the Capricorn asc boms will
be interested in the fields of arts and culture, will be affectionate
in their love affairs.
Since Taurus is a fixed sign, the Capricorn asc boms will have
wisdom and knowledge, artistic interests; they will show
sustained interest in their love affairs and religious faiths; they
will be blessed with children.
Venus is the lord of Taurus. So the Capricorn asc boms will
show interest in the fields of arts, culture, politics and astrology;
they will excel as best speakers and pundits; they may not hesitate
to involve in prostitution or entertaining others.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Krittiga ruled by Sun, the
Capricorn asc boms will involve in government owned temples,
government hotels, politics, religion and government sponsored
A strologicsof kaalch akra

arts or sports festivals, details of government subsidies and in
chess game.
Sun is the lord of 8th house to Capricorn. So the Capricorn
asc boms will involve in rape, face, disrespect, seizures of
properties, punishments, repair old musical instruments, live in
dirty places and get cheated.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Rohini, ruled by Moon, the
Capricorn asc boms will excel in character roles in films and
dramas will be poets, thinkers, cricket players; will be quick in
sexual pleasures, associate with recreation clubs, sports clubs
and will be blessed with children.
Moon is the ruler of the 7th house to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will maintain cordial and harmonious
relations with society, get musical instruments as donations,
serve in guest houses, live in government quarters for artists,
associate themselves with voluntary organizations and will marry
the girl or boy of their own choice.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Mrigasira, ruled by Mars , the
Capricorn asc boms will be arrogant during copulations, have
children with more interest in sexual pleasures, will not hesitate
to act in obscene scenes and will be atheists, sculptors, painters
or cabaret dancers.
Mars is also the lord of houses 4 & 1 1 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
( i ) have excessive energy production in the body, work for
artistic trainings, produce nutrition foods, livestock or
musical instruments or cosmetics, work in journals and
arrange music and dance programs.
(ii) construct lodges, learn aits with commitment, form
branches of unions or societies, enter into fortunate
agreements, enjoy luck in lotteries, purchase properties
with litigations, spend time with friends of their choice
with joy and will construct artistically beautiful
buildings.
Capricorn

VI House : Gemini
Gemini, the III sign of the Kaalchakra is the VI house of
Capricorn. So the Capricorn asc boms will frequently meet
with court cases; serve in information and communication
departments and in the fields of writings, agreements and
contracts; they will be explicitly courageous and confident in
their work.
Gemini is an airy sign; So the Capricorn asc boms will suffer
due to respiratory disorders; serve in gas or petroleum, radio,
air force, dye companies and research centres.
Gemini is a common sign; So the Capricorn asc boms will see
fluctuations in their health problems, food, dress, medicines,
loans and. borrowings, success, court cases, digestive system
and in service.
Gemini is a house of Mercury. So the Capricorn asc boms
would mostly be accountants, money collectors, printers,
computer operators, neurologists, nurses, compounders, office
clerks, labour contractors, money lenders on installment basis
and serve in commercial centres.
If the 6th house falls in the star of Mrigasira, ruled by Mars , the
Capricorn asc boms will suffer due to muscle pains and diseases
caused by excessive heat, serve in industries or medical
departments, will be in the fields of catering or tailoring and
they will have hard workers as their servants,
Mats is also the lord of houses 4 & 1 1 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms,
(i) will have excessive production in the body, serve in the
fields of lands , houses , vehicles and buildings , prepare food
items, maintain livestock, work for daily wages, as school
teachers, produce house-hold appliances, furniture and
make arrangements for music and drama stages.
(ii) could win only after struggles; stay in lodges, serve in
societies, gain success in court cases against societies,
have fortunate opportunities and employment
opportunities, make achievements in service, will be able
314 Astrologies of kaalchakra

to rightly diagnose diseases and will be able to employ
servants of their choice.
If the 6th house falls in the star Qf Arudra, ruled by Rahu, the
Capricorn asc boms will suffer due to respiratory problems,
will be fond of taking excessive food, serve in drug industries,
woik as anaesthetist or respiratory assistant, deal in drugs and
intoxicants.
(Please include house significations of Jupiter for Rahu).
If the 6th house falls in the star of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter,
the Capricorn asc boms will serve in large industries, banks,
preside over functions, fond of fatty food items, suffer due to
diseases in blood cells, acquire loans through popular
personalities, will be bank cashiers, medical officers, lawyers
and workers in legal departments.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 3 & 12 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) get press publicity about their success, publish
professional books, serve in advertisement, information
and communication departments, perform works to their
strength, enter into agreements of employment, receive
appointment or transfer orders and undertake works of
their choice.
(ii) acquire loans through secret plans, clear debts by
acquiring further loans, will be able to liquidate
investments, will become doctors; face court cases filed
by separated member of the family, face breakeven in
financial status and become inactive due to ill health.
Vn House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV sign of Kaalchakra is the VII house to Capricorn.
So the life partners of Capricorn asc borns will have
dissatisfactions in all walks of life and will become experts in
their chosen fields.
Cancer is a watery sign; so the life/business partners of
Capricorn

Capricorn boms would be god-fearing and the Capricorn asc
boms would gain out of them.
Cancer is a movable sign. So the relationships between the
Capricorn asc boms and their spouses/business partners would
progressively develop with time.
Cancer is a house of Moon* So the life/business partners of
Capricorn asc boms will be young, energetic and quick but
with wavering minds and will like to be quick during their
copulations.
If the 7th house falls in the star* of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter,
the Capricorn asc boms will have calm and adjustable life/
business partners and establish contacts with popular
personalities as their business customers .
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 3 & 12 to Capricorn* So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(I) get press-publicity with the assistance of others, publish
books on social service, become advertisers, spend
energy for the cause of others, enter into agreements of
meetings, write letters of recommendation, issue news
of transition or change, work in the fields wherein others
are also inclined, register or gain confidence through
others, write petitions, serve in information and
communication departments and may marry neighbour.
(ii) make secret planning , collect loans , will be thieves , give
troubles to others, have secret contacts, gain capital or
investment firm others, incur losses for the cause of
others and will be threatened by persons who know their
secrets.
1 f the 7,h house falls in the star of Pushy am, ruled by Saturn, the
spouses/business partners of Capricorn asc boms will be
undisciplined, insincere, liars and doubting natured people.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 1 & 2 to Capricorn* So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

( i) abide by collective thoughts; listen to others; suffer due
to diseases in kidneys, uterus and abdomen regions; gain
success through joint ventures; be inactive due to lack
of immunity; face increasing opposition , unable to take
independent decisions, induce competitions by way of
their actions and many persons who are well known to
them.
(ii) receive financial assistance from others, gain gold and
valuables with the assistance of others, get profitable
dealings with banks, lack digestive capacity, do things
as help, serve for mare than the needs of others and will
become a part of their family.
If the 7th house falls in the star of Aslesha, ruled by Mercury,
the spouses/business partners of Capricorn asc borns will be
clever, witty, cunning natural and research minded people and
excel in academics.
Mercury is the lord of houses 6 & 9 to Capricorn, So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) often meet with bank officers, money lenders, patients,
doctors, cooks, lawyers and would suffer due to
contagious diseases.
(ii) often meet with leaders, foreigners, exporters, judges,
priests, teachers and people with social recognition.
VIII House : Leo
Leo, the V sign of Kaalchakra is the Yin house to Capricorn.
So the Capricorn asc boms will lose their reputation and respect
in their love affairs, religious rituals and through their children.
Leo is a fiery sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will face damages
in their bones; they may be threatened or murdered; they may
often meet with fire accidents and they may sometimes become
violent.
Leo is a fixed sign; so the Capricorn asc boms will have a long
life; their worries, stress, pains, disrespect and loss of name and
feme would last long.
Capricorn

Leo is a house of Sun. So the properties of Capricorn asc bom
will be seized by the government; may misappropriate
government money; may be punished by government on criminal
charges; meet with fire accidents and they may enter politics
but would subsequently quit.
If the 8* house falls in the star of Makha, ruled by Ketu, the
Capricorn asc born swill get into illegal activities and get
subsequent punishments, will not hesitate to involve in thefts,
subversive activities and harassments; black-mailing and
rumouf-mongering.
Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of houses 6 & 9 to
Capricorn. So the Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) face problems in competitive examination centres , face
increase in their diseases due to maltreatment, acidity,
side effects of medicines and negligence of nurses, suffer
due to allergy of food and dresses, meet with accidents
in manufacturing of medicines and face allegations in
service records.
(ii) face troubles in port contracts , imports , closure of offices
for international agreements, teaching profession, due
to cancellation of transfer orders, fire accidents in
research laboratories, closure of religious endowments,
cheatings in temple charities, punishments by courts,
splits in panchayat boards and damages in ancient
monuments.
If the 8* house fallsin the star of Poorvapalguni, ruled by Venus,
the Capricorn asc boms will be put into disrespect and their
reputation will be spoilt by women; kidnap, rape and threaten
women; will be troubled by women and often receive bad news
through women.
Venus is also the lord of houses 5 & 10 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) meet with accidents in music or drama stages, involve
in rape, prostitution and consequently lose reputation,
face disrespect in the fields of short-stories, articles,
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

politics, arts, culture, sports and misbehaviour in dance
programs or in liquor bars or holy places wherein
religious rituals are performed;
(ii) face allegations in the substantiation process in service,
involve in corruption and misappropriation while
holding high offices, lose name and fame and face
hurdles in their promotion process.
If the 8th house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the properties of Capricorn asc boms will be seized by the
government; they may misappropriate government money;
punished by the government on criminal charges; meet with
fire accidents and may enter but would subsequently quit from
politics.
Sun is also the lord of 8th house to Capricorn. So the Capricorn
asc boms will face untimely death, may be murdered or harassed;
may enter into quarrels, face stress and pains, may become
traitors, involve in all kinds of illegal activities, will be hanged
to death, take revenge, will seize properties of others and opt
for anti-social means.
IX House : Virgo
Virgo, the VI sign of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Capricorn .
So the Capricorn asc boms will suffer from venereal diseases,
face litigations in foreign journeys , serve in finance departments
or foreign embassies and may have illegal affairs.
Virgo is an earthy sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will be
polygamists, have international contacts, knowledge and
research capacity; will not like to share their knowledge.
Virgo is a common sign; higher education, journeys, life at
foreign nat ions, research, confidence and illegal affairs of the
Capricorn asc boms wilt not last long and would see many
fluctuations.
Virgo is a sign of Mercury. So the Capricorn asc boms will
serve as clerks in research centres, high school teachers,
statisticians, counsellors, lawyers, mathematicians, agents of
imports and exports, cashiers in government treasury and in
Capricorn 319

information, communication and advertising departments.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, mled by Sun,
the Capricorn asc boms will involve themselves in the fields
of religion, higher education, foreign embassies, finance
departments, government research centres and foreign
organisations.
Sun is the lord of 8th house to Capricorn. So the Capricorn
asc boms will unexpectedly meet with government seizures,
damages in properties and government buildings, stealing
government documents, top leaders of the nation, death, quitting
politics, government punishment, death penalty, removal of
encroachments, charge-sheet, criminal activities , fire accidents.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Hastha, mled by Moon, the
Capricorn asc boms will have faster research capacity, will be
able to discover new things and run private research centres,
excel in higher education and may become professors, have
illegal affairs with widows and contacts with ships or money
lending.
Moon is also the lord of 7th house to Capricorn* So the
Capricorn asc boms will show discipline in social service
centres, make friendships with government officials, get needed
government recognition to their social clubs, may remarry, enter
into second partnerships and may have sexual affair with sister
of wife.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Chitra, mled by Mars , the
Capricorn asc boms will study agriculture, geology, machines,
history and archaeology; will become politicians, head masters,
transport owners, landlords, criminal lawyers and judges.
Mars is also the lord of houses 4 & 1 1 to Capricorn. So the
-Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) study teacher training, have ancestral properties, have
properties in foreign countries , import goods , run schools
or colleges or research laboratories, possess automobiles,
involve in manufacturing process, become trustees of
temple properties and own grain fields.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

( ii) study diploma courses, hold honorary posts, gain success
in research attempts, win things through greedy nature,
have co-operation with societies, gain success in the
agreements with societies, have fortunate opportunities,
make achievements in research ventures, find out right
ways and will be fond of taking nutritious foods.
X House : libra
Libra, the VII sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Capricorn.
So the Capricorn asc boms will work in the professional fields
of social sector, labour contracts, and supervisory cadres.
libra is an airy sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will work in
investigation departments or air force or air lines or radio.
Libra is a movable sign. Profession, status and prestige of the
Capricorn asc boms will always be in an upward trend. They
may get higher posts one after another in their profession.
Libra is a house of Venus. So the Capricorn asc boms will
gain status in the fields of arts and culture, perform high ranking
and luxurious professions, involve in the fields of music and
dance as professionals and may deal with intoxicating goods.
If the 10* house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Capricorn asc boms will serve in industries; handle fire in their
profession, land, houses, police, military, administrative offices
and as responsible officers.
Mars is the lord of houses 4 & 11 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) be in manufacturing fields, involve in agriculture in grain
fields, fruit gardens or farms, building contracts,
carpentry, automobile repair and maintenance, cleanings
of water tanks, electricity production, fertilizers and
chemical manufacturing and will be in the fields of
boilers and stores and godowns.
(ii) serve in societies, enter into agreements on behalf of
societies, involve in professions of their choice, have
fortunate opportunities in professional fields, make
Capricorn

achievements in their profession and modernize their
profession.
If the 10th house falls in the star of Swathi, ruled by Rahu, the
Capricorn asc boms will work in prisons, investigation
departments, international centres of trade and banking and
employment exchanges for foreign opportunities, deal in
minerals and will become wardens, shoe makers, translators
and pirates with the use of computers.
(For the house significations of Rahu, please include the
significations of Jupiter,)
If the 1 0th house falls in the star of Vishakha, mled by Jupiter,
the Capricorn asc boms will be responsible officers in big
organisations and volunteer in banking services, run children
welfare organisations, hold honorary posts, work in gold mines
and protect national properties and ancient monuments.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 3 & 12 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
( i ) get publicity as industrialists in press , work in the fields
of information, communication, advertisements,
agreements and lease, publish books and will be
messengers, printers, brokers, writers, bill collectors,
accountants, electrical workers, plumbers, assistants and
sellers of goods.
( ii) do business witfi the use of secret contacts^ dual natured
professions, incur and invest on profession, have secret
affairs through new profession and will do research
oriented professions.
XI House : Scorpio
Scorpio, the VIII sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house to
Capricorn. So the Capricorn asc boms will fulfil their desires
only after struggles and through criminal means.
Scorpio is a watery sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will have
the tendency to assist others with happy mind by showing
affinity.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Scorpio is a fixed sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will have
strong and permanent desires and expectations, long lasting
happiness and surplus vitamin and will be blessed with sons-inlaw or daughters- in-law.
Scorpio is a house of Mars. So the Capricorn asc boms will
have insincere friends or sons-in-law or daughters-in-law,
become successful and fulfil their own desires only after
struggles and show arrogance in fulfilling their desires.
If the XI house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Capricorn asc boms will have sincere and generous friends
or sons-in-law or daughters-in-law with great wisdom and
foresight and will get fulfilled with their desires only through
legal means.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 3 & 12 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) increase their strength, get positive press publicity , show
interest in the fields of information and communication,
write books, receive messages, audit accounts, increase
the power of memory and enter into sales agreement.
( ii ) become happy after secret relations and contacts , invest
in the fields of their choice, make achievements in
research fields, have secret interests through friends and
reveal secrets.
If the 1 1th house falls in the star of Anuradha, mled by Saturn,
the Capricorn asc boms will have lazy, undisciplined and
dishonest friends, sons-in-law and daughters-in-law, purchase
properties with litigations and get things done in untruthful ways
and means.
Saturn is the lord of houses 1 & 2 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) always think about them and remain selfish, proud, have
independent thoughts and imagination, have new
changes in their activities and excellent functioning of
the body.

(ii) make profits through their pleasant speech, gain gold,
valuables and costly articles as expected, gain profits
from friends, sons-in-law or daughters-in law, use
circumstances to their choices.
If the 1 Ith house falls in the star of Jyeshta, ruled by Mercury,
the Capricorn asc boms will like micro instruments, will be
able to read books of their choice and have witty friends, elder
brothers, sons-in-law and daughters-in law.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 6 & 9 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) become successful in their attempts, have diseases
caused by vitamin deficiency, join in service of their
choice, have opportunities and scope of success and will
be able to diagnose diseases and by doing works of their
interest.
(ii) establish and maintain contacts with social service
centres or voluntary organisations, higher officials and
foreign nations, will be polygamists, undertake foreign
journeys of their choice, study courses of their choice
and enter into agreements.
XII House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the IX sign of Kaalchakra is the XU house to
Capricorn. So the Capricorn asc boms will not be able to regain
stolen goods, outstanding money, gold and valuables and
investments and will not hesitate to go for illegal activities and
secret affairs.
Sagittarius is a fiery sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will
have secret interests and will involve in sabotages and will
become masochists.
Sagittarius is a common sign. So the Capricorn asc boms will
not carry on with their secret activities, making undue
expenditures and extravagant investments and face temporary
malfunctioning in the body to make them inactive.
Sagittarius is a sign of Jupiter. So the Capricorn asc boms
324 Astrologies of kaalchakra

will face secret threatening and imprisonments by law, will be
raided by income-tax authorities, face seizure of properties by
government, undertake secret financial reviews and may involve
in printing fake currency.
If the 12* house falls in the star of Moola, ruled by Ketu, the
Capricorn asc boms will have secret interests in illegal and
subversive activities, will secretly take revenges and would carry
on with secret plans.
Ketu would act like Mercury which is the lord of houses 6 & 9
to Capricorn. So the Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) have secret successes over enemies, fall unconscious
due to food allergy, shift to jobs of their choice, suffer
due to inability to identify diseases and could find scope
for success only after making extravagant expenditures.
(ii) incur expenditures for social service institutions, have
illegal affairs, show secret involvements in public service
organisations, secret multiple affairs, undergo foreign
journeys, face troubles in higher education, undertake
research education, enter into secret agreements and
establish secret contacts with foreign nations.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Poorvashada, ruled by Venus,
the Capricorn asc boms will have secret activities through
romance, have secret marriage, secret agreements with women
and will hide and plan things.
Venus is also the lord of houses 5 & 10 to Capricorn. So the
Capricorn asc boms will,
(i) face breaches in cordial relations and in agreements for
peace, face troubles in mutual agreements, make
expenditures in arts and culture and may have sexual
pleasures with persons disliked by them.
(ii) hold posts with secret responsibilities or with heavy
work loads and with double-natured jobs.
If the 1 2th house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun,
the Capricorn asc boms will face seizures of properties by
Capricorn 325

government, face damages in properties, live in government
buildings, have unauthorised possession of government
documents, quit politics, will be punished by government such
as framing of charge sheets with criminal charges, removal of
encroachments or being hanged and meet with fire accidents.
Sun is the lord of 8* house to Capricorn. So the Capricorn
asc boms will face troubles in all their secret activities leading
to undue expenditures, will face disrespect, will become
unconscious, will face losses and may have to hastily leave their
native places.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

Aquarius
General nature of the sign Aquarius
It is a windy, fixed and masculine sign; single and lifeless sign;
three-legged sign; dark green in colour; pot shaped and semi*
fruitful sign; short ascension; denotes knees in body parts; sign
of quick grasping, coward in nature, consistent efforts and lack
of faith in others; main roads, hallways, pits, unequal places,
hiding places, place of keeping radio, TV & refrigerator and
sandy regions in places. XI sign of Zodiac. House of Saturn,
north in direction, noon of a day, Maka in Saka or Masi in Tamil
calendars.
ASCENDANT! RELATED SIGNIFICATIONS OF AQUARIUS
(ci) It is a windy sign : Self-pride, sportive in nature and
lack of needed seriousness, lean in structure, acting as
if affectionate.
(b) It is a fixed sign : Static mind, long standing beauty,
consistent efforts, inflexible character.
(c) It is a house of Saturn : Secret activities, masochists
and research minded.
(d) It is XI house ofKaalchakra : Proud, fond of happiness,
joyful, friendly, encouraging and surplus of vitamins.
In the same manner, the remaining significations of Aquarius
could also be studied.
Aquarius

The sign Aquarius extends over three stars leading to the
following body natures.
7. Dhanishta: Owned by Mars : Fleshy body with
excessive heat in the body
2. Shathabisham: Owned by Rahu; Plump body.
3 . Poorvabadra : Owned by Jupiter : Fatty and stout body .
If the Asc falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars, the
Aquarius asc boms will be bold and courageous in actions,
short-tempered, have long-lasting anger, will not respect and
listen to others, selfish, have excessive prevalence of heat in
their body, arrogant in appearance with self-pride, indiscipline
and violent by nature, and Will remain inflexible.
Mars is also the lord of houses 3 & 1 0 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) have intelligence, self-confidence, self-efforts, mental
courage , inclination towards studies , interest in all fields ,
self-changing and adaptability, capacity to act and
communicative by nature.
( ii) have unsatisfied mind, status, prestige, leadership, name
and fame, counselling and responsibilities,
administrative capacity and honours.
If the Asc falls in the star of Shathabisham, ruled by Rahu, the
Aquarius asc boms will have great and big ideas and thoughts,
undue growths in the body, problems in respiratoiy system, fond
of food and addictions to intoxicants.
Rahu will carry significations similar to that of Jupiter.
If the Asc falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter, the
Aquarius asc boms will be honest, sincere, soft-natured, calm,
adaptable, flexible, self-confident persons with self- thoughts and
with due honours.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 2 & 1 1 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
Astrologies of kaalchakra

(i) have the skills of expression, increasing activities,
digestive capacity and truthful in nature.
( it ) be greedy, selfish but joyful, counsellor of societies; have
desires and fortunes, will be successful and would make
achievements and will remain happy and flexible with
others.
II House : Pisces
Pisces, the XII sign of Kaalchakra is the II house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms will speak mostly about secrets,
expenditures and investments.
Pisces is a watery sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will lack
clarity in their speech though they are capable of speaking about
wisdom and Moksha, the eternal world of almighty.
Since Pisces is a common house, speech, power of eyes,
digestive capacity, gold, valuables, costly articles and documents
will not remain long and would see fluctuations for the Aquarius
boms.
Since Pisces is a house of Jupiter, the Aquarius asc boms will
be explicit in their desires in their speech.
III House : Aries
Aries, the first sign of Kaalchakra is the HI house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms will lead in all walks of life and will
show self-pride.
Aries is a fiery sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will be
courageous, self-confident and arrogant.
Aries is a movable sign. Courage, self-confidence, intelligence,
activities, functioning of sensory organs and blood vessels,
ability to communicate, mind to change places will have growing
in nature.
Aries is a house of Mars; so the Aquarius asc borns will have
increased courage and confidence, involve in document
cheatings, enter into unfair agreements with impractical tenns
and conditions. They will be aggressively intelligent.
^quariuF

IV House ; Taurus
Taurus, the II sign of Kaalchakra is the IV house to Aquarius*
So the Aquarius asc boms will gain eloquence through
education. They will study finance related courses.
Taurus is an earthy sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will be
simple without pride though they are well educated.
Taurus is a fixed sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will show
steady progress in their financial life. They may study agriculture
courses.
Taurus is a house of Venus. So the Aquarius asc boms may
study automobile engineering and may face hurdles in their
education.
V House : Gemini
Gemini, the III sign of Kaalchakra is the V house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms will think differently in the fields of
arts and culture. They will have artistic talents as writers.
Gemini is a windy sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will have
research mind in the fields of arts and culture and they will
have needed interest.
Gemini is a common sign. So the interests of Aquarius asc
boms in the fields of arts and culture would face fluctuations.
Gemini is a house of Mercury . So the Aquarius asc boms will
face disrespects in the fields of arts and culture and will be
interested in multiple fields of arts and culture.
VI House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV sign of Kaalchakra is the VI house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms will have diseases in the chest and
in lungs. They will gain success in their life with the confidence
gained from their academic qualifications.
Cancer is a watery sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will suffer
due to water-borne diseases and will gain success with selfpride.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Cancer is a movable sign. So the diseases and litigations of the
Aquarius asc boms will soon be over.
Since it is a house of Moon, the Aquarius asc boms will face
litigations in lands, vehicles and properties and will have increase
in body weight.
VII House : Leo
Leo, the V sign of Kaalchakra is the VD house to Aquarius. So
the Aquarius asc boms will meet artists and persons with selfpride.
Since Leo is a fiery sign, the Aquarius asc boms will often
disagree with their opponents and will enter into egoistic
arguments.
Leo is a fixed sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will have long
lasting social relationships. Since it is a house of Sun, the
Aquarius asc boms will often meet persons with steady and
stable minds and links with government.
Vlll House : Virgo
Virgo, the VI house to Kaalchakra is the VIII house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms will face disrespect through
borrowings, litigations, service, foods and diseases.
Virgo is an earthy sign. So the lives of Aquarius asc boms will
be endangered due to natural calamities.
Virgo is a common sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will face
same problems repeatedly and suffer troubles both physically
and mentally.
Virgo is a sign of Mercury. So the Aquarius asc boms will
face disrespect due to uncles and suffer due to neurological
disorders.
IX House : Libra
Libra, the VD sign of Kaalchakra is the I X house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms will academically excel in social
and legal or public relations.
’Aquarius’ 331

Libra is a windy sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will have a
research mind about society.
Libra is a movable sign. So the educational qualifications,
research mind and intention to undertake foreign journeys of
the Aquarius asc boms will show growing natures.
Libra is a sign of Venus. So the Aquarius asc boms will have
research education, will have links with education centres, will
be talented in education and would become as counsellors or
lawyers.
X House : Scorpio
Scorpio, the VM sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms will spoil their reputation and respect
in their profession. They would opt for illegal means and
substandard ways in their profession.
Since Scorpio is a watery sign, the Aquarius asc boms will
behave improperly by using their name, status and authority.
Scorpio is a fixed sign. So the authority and status of the
Aquarius asc boms will remain stable.
Since Scorpio is a house of Mars, the Aquarius asc boms will
forcibly earn reputation, authority and respect with the assistance
of others.
XI House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the IX sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house to
Aquarius. So the Aquarius asc boms will have illegal affairs
with the persons of their choice. They will fulfil their desires
through illegal means and persons of their choice .
Sagittarius, is a fiery sign. So the Aquarius asc boms would
be able to fulfil their desires only after struggles.
Sagittarius is a common sign. So the Aquarius asc boms woul
face fluctuations in their desires and expectations.
Sagittarius ia a sign of Jupiter. So the Aquarius asc boms
will greedily run after money.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

XII House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the X sign of Kaalchakra is the XII house to
Aquarius* So the Aquarius asc boms will have secret
professional activities and will do hoarding.
Capricorn is an earthy sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will
opt for secret activities in the name of their affinity.
Capricorn is a movable sign. So they will have a mind to incur
undue expenditures for the cause of their profession.
Capricorn is a house of Saturn. So the Aquarius asc boms
may at times have to abscond due to their secret activities.
SIGNIFICATIONS OF AQUARIUS UNRELATED TO ASCENDANT
II House : Pisces
Pisces, the XII sign of Kaalchakra is the II house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms will soon spend their income. They
may have to pay dearly for their loose talks. They tend to keep
their money secretly.
Pisces is a watery sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will not be
clear in their conversations but will show their wisdom and
knowledge through their speech.
Pisces is a common sign. So their speech and words , eye power,
digestive capacity, possession of gold, valuables, costly articles
and documents would not remain stable and will face
fluctuations.
Pisces is a house of Jupiter. So the Aquarius asc boms may
.earn money through truth and respect in their speech, through
teaching or in banking, jewellery shops, mortgage shops or
through treasury.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, mled by Jupiter,
the Aquarius asc boms may earn money through truth and
respect in their speech, through teaching or in banking, jewellery
shops, mortgage shops or through treasury.
Aquarius *

Jupiter is also the lord of houses 2 & 1 1 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) have eloquence, speak truths, increase their activities
by way of money and have the capacity to digest
anything.
( ii ) gain profits out of their greediness, in easy means and
happy ways, through romance, through societies, from
interested fields, by fortune and success, by making
achievements, by entertaining others and by cooperating with friends.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Uttarabadra, ruled by Saturn ,
the Aquarius asc boms will be misers, belong to small income
group, talk slowly, tend to lie, hold costly articles in their
possession and will tend to seize goods of others.
Saturn is the lord of houses 1 & 12 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) capitalize their thoughts, have mind to make money,
quick reflexes in the body, become more active, have
independent sources of income, express their thoughts
and like to show their strength through money.
(ii) gain profits from secret activities, horn savings and
money lending, from secret plans and from treasures
and will be able to regain lost goods.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Revathi, ruled by Mercury,
the Aquarius asc boms will gain income through greenish
articles, costly and micro instruments, cheques, negotiable
instruments, witty speech, rendering commentaries and skills
of eloquence or mimicry.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 5 & 8 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
( i ) gain from costly shares , by perfonning religious services
or rituals, through deep thoughts, imagination and
intelligence, love affairs, in the fields of arts, culture
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

and sports and in maintaining auditoriums and from selfbeauty and prostitutions;
(ii) gain monetary income by thefts, robbery, harassments,
magic, wills, forgery, raping, murders, threatening,
bribery, cheating and through all kinds of illegal
activities; by serving in dirty places, accident wards,
mortuary and insurance offices.
Ill House : Aries
Aries , the first sign of Kaalchakra is the III house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms will excel in the fields of information
and communication; progress through journeys and agreements;
may get depressed in their achievements.
Aries is a fiery sign. So the Aquarius asc borns will be
courageous, confident, bold but arrogant.
Aries is a movable sign; the confidence, courage, functioning
of the body, especially the neural senses and blood vessels , skills
of communication and writings, movement of properties and
the intelligence of the Aquarius asc boms will always carry
improvements and progress.
Aries is a house of Mars . So the Aquarius asc boms will go on
building their courage and confidence; spread rumours and forge
documents; enter into unethical agreements with undue clauses;
have knowledge with arrogance.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Aswani, ruled by Ketu, the
Aquarius asc boms will forge documents and cheques, spread
rumours, provide misinformation, face criminal charges and
write anonymous letters.
Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of houses 5 & 8 to
Aquarius. So the Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) intelligently deal in company shares, holy books, sports,
politics, romance, writing of stories, poems and articles ,
preaching of religious values, paintings, glamourous or
obscene dances.
’TquarTus

(ii) seize properties by using force and cheatings, steal
documents and notes, sell old goods, write obscene
letters, threaten, have mental depression, serve as clerks
in accident wards or mortuary, act as agents for bribery,
spread illegal information, have unauthorised possession
of documents and deal in insurance policies.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Bharani, ruled by Venus, the
Aquarius asc boms will have happy and joyful information,
communications, agreements and agency; write stories, songs
and articles, write with pure imagination, will become editors
or script and dialogue writers in cinema field.
Venus is the lord of houses 4 & 9 to Aquarius. So the Aquarius
asc boms will,
(i) lose physical energy, get certified in education, deal in
the business of fruits, vegetables, grains, seeds, nurseries,
stationeries, school books, notes, news papers and
journals, vessels, utensils, furniture, groceries, hardware,
lands, houses buildings and livestock.
(ii) enter into reliable and honest agreements, have name
and fame, exchange money, get certified for higher
education, enter into agreements for research, send
messages, face monitoring on their religious activities,
negotiate for endowments, transplant organs, have
international communication and relations, file salestax accounts, serve as clerks in law departments,
mediators and provide information about ancient
monuments.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the
Aquarius asc boms will deal with government documents,
information and communication departments of the nation and
will become responsible for statistics and government
documents.
Sun is the lord of 7ih house to Aquarius. So the Aquarius asc
boms will get due social recognition, have legally valid
government documents, get recommendation letters, enter into
Astrologies of kaalchakra

partnership agreements, issue notices to collect taxes, correspond
with banks and may have to communicate for life partners.
IV House : Taurus
Taurus, the II sign of Kaalchakra is the IV house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms will gain income from house, lands,
vehicles, machinery and properties; live in apartments; live in a
main road and in the central part of a street. Mostly their entrance
may face western direction in a north-south facing street.
Since Taurus is an earthy sign, the Aquarius asc boms would
be blessed with deep knowledge and would be interested in
agriculture. They may keep pet animals in their houses.
Taurus is a fixed sign. So the productive organs of the body,
education, house, lands and vehicles, machineries and
belongings of the Aquarius asc boms will stay permanent.
Taurus is a sign of Venus. So the Aquarius asc boms may live
in bungalows or palaces; own flower or vegetable gardens at
home, produce cosmetics, deal m glassware, plastics and films
and may run schools for arts and culture or driving schools.
If the 4th house falls in the star Kiittiga, mled by Sun, the
Aquarius asc boms may live in government quarters, work in
government buildings, encroach village common lands, get
government pattas, handle government machineries or vehicles,
live near education centres or colleges, own agricultural lands,
wells, ponds, water tanks, grain godowns and may serve in
departments of vehicles or housing.
Sun is also the lord of 7th house to Aquarius. So the Aquarius
asc boms will become members of social clubs, live in
government quarters, will receive lands donated by the
government, purchase properties by availing bank loans, become
members of ration cards and live in a joint family.
If the 4 th house falls in the star of Rohini, mled by Moon, the
Aquarius asc boms will own water reservoirs, agricultural lands,
boats, bridges, water-vehicles, wells or ponds, will be able to
save rain water, get surplus groundwater, will be fond of taking

fruits and vegetables with excessive water content and undertake
educational trainings.
Moon is the lord of 6th house to Aquarius. So the Aquarius
asc boms will run centres for competitive exams, medical camps
or laboratories, prepare food, become tailors, milkmen,
accountants, money lenders against properties, live in rented
houses, work in purchase departments or lodges, produce
medicines or medical equipments and may treat their servant as
one among the family.
If the 4* house falls in the star of Mrigasira, mled by Mars , the
Aquarius asc boms may be arrogant during their academic
studies, show arrogance in acquiring lands or houses or vehicles,
become landlords, own agricultural farms, have machinery to
produce chemicals and fertilizers and serve in big industries.
Mars is also the lord of houses 3 & 10 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) get publicity about their transfers and places of postings,
publish books on general knowledge, serve in
manufacturing fields, leave their native places, show
intelligence in studies, have confidence in increasing
production, get stayed with their transfer orders and get
needed technical information for production.
(ii) become landlords or industrialists, hold honorary or
responsible posts, have administrative capacity, gain
name and fame and will become responsible for
government documents.
V House : Gemini
Gemini, the HI sign of Kaalchakra is the V house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms will write more and more letters in
their love affairs, have satisfaction in love affairs and in
devotional services, will be blessed with an intelligent first child,
excel in writing stories and articles and do things for selfpublicity.
Gemini is an aiiy sign. The Aquarius asc boms may like sports
338 Astrologies of kaalchakra

and games, may become comedians, story-writers and puzzlemasters.
Gemini is a common sign. Blood cell count, knowledge, interest
in the fields of arts and culture, life of children, love affairs and
faith in god of the Aquarius asc boms may have to face many
fluctuations.
Gemini is a sign of Mercury. So the Aquarius asc boms would
mostly become singers, comedians, debaters, orators, teachers
and masters of arts, crafts, painters, sculptors, priests, music
instrumentalists and commission agents.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Mrigasira, ruled by Mars, the
Aquarius asc boms will show arrogance during copulations,
have children with excessive interest in sexual pleasures, will
become atheists, sculptors, painters, obscene dancers, singers
or boxers.
Mars is the lord of houses 3 & 1 0 to Aquarius. So the Aquarius
asc boms will,
(i) get press publicity for writing skills, publish books on
arts and advertisements, perform artistically, enter into
agreements for artistic performances and gain changes
in their transfer orders.
( ii ) will hold honorary post as the best artist, produce artistic
goods, will have unusual ideas about their professions,
earn name and fame in their professional fields, become
astrologers and will have artistic and administrative
capacity.
If the 5th house falls in the star* of Arudra, mled by Rahu, the
Aquarius asc boms will have sexual relations with foreigners,
will do prostitution in foreign countries, serve in liquor bars,
perform obscene dances, gamble and will be swimmers or
sprinters.
(Rahu would act like Jupiter as far as house significations are
concerned.)
AquarTuT

If the 5th house falls in the star of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter,
the Aquarius asc boms will have religious contacts; have faith
in god and children; show sincerity in love affairs, perform
religious rituals, become priests, religious leaders, religious
service volunteers and show power of intuition in arts.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 2 & 11 to Aquarius, So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) be fond of purchasing artistic goods, useful musical
instruments, musical records, artistically rare and costly
goods and learn arts without any meaning or purpose .
(ii) learn arts with commitment, organize lodging homes
and branches of societies; make love with women of
their choice; enjoy fortunate agreements and
opportunities; remain happy with friends, make
achievements in production of livestock.
VI House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV sign of Kaalchakra is the VI house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms may serve and will have to face
litigations in their lands, vehicles, machinery, education and in
production processes.
Cancer is a watery sign leading to troubles and diseases in and
caused by water or liquids for the Aquarius asc boms.
Cancer is a movable sign. So the Aquarius asc boms may serve
for long; suffer due to increase in diseases especially in digestive
organs; their court cases would get prolonged and loans tend to
increase further and further. They may suffer due to frequent
changes in the nature of their diseases and will be gluttons or
will have to take medicines endlessly.
Cancer is a house of Moon. So the Aquarius asc boms will
mostly serve in water reservoirs, ships, fisheries or plumbing
works or in grain fields; suffer due to diseases caused by water.
If the 6th house falls in the star of Punarvasu ruled by Jupiter, the
Aquarius asc boms will serve in huge organizations, banks, medical
or legal departments; acquire loans with assistance from popular
Astrologies of kaalchakra

persons, will be fond of taking fatty food and nutrition tablets, suffer
from diseases caused in blood cells and will preside over functions
and feasts.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 2 & 1 1 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) have successful and profitable speech, good digestive
capacity, acquire gold and costly articles as loans, keep
things by acquiring loans and render excessive labour
or service.
(ii) win only after protracted struggles, live in lodges, serve
in societies, win court cases against societies, employ
servants of their own choice, get fortunate opportunities
or employment, make achievements in their labour, will
be able to diagnose diseases and consume food items of
their choice.
If the 6th house falls in the star of Pushyam, mled by Saturn, the
Aquarius asc boms will undertake labourious jobs; work for
low wages in hotels, law offices, tailoring shops and medical
shops; suffer due to skin diseases and get loans in small amounts.
Saturn is the ruler of houses I & 12 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) become unconscious or inactive due to diseases, suffer
fiom generation of new diseases; diseases in stomach,
intestines and neurological system, lack of immunity,
lack of self-thoughts and independent activities; have
successful activities and develop their skill of labour.
(ii) acquire loans through secret plans, clear debts by
acquiring further loans, regain what was lost, liquidate
investments, undertake medical treatments in hospitals,
face litigations filed by separated member of the family,
have break-even of accounts and will become inactive
due to ill health.
If the 6th house falls in the star of Aslesha, mled by Mercury,
the Aquarius asc boms will become accountants, labour
contractors, tax-collectors, printers, computer operators,

neurologists, nurses, compounders and office clerks, serve in
commercial places and will give and collect loans in instalments.
Mercury is the lord of houses 5 & 8 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boras will,
(i) serve as share brokers, priests or in sports centres,
auditoriums, marriage registration offices, prostitution
dens, liquor bars and in places of religious rituals;
manufacturers of sports goods orpimps orproof readers
of stories, articles and poems.
(ii) render hard labour, have to do jobs of no respect and
without any benefits for labour; repair old goods and
undertake jobs in severe working conditions and at dirty
places with heavy work load.
VII House : Leo
Leo, the V sign of Kaalchakra is the VH house to Aquarius . So
the life/business partners of Aquarius asc boms will be
dominating in nature with more interest in the fields of arts and
culture.
Leo is a fiery sign. So the life/business partners of Aquarius
asc boms may be less disciplined.
Leo is a fixed sign. So the relationships with life/business
partners/customers of Aquarius asc boms will remain long. They
will have proper functioning of kidneys and will have a high
sense of touching.
Leo is a sign of Sun. So the Aquarius asc boms may deal with
public works and welfare departments. Their life/business
partners will show pride and authority. The Aquarius bom may
often have to meet with dominant and arrogant people.
If the 7th house falls in the star of Makha, mled by Ketu, the
life/business partners of Aquarius asc boms will be cunning
and revengeful; the Aquarius asc boms may often have to deal
with criminals and cunning people.
Ketu would act like Mercury , which is the lord of houses 5 &
8 to Aquarius. So the Aquarius asc boms will,
342 Astrologies of kaalchakra

( i) often have to deal with lovers, artists, painters, singers,
astrologers , teachers , religious servants , priests , pimps ,
prostitutes and saints.
( ii) often have to deal with criminals, opponents, murderers,
thieves and insurance officials; brokers of bribery,
terrorists, cunning people, traitors and people who
disrespect the Aquarius asc boms.
If the 7th house falls in the starof Poorvapalguni, ruled by Venus,
the Aquarius asc boms will have glamourous life partners and
will often meet with happy and joyful persons or women.
Venus is the lord of houses 4 & 9 to Aquarius. So the Aquarius
asc boms will,
(i) often meet with relatives, residents of same compound
especially the opposite houses and the persons who
maintain their lands and buildings.
(ii) often meet and deal with foreigners, leaders, exporters,
judges, priests, trustees and teachers.
If the 7th house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Aquarius asc boms may deal with public works and welfare
departments. Most often, they have to meet with dominant and
arrogant people. Life/business partners will show self-pride and
authority.
Sun* is the lord of 7th house to Aquarius. So the Aquarius asc
boms will often meet with foreign dignitaries, social servants,
agents for government servants, marriage brokers, public
welfare officers and business customers.
VIII House : Virgo
Virgo, the VI sign of Zodiac , is the VIII house to Aquarius. So
the Aquarius asc boms will face disrespect by way of litigations,
loans, diseases and service in the fields of food, dress and
medicines.
Virgo is an earthy sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will face
problems due to natural calamities like thunders and cyclone
etc and will face dejections in family life caused by relatives.
/TquarTu^ 343

Virgo is a common sign. So the life of Aquarius asc boms will
see fluctuations. Dangers like accidents, pains, stress, disrespect,
loss of name and fame and sorrows of the Aquarius boms will
not last long.
Virgo is a house of Mercury, So the Aquarius asc boms will
face problems by way of cheques and documents, disconnection
of electricity and telephone; misinformation, surety signatures,
anonymous letters, loss of memory and due to neural disorders.
If the 8th house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Aquarius asc boms will face seizure of their properties by
government, cause for loss or damages to government properties,
steal government documents, quit politics, get punished for
criminal charges, remove encroachments on behalf of
government and may meet with fire accidents.
Sun is the lord of 7th house to Aquarius. So the Aquarius asc
boms will behave indecently in social service centres, increase
enmity towards government officials, corrupt in public service,
face dejections in married life, will be cheated by partners and
face disrespect and threatening on their lives.
If the 8th house falls in the star of Hastha, ruled by Moon, the
Aquarius asc boms will suffer due to mental dejections and loss
of memoiy; become unconscious; lack in educational qualifications,
face troubles in water and dehydration and carry subversive
thoughts.
Moon is the lord of 6th house to Aquarius. So the Aquarius asc
boms will face troubles in competitive exam centres; suffer due
to increase in diseases resulted by side effects of medicines,
negligence of nurses, allergy caused by dresses or food, meet
with accidents in manufacturing of medicines, do illegal
activities in medical departments , face allegations in lodges and
enter into quarrels inside court premises.
If the 8th house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Aquarius asc boms will meet with all kinds of illegal, subversive
and violent activities such as quarrels, wars, dots, straggles,
terrorism, seizures, false allegations, police and military actions,
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

assault by weapons , bombings , rapes , murders , robbery , forgery ,
cheatings and suicide attempts.
Mars is also the lord of houses 3 & 10 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) get notorious press publicity, publish books on
criminology, spread rumours, commit mistakes in
mathematics due to loss of memory, misplace
belongings, face deterioration of body organs, face
breach of agreement on employment, troubles in
appointment orders, get black-mark in service, face
troubles in increasing productivity in service, face
troubles as clerks in communication and tenders.
(ii) face allegations in the substantiation process of
employment, corrupt in high posts, commit forgery in
administrative capacity, lose name, fame and honour
and face hurdles in promotion processes.
IX House : Libra
Libra, the VII sign of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms will indulge in illegal activities in
business, social service centres and may have illegal affairs with
partners or foreigners.
Libra is an airy sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will have
research capacity and excel in higher education and may become
professors and teachers. Since Libra is also a movable sign, the
Aquarius asc boms will excel in their higher education,
undertake frequent foreign journeys , become polygamists and
will increase their credibility.
Libra is a house of Venus. So the Aquarius asc boms will
research in the fields of arts and culture, have higher education,
work in transport organisations , make arrangements in feast halls
and have affinity towards women especially foreigners.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Rlars, the
Aquarius asc boms will study agriculture, geology, mechanical
engineering, history or archaeology, become politicians, head
“Tquhrfus* *345

masters, transport organizers, judges, criminal lawyers and
zamindars.
Mars is the lord of houses 3 & 1 0 to Aquarius. So the Aquarius
asc boms will,
(i) think beyond their capacity, get press publicity about
happy occasions, deal in information and
communication, will become educationists, mediators,
messengers and mathematicians, exchange properties
and have increased power of memory.
(ii) serve in transport departments, involve in
communication and information departments,
international trade, electricity, plumbing, oil wells,
mines , endowments , government temples , tax collection
authorities, temple trusts, courts, panchayat boards and
ancient monuments.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Swathi, mled by Rahu, the
Aquarius asc boms will become researchers of addictions,
transplant surgeons, artificial organ specialists and teachers of
foreign languages and involve in religious research centres,
international cultural centres and international grain godowns,
(Rahu will act like Jupiter in respect of house significations.)
If the 9th house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Aquarius asc boms will have higher education in the field
of teaching, act as financial controller of the nation, have wisdom
and knowledge, transform the structure and rituals of religion,
law & discipline of the country, undertake religious rituals &
service, become trustees of temples, ambassadors of the country
and exporters.
Jupiter is also tjie lord of houses 2 & 1 1 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) negotiate peacefully and amicably, acquire ancestral
properties as gold and valuables , get money and a variety
of articles as donations.
( ii) study diploma courses , hold honorary posts , gain name,
346 Astrologies ofkaalchakra

fame, success and achievements in their research
attempts, remain joyful and happy, have co-operation
in unions, successful agreements with societies,
fortunate opportunities of agreements; will find out right
methods and like to take fatty foods.
X House : Scorpio
Scorpio, the Vm sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Aquarius.
So the Aquarius asc boms will work in the fields of operation
•theatres, sanitary & toilets, wastes, prostitution, treatments of
venereal diseases and in a few illegal professions.
Scorpio is a watery sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will work
in the fields of agriculture, ports, bridges and water reservoirs.
Scorpio is a fixed sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will get
permanent status; their profession, prestige and postings would
last long.
Scorpio is a house of Mars. So the Aquarius asc boms w ill
work as responsible executives in huge industries, fire related
professions, housing, lands, police, military and for government
documents.
If the 10* house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Aquarius asc boms will become responsible officers or by
holding honorary posts in huge industries, banks, children s'
welfare societies, currency divisions, gold mines, protection of
ancient monuments and national properties.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 2 & 1 1 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) work in those professions wherein speech is required,
deal in fields of ancestral golden ornaments, costly
articles and finance and will do everything as
professional.
( ii) work in societies, work for agreements of societies, work
in the fields of their choice, avail fortunate employment
opportunities and employment contracts make
Aquarius

achievements in their profession and would improve
their professional fields.
If the 10th house falls in the star of Anuradha, mled by Saturn,
the Aquarius asc boms will come up in life from lower cadre,
work as office assistants especially in the fields of police, military
or corporations, respect people irrespective of their status and
sell old and obsolete goods.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 1 & 12 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) work in the fields wherein self thoughts are required
more, more active with enthusiasm, become
industrialists, perform acts of honour, suffer due to
allergy ftara a specific set of foods, have independent
approach in their professional field and make needed
changes in their professional capacity.
( ii) do business with secret likes and hidden things, involve
in dual profession, make extravagant expenditure on
their profession, invest in profession, have secret
interests through new profession and take up researchoriented jobs.
If the 10th house falls in the star of Jyeshta, mled by Mercury,
the Aquarius asc boms will do business and deal in the fields
of micro instalments, scales and metres, mercury, pipes and
rods, wires, greenish articles, stationeries and notebooks,
calculators and computers.
Mercury is the lord of houses 5 & 8 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) perform religious rituals especially during deaths and
funerals, arrange for pleasure trips, render religious
services, foretell the future and become religious
preachers, pimps, painters, actors, singers, poets,
astrologers and music artists, producer’s of vitamin
symps and nursing maids of child-births.
(ii) do criminal activities in profession, sell or modify old
goods; involve in rape, stealing or murder.
348 Astrologies of kaalchakra

XI House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the IX house of Kaalchakra is the XI house to
Aquarius. So the Aquarius asc boms will fulfil their desires
through illegal means and win over others by inducing them to
have illegal affairs.
Sagittarius is a fiery sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will have
friends who are arrogant, greedy and carry self pride.
Sagittarius is a common sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will
have fluctuations m their happiness, expectations and desires;
relationships with their sons-in-law and daughters-in-law will
see fluctuations.
Sagittarius is a house of Jupiter. So the Aquarius asc boms
will have sincere, truthful and generous friends, sons-in-law and
daughters-in-law; will get things done thru legal means and will
expect things to be done only through legal ways.
If the 1 1* house falls m the star of Moola, ruled by Ketu, the
Aquarius asc boms will fulfil their desires through illegal means,
expect things and have cunning natured friends and in-laws.
Ketu would act like Mercury in house significations. Mercury is
the lord of houses 5 & 8 to Aquarius. So the Aquarius asc boms
will,
(i) have happy relations, will be interested in the field of
arts, have sexual affairs with persons of their choice and
will enter into mutual agreements.
(ii) face troubles in fulfilling their desires, become hasty
and tensed, suffer due to deficiency of vitamin,
dissatisfactions and lack of mental stability.
If the 1 llh house falls in the star of Poorvashada, ruled by Venus,
the Aquarius asc boms will often meet with happy and joyful
people, happy friends, in-laws and elder brother and will always
expect happy things.
Venus is also the lord of houses 4 & 9 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
TquarTus

( i) buy desired things, own properties with litigations; have
frequent repairs in vehicles and lose their belongings.
(ii) have contacts with social service centres and higher
officials, will be polygamists, render voluntary service
in social organisations, undertake foreign journey of their
choice, study courses of their choice, involve in research
and have international relationships and agreements.
If the 1 1th house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun, the
Aquarius asc boms will have links with political leaderships,
government societies, friendship clubs, government festivals and
feasts, guest houses, co-operative centres, government medals,
mementos, monuments, subsidies and assistance to fulfil their own
desires,
Sun is alsp the lord of VII house to Aquarius . So the Aquarius asc
boms will choose their life partners by choice, maintain affinity
towards others and society and often meet people whom they love
most.
XII House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the X sign of Kaalchakra is the XU house to Aquarius .
So the Aquarius asc boms will make extravagant expenditures in
their profession by increasing their investments; involve in
subversive activities, adulteration and all kinds of illegal activities
in their profession.
Capricorn is an earthy sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will
involve in the fields of medicines, dresses, food items and
vegetables and agriculture, (probably as a second profession.)
Capricorn is a movable sign. So the Aquarius asc boms will
go on increasing their secret activities, expenditures and
investments and soon lose their physical energy and movements.
Capricorn is a sigh of Saturn. So the Aquarius asc boms will
secretly be vengeful against their opponents, hoard and hide things,
make secret plans and will involve in all kinds of secret and indecent
acts.
If the 1 2th house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun,
350 Astrologies oJTiaalcltakra

the Aquarius asc boms will work in the departments of
investigation, customs, sales-tax, auditing, jails, post-mortem
in government hospitals, seizure of encroachments, secret
agencies of government and will hide and hoard things.
Sun is also the lord of 7th house to Aquarius . So the Aquarius
asc boms will choose foreign citizens as life partners, hve away
from society and especially from opposite sex and hate others
and society.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Shravana, ruled by Moon, the
Aquarius asc boms will be quick; make hasty investments,
undertake voyages and sea journeys; hoard liquid articles and enjoy
bed comforts.
Moon is the lord of 6th house to Aquarius. So the Aquarius
asc boms will gain secret successes, fall unconscious due to
food allergy, change jobs of their choice, will be unable to
diagnose diseases, get separated from their servants and gain
favourable scope for success after making undue expenditures.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Dhantshta, ruled by Mars,
the Aquarius asc boras will involve in illegal and unethical
acts, smugglings, adulterations, hoardings, secret activities,
operation theatres, prostitution dens, lodges and investigations.
Mars is also the lord of houses 3 & 10 to Aquarius. So the
Aquarius asc boms will,
(i) lose their physical eneigy, will have notorious press
publicity, face breach of agreements, face troubles in
communications, sell books, commit mistakes in
accounts and face loss of memory.
( ii ) hold responsible secret posts Jobs with heavy work load
and undertake dual natured jobs.
Besides the above, the residential positions of planets could also
be included for study of detailed significations of the respective
houses.
’XquarTus

Pisces
General nature of the sign Pisces
It is a watery, common and feminine sign; double-fish in shape;
even sign; grey in colour; fruitful sign; short ascension; live
sign; generous, obedient, calm and intelligent in nature; improve
and develop things; ocean, sea, fish ponds, clay pits, oil fields,
salt-beds, ports, jails, tanneries, XII sign of Zodiac, house of
Jupiter, north-east in direction, night times, Palghuna in Saka
or Panguni in Tamil calendars,
ASCENDANT RELATED SIGNIFICATIONS OF PISCES
(a) It is a watery sign : Soft and calm in appearance and
speech , God-fearing, detached mind, stout body, implicit
and unexpressive by nature.
(b) It is a common sign :Anger, activeness and talents will
not last long, colour, beauty and structure will disappear
shortly; mood and mind would frequently change.
(c) It is a house of Jupiter : Honest and sincere selfthoughts, obedient, calm, prestigious, self-confident,
intelligent, flexible and adaptable by nature.
(d) It is the XII House of Kaalchakra : Secret activities,
investigation, research-oriented, life at foreign countries,
absconding and doubtful.
In the same manner, the remaining significations of Pisces could
also be studied.
352 Astrologies of kaalchakra

The sign Pisces extends over three stars leading to the following
body natures.
L Poorvabadra : Owned by Jupiter: Plump body.
2. Uttarabadra: Owned by Saturn: Rough skins.
5. Revathi: Owned by Mercury: Lean body.
If the Asc falls in the star of Poorv abadra, ruled by Jupiter, the
Pisces asc boms will be honest and sincere in thoughts, obedient,
calm, prestige-conscious, self-confident, intelligent, flexible and
adaptable.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 1 & 10 to Pisces. So the Pisces
asc boms will,
(i) have self- thoughts and independent actions, active and
quick in actions, like to exhibit strength and like to do
things of their own choice.
(ii) gain status, prestige with name and fame, leadership
qualities; hold honorary posts and will be responsible
counsellors with administrative capacity.
If the Asc falls in the star of Uttarabadra, ruled by Saturn, the
Pisces asc boms will be lazy and doubtful with dissatisfactions;
pessimistic with inferiority complex; have research capacity and
take decisions only after coming to a clear mind.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 11 & 12 to Pisces. So the
Pisces asc boms will,
(i) be selfish and greedy by nature, happy and joyful;
counsellors for societies have fortunate opportunities
for success and achievements and wHl be flexible with
others.
(ii) have secret activities, lose energy, abscond, sacrifice or
investigate, face secret disturbances and often face
defeats and difficulties.
If the Asc falls in the star of Revathi, ruled by Mercury, the
Pisces asc boms will be intelligent, witty and flexible in nature,
have the capability to make quick estimation about situations;

lean and beautiful in structure, have excellent neural system
with mental fluctuations and oscillations; mathematical brain,
think twice before acting and will be cunning at times.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 4 & 7 to Pisces. So the
Pisces asc boms will,
(i) have manufacturing capacity; fond of education,
cultivate fruits and vegetables in farms, become founders
of educational centres or libraries and may own ponds
and water reservoirs.
(ii) have cordial social relations and get due social
recognition and depend on relatives.
II House : Aries
Aries, the I sign of Kaalchakra is the II house to Pisces. So the
Pisces asc boms will be dominating and arrogant in their speech
and often find faults with others: establish their side in words
and try to destabilize others through their speech.
Aries is a fiery sign. So the Pisces asc boras are fiery in their
speech with arrogance and will hurt the feelings of others in
their speech.
Aries is a movable sign; so the eyesight, speech, digestive
capacity of the Pisces asc boras will go on improving by nature.
Since Aries is a house of Mars, the Pisces asc boms will show
their generosity in the fields of religion and education in words.
Their benevolence will be limited only in words.
Ill House : Taurus
Taurus, the II sign of Kaalchakra is the ID house to Pisces. So
the Pisces asc boms will be money-minded. They would tend
to be in the forefront with the use of financial means.
Taurus is an earthy sign. So the Pisces asc boras are mostly
cowards; they are only courageous and confident like saints and
at times are insensible.
Taurus is a fixed sign. So confidence, courage, functioning of
354 Astrologies of kaalchakra

naira! system especially blood vessels and sensory organs,
ability to communicate, transfer of places, actions and
intelligence of the Pisces asc boms would mostly remain
permanent
Taurus is a sign of Venus. So the Pisces asc boras will face
disrespects and damages caused by women and will be dejected
in all walks of their life.
IV House : Gemini
Gemini, the III sign of Kaalehakra is the IV house to Pisces. So
the Pisces asc boras will lack inclination towards education and
will tend to shift places often.
Gemini is an airy sign. So the Pisces asc boras will tend to
show themselves as educated and weft-versed persons.
Gemini is a common sign; So the Pisces asc boras may face
frequent troubles in their academic career. They may study
information and communication oriented courses.
Gemini is a house of Mercury. So the Pisces asc boms will
gain knowledge through experience and will undergo studies
with the assistance of relatives.
V House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV sign of Kaalehakra is the V house to Pisces. So
the Pisces asc boms may like -to produce artistic goods and
decorative materials and make films with pure imagination.
Cancer is a wateiy sign. So the Pisces asc boms may get
dissatisfied in the fields of arts, religion, culture and literature
and with their children. They may not be successful in their
love affairs and in their romantic life.
Cancer is a movable sign. So the Pisces asc boms will reach
their levels of peaks in their artistic life. They have high ideals
about love and religion.

VI House : Leo
Leo, the V sign to Kaalchakra is the VI house to Pisces. So the
Pisces asc boms will gain success in the fields of arts and sports
and suffer due to diseases in the blood cells.
Leo is a fiery sign to mean that the Pisces asc boras will suffer
due to diseases caused by excessive body heat and achieve
success with arrogance.
Leo is a fixed sign. So the sufferings in the body, litigations of
the Pisces asc borns would almost remain permanent and their
success would also last long.
Leo is a sign of Sun. So the Pisces asc boms will suffer due to
calcium deficiency and excessive body heat. They would often
be troubled by hot climates.
VII House : Virgo
Virgo, the VI sign of Kaalchakra is the VII house to Pisces. So
the Pisces asc boms will make their opponents to lose their
energy and strength. Pisces asc boms are mostly inflexible
towards their opponents and opposite sex.
Virgo is an earthy sign. So the opponents will tend to tie the
Pisces asc boms by showing love and affection.
Virgo is a common sign. So the Pisces asc boms will not have
long standing relationships with others and the society.
Virgo is a sign of Mercury. So the Pisces asc borns will often
meet with dual-natured persons who are excellent in
mathematics.
VIII House : Libra
Libra, the VII sign of Kaalchakra is the VIII house to Pisces.
So the Pisces asc borns will often face disrespect caused by
opposite sex, life partners or business partners or customers.
Libra is an airy sign. So the Pisces asc borns will face
unexpected troubles due to respiratory disorders and in cyclones
and for the cause of others.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Libra is a movable sign. So the Pisces asc boms will face
prolonged troubles.
Libra is a house of Venus. So the Pisces asc boms will face
mental dejections, disrespect due to women and unexpected
sufferings in kidneys or uterus.
IX House : Scorpio
Scorpio, the VIII sign of Kaalchakra, is the IX house to Pisces.
So the Pisces asc boms will tend to involve in illegal activities;
they may go to the extreme level of committing murder and
robbery for the cause of their illegal affairs; challenge the law
and order of a region; suffer subsequent to organ transplantation.
Scorpio is a watery sign. So the Pisces asc boms will have
research minds and think about the miseries and secrets of life.
Scorpio is a fixed sign. So by nature the academic careers,
journeys and research ventures of the Pisces asc boms will
always remain stable.
Scorpio is a house of Mars. So the Pisces asc boms will excel
in the academics of finance, criminology and foreign exchanges .
X House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius, the IX sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Pisces.
So the Pisces asc boms will lose their status and prestige in
their professional fields, may hold honorary posts or may woik
in the fields of education, have illegal affairs at places of work,
face legal troubles in professional career.
Sagittarius is a fiery sign. So the Pisces asc brims will be
arrogant in illegal affairs by using their name, fame and authority.
Sagittarius is a common sign; so the Pisces asc boras will see
fluctuations in their status and prestige.
Sagittarius is a sign of Jupiter. So the Pisces asc borns will
gain power and authority with due status and prestige in their
professional careers.
Pisces

XI House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the X sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house to Pisces.
So the Pisces asc horns will fulfil their desires in their
professional ventures and will do things of their choice in their
professional career.
Capricorn is an earthy sign. So the Pisces asc boras will fulfil
their desires through love, affection and by being flexible.
Capricorn is a movable sign. So the Pisces asc boras will have
very high levels of burning desires.
Since Capricorn is a house of Saturn, the Pisces asc boras
will develop their cheap interests and will fulfil them secretly.
XU House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI sign of Kaalchakra is the XK house to Pisces.
So the Pisces asc boras will be happy in maintaining secrecy
and will have success in their secret activities.
Aquarius is an airy sign. So the Pisces asc bomss will have
high degree of research capabilities .
Aquarius is a fixed sign. So the Pisces asc boras will abscond
for long and gain permanent successes in their secret activities.
Aquarius is a sign of Saturn. So the Pisces asc boras will live
as they like through secret activities.
SIGNIFICATIONS OF PISCES UNRELATED TO ASCENDANT
II House : Aries
Aries the first sign of Kaalchakra is the II house to Pisces. So
the Pisces asc boms will become authoritative and dominant
with self-pride when their financial status gets improved. They
tend to make financial gains with the use of their eloquence;
They tend to keep liquid cash just to exhibit their self-pride.
Aries is a fieiy sign. So the Pisces asc boms will have dominating
speech with self-pride and would tell lies copiously. They will
be spendthrifts and would like to possess weapons.
358* "" "" Astrologies ofTcbalchakra

Aries is a movable sign. The financial Sow and the income of
Pisces asc boms will always maintain an upward trend; like to
possess coral ornaments, gold, valuables, costly articles, money
and documents.
Aries is a house of Mars. So the Pisces asc boms will be
spendthrifts, liars, dishonest persons, like to wear coral
ornaments, deal in metals, like to seize the belongings of others
by threatening and will hurt the feelings of others in financial
matters.
If the 2nd house falls in the star of Aswani, ruled by Ketu, the
Pisces asc boms will be stubborn in their speech, improve their
financial status by improper means, cunning and controversial
during conversations, possess drugs and intoxicants, spread
rumours for financial gains and may deal in diamonds.
Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of houses 4 & 7 to Pisces.
So the Pisces asc boms will,
(i) have excessive energy production in the body; get
benefited Iran education, fruits, vegetables, grain fields,
farms, educational centres, libraries, ponds and
reservoirs.
(ii) get benefited from society* professional recognition,
subsidy, assistance from others, partnerships, wife/life
partners, banks and by tax evasions.
If the 2nd house falls in the star oTBharani, ruled by Venus, the
Pisces asc boms will be benefited financially from women,
cosmetic goods, films, silks, costly artistic goods, diamonds and
gold; their financial status would always be healthy and they
will earn money through their pleasing and attractive speech.
Venus is also the lord of houses 3 & 8 to Pisces. So the Pisces
asc boras will,
(i) be intelligent in conversations, get benefited from
writings, thoughts and ideas, mental inclination and
courageous actions, placing intelligent arguments,
information and communication; gain confidence from
income and change themselves for the cause of money

and show enough interest in earning money*
(ii) earn by harassments, robbery, thefts, raping, murders,
cheating, forgery, bribery and all kinds of illegal
activities; by dealing in old and obsolete goods, by
serving in dirty places or in mortuary or at accident wards
or in insurance departments.
If the 2nd house falls in the star ofKrittiga, ruled by Sun, the
Pisces asc boms will deal with financial status of the country,
finance companies and departments, government revenue,
orders, national savings, stamps and carbuncle ornaments.
Sun is the lord of 6* house to Pisces. So the Pisces asc boms
will gain out of competitions, catering, tailoring, medicines,
physical labour, money lending, litigations, rental goods and
house rents, will be able to get medical benefits and mostly
belong to monthly income groups.
Ill House : Taurus
Taurus, the n sign of Kaalchakra is the HI house to Pisces. So
the Pisces asc boms will courageously undertake financial
matters for personal gains. They would gain from informations
and communications.
Taurus is an earthy sign. So the Pisces asc boms will be flexible
when financial matters are concerned.
Taurus is a fixed sign. So their courage, confidence,
communication would be permanent, would mostly remain
away from home and would carry long-standing repercussions.
Taurus is a sign of Venus. So the Pisces asc boras Will have
happy and harmonious communication, information, agreements
and public relations; will write happy and joyful stories, articles
and poems; work as editors or film script-writers and will get
brokerage by making others feel happy.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Krittiga, ruled by Sun, the
Pisces asc boms will deal with government orders, serve in
information, communication and publicity departments of the
government like postal, telephone, radio, television and statistics.
360 Astrologies of kaalchakra

Sun is the lord of 6* house to Pisces. So the Pisces asc boms
will become sellers of foods, dresses, medicines and medical
equipments; lawyers, pay & accounts officers, rent collectors,
postmen, lessors, medical counsellors, money lenders against
documents; undertake house-keeping and gain success in
competitive examinations.
If the 3rd house falls in the star of Rohini, ruled by Moon, the
Pisces asc boms will be very quick in information and
communication, undertake short journeys, will be document
writers, write articles and imaginative stories and will render
commentaries.
Moon is the lord of V house to Pisces. So the Pisces asc boms
will write about share market, sports, politics, religions rituals
and romance; induce actions by deep thoughts, sharpen their
skills of intelligence, will become religious preachers and
perform in music and drama auditoriums.
If the in house falls in the star of Mrigasira, ruled by Mars, the
Pisces asc boms will show murage and confidence, spread false
information, have forged documents and include unnecessary
clauses in improper agreements.
Mars is also the lord of houses 2 & 9 to Pisces. So the Pisces
asc boms will,
(i) excel in the skill of writing, undertake written actions,
deal in cheques and money related documents, write
about truths and will have the capacity to grasp things
quickly.
(ii) enter into confident agreements of research, get due
publicity, exchange currencies, will be certified in
education, receive orders of headship in offices,
affectionate towards foreigners, will become
messengers, mediators, clerks in law departments,
protectors of ancient monuments, have government links
in religious matters and services, negotiate for
endowments, work in organ transplantation, compute
sales and income tax accounts and will take lease of
temple properties.

IV House : Gemini
Gemini, the III sign of Kaalchakra is the IV house to Pisces. So
the Pisces asc boras will deal in lands, vehicles, properties and
machinery. They mostly live in multi-storied buildings in the
end part of a narrow street Mostly their houses would face
western direction.
Gemini is an airy sign. So the Pisces asc boras will write songs,
stories and articles; they will excel in mathematics. They will
live in an airy place.
Gemini is a common sign. The properties, lands, vehicles, house,
machinery and belongings of the Pisces asc boms would not
remain permanent with them.
Mercury is the lord of Gemini. So the Pisces asc boms will
possess sensitive instruments like calculators, computers,
printers, electrical and electronic goods, spare parts of
machinery, tiles and lathe works, will become assemblers of
vehicles and ticket-checkers of transport organisations and may
own lodges.
If the 4th house falls in the star of Mrigasira, mled by Mars, the
Pisces asc boms will show arrogance in possessing lands,
vehicles and machinery; become landlords and may own
agricultural farms, livestock farms, huge industries and
machinery for production of chemicals and fertilizers.
Mars is also the lord of houses 2 & 9 to Pisces. So the Pisces
asc boms will,
(i) purchase costly and utility oriented articles, build
bungalows, purchase gold and ornaments, make
extravagant purchases and will like to keep properties
in their personal custody.
( ii ) become contractors of properties, high school teachers,
head masters, protectors of ancient monuments,
importers, exporters, researchers and clerks in courts,
earn name and fame in education, make barter
exchanges, serve in panchayat boards, trust for temple
36 5" — "" “ AsiFoToglcsofTcaafcJta^ra

properties, produce artificialorgans and have links with
temples and religious institutions.
If the 4th house falls in the star of Arudra, ruled by Rahu, the
Pisces asc boms will study in foreign countries, deal with
vehicles, live in guest houses or in government quarters or in
prisons and will deal in graveyards, intoxication materials and
adulterated food articles.
(For the house significations of Rahu, please include the
significations of Jupiter •)
If the 4th house falls in the star of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter,
the Pisces asc boms will hold legally valid properties and big
organisations, run education centres, produce goods especially
food articles, silk, turmeric, cotton and livestock, real estate
and will become surveyors and land inspectors.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 1 & 10 to Pisces . So the Pisces
asc boms will,
(i) have their own manufacturing processes, undertake
courageous acts in matters of properties and make
independent purchases and increase their strength.
( ii ) become honorary zamindars or landlords , industrialists ,
administrative officers, responsible officers for
documents, hold responsible posts and will become
persons with name and fame.
V House : Cancer
Cancer, the IV sign of Kaalchakra is the V house to Pisces. So
the Pisces asc boms will face troubles in their love affairs and
romantic life. They will feel dissatisfied in devotional worships
and in love affairs. Their first child may face longevity problems .
They will excel in the construction of buildings.
Cancer is a watery sign. The Pisces asc boms will gain wisdom
and knowledge and would become experts in the fields of arts
and culture.
Cancer is a movable sign. The faith in god of Pisces asc borns

would get intensified with time. Their love affairs, knowledge
and deep thoughts would see gradual development.
Cancer is a house of Moon. So the Pisces asc boms will excel
in character roles in films and plays, become poets, thinkers
and cricket players, associate themselves with recreation clubs
and sports clubs and will have intelligent children.
If the 5 th house falls in the star of Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter,
the Pisces asc boms will have religious links, faith in god and
deep thoughts; will be sincere and truthful in love affairs; become
political or religious leaders and render service in religious
institutions.
Jupiter is the lord of houses 1 & 10 to Pisces. So the Pisces asc
boms will,
(i) deal in share markets, chant Vedic mantras; would be
fond of sports and games; write poems and short stories,
interested in politics and arts; become trainer of arts,
associate themselves with marriage registration offices
and places of religious rituals; will innovate artistic
goods.
(ii) hold honorary posts as artists, deal with industry for
artistic goods, become responsible for large temples,
hold posts with easy workload and earn name and fame
in their professions.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Pushyam, ruled by Saturn, the
Pisces asc boms will have sexual relationships with people of
lower strata, become insincere in love affairs, become saints or
prostitutes or security guards of ponds or water reservoirs, have
lazy children and act in sober characters.
Saturn is also the lord of houses 11 & 12 to Pisces. So the
Pisces asc boms will,
(i) learn arts with commitment, arrange lodges, make
branches of unions, have partnerships with unions and
associations, have fortunate opportunities of agreements,
make professional achievements in livestock and would
Astrologicsof kaalchakra

like to be in the company of joyful and happy friends.
(ii) secretly plan for love affairs but fail in them, regain:
energy and strength, deliver child secretly, hide and
protect child and will rejoin with a separated member
of the family.
If the 5th house falls in the star of Aslesha, ruled by Mercury,
the Pisces asc boms will become singers, comedians, debaters,
arts trainers, painters, sculptors, priests, instrumentalists,
commission agents and singers preaching the values of society.
Mercury is also the lord of houses 4 & 7 to Pisces. So the
Pisces asc boras will,
( i) produce nutritious food , livestock, musical instruments,
cosmetics, films; arrange stages for music and dramas
and will have a high degree of stamina in the body:
(ii) have cordial relationships with society, live in
government quarters for artists, get instruments from
government, enter into partnerships, associate with
social service clubs or guest houses and marry persons
of their choice.
VI House : Leo
Leo, the V sign of Kaalchakra is the VI house to Pisces. So the
Pisces asc boms will serve in the fields of arts and culture, sports
and gambling; also, they may have to face frequent litigations
in these fields and may suffer due to viral infections.
Leo is a fiery sign. So the Pisces asc boras will serve in those
fields where fire is used; they may also suffer due to heat-borne
diseases.
Leo is a fixed sign. So the food and the digestive system of
Pisces asc boms would remain stable. They are reluctant to
change their dresses or costume styles; The litigations would
remain unsolved for long but the success gained by them would
carry long-standing effects. They may mostly be employed in
permanent service; their diseases also would remain for long.
VisceT" r "365

Leo is a sign of Sun. So the Pisces asc boras will serve in
government departments of food and agriculture, cattle,
employment, medicines and loans. They may also represent
government side in litigations.
If the 6ih house falls m the star of Makha, ruled by Ketu, the
Pisces asc boras will acquire loans with an intention to cheat,
become criminals, deal in acids, illicit drugs and intoxicating
materials and become criminal lawyers or doctors of gastroenteritis.
Ketu would act like Mercury , the lord of houses 4 & 7 to Pisces.
So the Pisces asc boras will,
(i) have excessive energy production m the body, serve in
huge organisations of lands, housing, vehicles and
automobiles, catering Reids or livestock and cattle
developments, may work for daily wages, become
school teachers, manufacturers of house-hold articles
like furniture and stage decorators of music and dramas.
(ii) serve in social service institutions and voluntary
organisations or labour welfare offices and will become
agents of government officials, marriage brokers, and
labour contractors.
If the 6* house falls m the star of Poorvapalguni, ruled by Venus,
the Pisces asc boras will serve in the fields of arts and culture,
tailoring, silk-manufacturing, weaving, sale ofvegetables, fruits,
hardware, glass wares, plastics, paints, cosmetics or sweets and
suffer due to diabetes or water-borne diseases.
Venus is also the lard of houses 3 & 8 to Pisces. So the Pisces
asc boms will,
(i) have press publicity about their success, publish books
on profession, involve in advertising and publication
departments, enter into agreements of employment,
confident in their service and work as clerks in tender
or personnel departments.
(ii) become hard workers with heavy workload, undertake
jobs of disrespect under severe working conditions and
36<T“ ” ” Astrologies of kaalchakra

jobs in which labour privileges are deprived and may
undertake repairing jobs.
If the 6th house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Pisces asc boms will serve in government departments of
food and agriculture, cattle, employment, medicines and loans.
They may also represent government side in litigations.
Sun is the lord of 6th house to Pisces. So the Pisces asc boms
will work in competitive exam centres, lodges, hospitals,
nursing, health care centres, and in the fields of tailoring,
weaving and catering.
VH House : Virgo
Virgo, the VI sign of Kaalchakra is the VII house to Pisces. So
the Pisces asc boms will not have mutual understandings with
their life partners leading to separations, divorces and troubles.
They may also suffer due to contagious diseases.
Virgo is an earthy sign. So the Pisces asc boms will have
disciplined and affectionate spouses and business partners.
Virgo is a common sign. The relationships of the Pisces asc
boms between life/business partners, opposite sex and customers
would see more and more fluctuations. The functioning of
kidneys and sensory organs may be improper*
Virgp is a sign of Mercury. So the life/business partners of
Pisces asc boms may be clever and cunning; the Pisces asc
boms may often have to meet with mediators, business customers
and academicians.
If the 7th house falls in the star of Uttarapalguni, ruled by Sun,
the Pisces asc boms may have life/business partners with selfpride, often meet with persons belonging to public works and
welfare departments, government officers and high ranking
officials.
Sun is the lord of 6th house to Pisces. So the Pisces asc boms may
often meet with bank officials, money-lenders, servants, patients,
doctors, cooks, lawyers and suffer due to contagious diseases.
Ttscel 367

If the 7th house falls in the star of Hastha, ruled by Moon, the
Pisces asc boms will marry young and energetic persons with
fluctuating minds; meet customers and business partners quite
frequently.
Moon is the lord of 5th house to Pisces. So the life/business
partners of Pisces asc boms will become artists, priests,
prostitutes, pimps, saints, singers, astrologers or religious
servants.
If the 7th house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
life/business partners and the 2nd child of Pisces asc boms may
be undisciplined with arrogance; the Pisces asc boms may often
meet with people who threaten public and will be forced to
request for other’s assistance.
Mars is also the lord of houses 2 & 9 to Pisces. So the Pisces
asc boms will,
(i) get the scholarship of others, have meaningful dialogues
with banks, lack digestive capacity, purchase gold and
valuables with the help of others, get money as
assistance, costly goods as donation; work beyond the
needs of others and become members of joint family.
( ii ) often meet with leaders, foreigners, exporters, judges,
priests, trustees, teachers and people with social recognition.
Vm House : Libra
Libra, the VII sign of Kaalchakra is the VIII house to Pisces.
So the Pisces asc boms will face troubles caused by life/business
partners and customers. They will be threatened by opposite
sex and they will be put into disrespects by them.
Libra is an airy sign. So the Pisces asc boms will face difficulties
due to natural calamities like bomb blasts and air pressures and
suffer due to respira*ory disorders.
Libra is a movable sign. The life of Pisces asc boms will
generally be long but the disrespects caused to them would also
remain for long. Pains, stress, troubles and accidents may recur
Astrologies of kaalchakra

frequently.
Libra is a house of Venus. So the Pisces asc boms will face
disrespects and harassnients caused by women; kidnap, threaten
and rape women and will lose happiness due to women.
If the 8th house falls in the star of Chitra, ruled by Mars, the
Pisces asc boms will get into quarrels, riots, wars, straggles,
violence, terrorism, seizures, allegations, police Or military
actions, seize properties of others, handle weapons and bombs,
will be troubled by brothers, meet with cruel accidents, cheat,
rape, murder or steal and may be part of suicide squads.
Mars is the lord of houses 2 & 9 to Pisces. So the Pisces asc
boms will,
(i) talk with troubles and difficulties, suffer due to allergy
and will donate money and costly articles beyond their
capacity.
(&) face difficulties in port contracts, will face stay of
transfer orders and in teaching profession, will meet with
fire accidents in research centres, will close trusts and
endowments, will do subversive activities in trusts to
maintain temples and in collection of taxes, will be
punished by the court of law and will have damages in
ancient monuments.
If the 8* house falls in the star of Swathi, ruled by Rahu, the
Pisces asc boras will be imprisoned, face troubles during sex,
addicted to intoxicants, will be alleged and punished in foreign
countries; suffer due to respiratory infections and deficiency in
proteins and the belongings of Pisces asc boras may be seized.
(For Rahu's house significations, kindly include the house
significations of Jupiter.)
If the 8th house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter,
the Pisces asc boms will be punished or fined by courts, lose
gold and valuables, do illegal activities, produce goods with
damages and enter into actions of illegal seizures.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses 1 & 10 to Pisces. So the Pisces

(i) lose self-thoughts, physical energy and would become
inactive, perform with struggles; lack in independent
actions; suffer due to allergy, troubles, pains, stress and
amputations in their service and face dejections in their
professional career.
(ii) face allegations in their substantiation process of
employment and will be corrupt by misusing their
administrative powers in high posts to lose name, fame
and promotions.
IX House : Scorpio
Scorpio , the VIII house of Kaalchakra is the IX house to Pisces .
So the Pisces asc boras may get into illegal affairs in departments
of finance and foreign affairs, high courts, hospitals and colleges
and during foreign journeys.
Scorpio is a watery sign. So the Pisces asc boras will face
troubles in life and problems in ponds and water tanks and during
rainy seasons and in urinary tracts.
Scorpio is a fixed sign. So the higher education, foreign journeys,
life at foreign countries and research ventures of the Pisces asc
boms will be stable in nature. Their credibility would remain
permanent and few of them may become as polygamists.
Scorpio is a house of Mars. So the Pisces asc boms may study
agriculture, geology, mechanical engineering, history and
archaeology, become bead masters, politicians, transporters,
landlords and judges and involve in branches of criminal law.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Vishakha, ruled by Jupiter, the
Pisces asc boms will have higher education and will be in the field
of teaching; become responsible for controlling financial activities
of the country, gain intelligence and wisdom, after the codes of
religion, law and social discipline, involve in religious rituals,
religious services and become trustees, temple executives,
ambassadors and exporters.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses I& lOto Pisces. So the Pisces
asc boms will,
Astrologies of kaalchakra

(i) research with own ideas, calm and stable in their
independent actions, become academicians, enjoy
increased activities and proper functioning of body, have
flexibility in their working capacity, suffer due to
swellings and growths, have changes in the body and
would become stout and get needed rest in sleep and in
calm thoughts.
(ii) work in the fields of transport, information and
communication, courts and law, imports and exports,
ports, electricity, teaching, research centres, endowments
and temples, tax collection, international offices of
agreements, panchayat boards and in protection of
ancient monuments.
If the 9th house falls in the star of Anuradha, ruled by Saturn,
the Pisces asc boras will leam science, will be slow in their
academic career due to lack of needed inclination, work in
research of oil seeds, blood, urine and sputum and work in oil
fields.
Saturn is also the tord of houses 1 1 & 12 to Pisces. So the
Pisces asc horns will,
(i) study diploma courses, hold honorary posts, become
successful and make achievements in research to identity
right ways, earn name and fame, gain success with
greediness, always remain happy and joyful, haVe
needed co-operation with societies and gain success in
agreements with societies, have fortunate chances of
employment and will be fond of taking fatty foods.
(ii) spend much in secret links, face financial crisis
especially due to second professional venture andspend
for religious service, unable to liquidate capital, find
hidden factors and leam in research fields.
If the 9* house falls in the star of Jyeshta, ruled by Mercury,
the Pisces asc boms will work as clerks in research centres,
become high school teachers, counsellors, lawyers,
mathematicians, statisticians, advertisers, servants of embassy,,
jusentsof foreign trade and accountants in treasuries. _ _
Pisces- - — — “

Mercury is also the lord of houses 4 & 7to Pisces. So the Pisces
asc boras will,
(i) study teaching courses, have ancestral properties and
properties in foreign countries, maintain temple
properties, use imported goods, become founder of
schools and colleges, work in maintenance division of
automobiles, production departments, grain fields and
research centres.
(ii) become disciplined worker in social service centres and
voluntary organisations, get due recognition from
government for their social and voluntary institutions,
maintain friendships with government officials, marry
the sister of wife and will be induced into illegal affairs
by opposite sex.
X House : Sagittarius
Sagittarius , the IX sign of Kaalchakra is the X house to Pisces.
So the Pisces asc boras will work in the professional fields of
law, religion, import & export, become contractors and
superintendents of construction works and may work in
panchayat offices.
Sagittarius is a fiery sign. So the Pisces asc boms will hold
important and responsible posts as leaders.
Sagittarius is a common sign. So the status , prestige, posts and
profession of the Pisces asc boms would see many fluctuations.
Sagittarius is a house of Jupiter. So the Pisces asc boms will
hold responsible or honorary posts in big organisations; serve
in banks , child welfare societies , mints , gold mines and national
monuments.
If the 10th house falls in the star of Moola, ruled by Ketu, the
Pisces asc boras will involve in illegal activities using their
status and authority, illegal professions, gain status through
illegal means and will feel dissatisfied in all walks of life.
Ketu would act like Mercury, the lord of houses 4 & 7. So the
Pisces asc boms will,
Astrologies of kaalchakra

(i) be manufacturers of commodities, become agriculturists,
cleaners and house-keepers; work in the fields of
building constructions , automobiles , electricity , boilers ,
water tanks, grain fields, farms? fruit gardens, godowns
and industries.
(ii) serve in social and public service institutions, become
marriage brokers or labour contractors, enter into
partnerships and represent themselves in social forums.
If the 1 0* house falls in the star of Poorvashada, ruled by Venus ,
the Pisces asc boras will earn status and prestige in professional
fields of arts and culture and work in the fields of intoxicants or
prostitution.
Venus is also the lord of houses 3 & 8 to Pisces. So the Pisces
asc boras will,
(i) work in those professions wherein the Pisces bom are
expected to think beyond their capacity, get professional
press publicity, become brokers, involve in the fields of
information and communication, work in the fields of
printing, publishing, plumbing, writing, electricity, collection
of fees, accounting, sale of goods and work as assistants.
(ii) work in the fields of old and obsolete goods and may
work as professional criminals.
If the Kk house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun,
the Pisces asc boras will become government officials, work in
semi/quasi government organisations, industrial centres,
industrial training centres, employment offices and government
trade centres and hold honorary government posts .
Sun is also the lord of 6th house to Pisces. So the Pisces asc
boras will work in competitive examination centres, medical
shops, hotels and as medical officers, nurses, lab technicians,
lawyers, money lenders or tailors.
'isces

XI House : Capricorn
Capricorn, the X sign of Kaalchakra is the XI house to Pisces.
So the Pisces asc boms will fulfil their desires through their
profession. They will tend to win over the minds of others
through their profession.
Capricorn is an earthy sign. So the Pisces asc boms will be
joyful, happy persons and always be enthusiastic.
Capricorn is a movable sign; the profession, status, authority
and posts of the Pisces asc boms will always progress with an
upward trend.
Capricorn is a house of Saturn. So the Pisces asc boms will
have lazy, undisciplined and dishonest friends, sons-in-law and
daughters-in-law, will get things done in untruthful ways and
the properties purchased by them will be with litigations.
If the 1 1th house falls in the star of Uttarashada, ruled by Sun,
the Pisces asc bom will work in the professional fields of
government bodies, societies, co-operative clubs, friendship
forums, government festivals, guest houses, monuments, cooperative centres , and will be able to get government assistance,
subsidies, medals and honours.
Sun is the lord of 6th house to Pisces. So the Pisces asc boms
will gain success in their fields of interest, suffer due to vitamin
deficiencies, join in the services of their choice and always find
themselves with successful opportunities .
If the 11th house falls in the star of Shravana, ruled by Moon,
the Pisces asc boras will have more number of friends who
tend to create confusions and the Pisces asc boras will be persons
of self-satisfaction and remain selfish.
Moon is the lord of 5th house to Pisces . So the Pisces asc boms
will fall in love affairs, enter into mutual agreements, show
interest in the fields of arts and culture and have cordial and
harmonious social relationships.
If the 1 1* house falls in the star of Dhanishta, mled by Mars,
the Pisces asc boms will have untruthful and insincere friends,
Astrologies of kaalchakra

sons-in-law and daughters -in-law, will have success only after
struggles, will be greedy and could win their professional desires
only after prolonged struggles.
Mars is also the lord of houses 2 & 9 to Pisces. So the Pisces
asc boms will,
(i) use eloquence for professional gains, gain out of their
speech, gain expected gold and valuables, benefit out
of friends, sons-in-law and daughters -in-law and utilize
opportunities and circumstances.
(ii) have links with social service institutions and higher
officials, show interests in public service centres,
undertake journeys, researches, courses of higher studies
of their choice, have international contacts and will
frequently enter into agreements.
XII House : Aquarius
Aquarius, the XI sign of Kaalchakrais the XII house to Pisces.
So the Pisces asc boms will be able to liquidate their capital
and investments, maintain sedrecy in friendships and will be
able to fulfil their desires only after making extravagant
expenditures.
Aquarius is an airy sign. So the Pisces asc boras will involve in
secret research, investigations, archaeology and in the research
fields.
Aquarius is a fixed sign. So the Pisces asc boros will
consistently involve in secret researches and would make steady
expenditures. Their investment would remain steady for long.
Aquarius is a house of Saturn. So the Pisces asc boras will
take secret revenges against their opponents, they tend to hoard
and adulterate things, will reject things, make secret plans and
will act secretly.
If the 12th house falls in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mara,
the Pisces asc boras will involve in investigations, adulterations,
hoardings, smugglings, secret and illegal activities and work in
operation theatres, prostitution dens or lodges.
Tisces

Mars is also the lord of houses 2 & 9 to Pisces. So the Pisces
asc boras will,
(i) be able to regain what was lost, will have diseases in
digestive system and eyes, invest in gold, valuables and
will have secret financial transactions.
(ii) spend for social service centres and voluntary
organisations, have secret links with higher officials and
foreign nations; undertake foreign journeys; face
troubles in higher education; enter into secret agreements
and have secret illegal affairs.
If the 1 2th house falls in the star of Shathabisham, ruled by Rahu ,
the Pisces asc boms will involve in secret investigations,
software, atomic power stations, explosives, anaesthesia,
artificial respiratory system’s, prisons and hijacking of planes.
(For the house significations of Rahu, kindly include the
significations of Jupiter .)
If the 12th house falls in the star of Poorvabadra, ruled by Jupiter,
the Pisces asc boras will involve in legally valid secret activities
or printing of fake currencies, face secret troubles and
imprisonments by law, undertake secret financial reviews, will
be raided by income-tax authorities and the secret properties of
the Pisces asc boms will be seized by government.
Jupiter is also the lord of houses I & 1 0 to Pisces. So the Pisces
asc boms will,
(i) lack physical energy and self attention, suffer due to
inferiority complex, become masochists, underestimate
themselves, suffer due to allergy, lack in imaginations
and face troubles in their actions.
(ii) undertake jobs with secret responsibilities with heavy
workload or dual natured jobs .
In addition to the above, the residential positions of the planets
should also be taken into consideration for a comprehensive
study of a horoscope.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

ANNEXURE (SPORTS)
Different fields of sports and games could be identified in the
zodiac for astrological study and research. For example, sprint,
one of the sports, has been studied here after a detailed analysis
of a set of charts that were available with us and after providing
scope for improvements from the feedbacks of the readers.
SPRINT is a sport of running a short distance at full speed.
Naturally, the karaka planet ought to be Moon, the fastest planet.
Moon is the lord of the sign Cancer, a movable sign, again to
reassure the conclusion on motion. Cancer has three stars, i.e.,
Punarvasu, ruled by Jupiter, Pushyam, ruled by Saturn and
Aslesha, ruled by Mercury. Hie sport of sprint, i.e., the 100
metres or 200 metres dash, requires veiy good strength on legs .
Saturn is the karaka planet of legs. So Pushyam could be the
star for this sport of sprint. There are four quarters in Pushyam
star that would spread in the Navamsa signs of Leo, Virgo,
Libra and Scorpio. The field of sports is one of those
significations of the sign Leo, as it is the V sign of the Zodiac:
So Pushyam first quarter may generally denote the sport of sprint.
So the V house of a person may have to fall in the first quarter
of the star of Pushyam for him to become a sportsperson of
sprint. It may be possible only to those who are bom in the
Ascendant sign of Pisces. Saturn, being the lord of houses 1 1
& 12 would enable the Pisces asc boras to gain success in sprint.
If Saturn remains in the I house of the natal chart, i.e., in the
sign of Pisces itself, he/she would be able to earn status. If it
resides in the II house, Aries, he/she could earn money; If it
resides in the III house, Taurus, he/she would avail needed
publicity; if it is in the sign of Gemini, the IV house, he/she
may become a trainer of sprint and could participate in the local
events; If it is in the sign of Cancer, the V house, he/she may
represent the nation; If it is in the sign of Leo, the VI house, he/
she may win competitions; If it resides in the sign of Virgo the
Annexure (Sports)

VII , he/she may represent clubs' in group events; If it resides in
the sign Libra, the VUI house to Pisces, he/she may get into
frequent injuries in this sport event; If it resides in the sign
Scorpio, the IX house, he/she may represent their state in the
national events. If it resides in the sign of Sagittarius, the X
house, he/she may undertake foreign journeys to represent the
nation and thus could earn status as a national player. If it resides
in the sign of Capricorn, the XI house, the ambition to shine in
this field of sport could be fulfilled and could bring honours to
them. If it resides in the sign of Aquarius, the XII house, he/she
may be able to participate m the world events like Olympics.
So we could draw a logic that the runners (Sprint) would mostly
belong to the Ascendant sign of Pisces. But all the Pisces asc
boras may not be running the same dasa. Only if they are running
either the Saturn or the Moon dasa/ bhukthi/ antharaa/
sookshama, they could show some involvement in this field of
sport, i.e, only to those who are running Saturn/Moon dasa at
their right ages of 15-34, could possibly dedicate their life in
this sport
This logic could also be extended to people who are running
dasas of other planets, which are in the star of Saturn or Moon.
People who are running Saturn or Moon bhukthi in the dasas
of other planets, could perform only for a short period. If they
are running Saturn or Moon Antharaa, they could participate
in one or two important events to settle themselves with a few
sweet memories of this sport. Sookshma could limit the scope
only for occasional participations in this event.
If the Pisces asc horns are running Sun dasa, as the planet Sun
is the lord of VI house to Pisces born, the involvement in
competitions could naturally be assured. But the success could
be possible only during the period of Saturn or Moon bhukthies.
Added to this, if the dasa lard Sun resides in the sign of Aries in
their natal chart, i.e., for those Pisces asc boras who are bom in
the Tamil month of Chithirai,»they may have a fair chance of
winning cash awards, as Sun is in Aries, the n house to them. If
it is in the sign of Taurus, the HI house, they will win certificates
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

or silver medals mostly from the hands of a lady. If Sun is in the
sign of Gemini, the IV house, they will win more than a single
article as mementos or cheques along with certificates. If Sun
is in the sign of Cancer, the V house, they will be honoured in
feasts and may be accommodated in government hotels. If Sun
is in Leo itself, the VI house, they may be able to win government
scholarships. If Sun resides in the sign of Virgo, the VH house,
they may be able to get prizes sponsored by sports clubs and
corporate companies. If Sun is in the sign of Libra, the VIII
house, they may unexpectedly receive prizes carrying
commercial benefits. If Sun is in the sign of Scorpio, the IX
house, they may unexpectedly be selected for a tour by the
government. If Sun is in the sign of Sagittarius, the X house,
they may win gold medals in prestigious events. If Sun is in the
sign of Capricorn, the sign of employment, they may be offered
with employment opportunities. If Sun is in the sign of
Aquarius, the sign of satisfactions, they would secretly be
selected for an international event. Li the above manner, we can
use the residentships of the other dasa lords (planets) for
comprehensive study.
Like Saturn, the planet Moon, the lord of V house to Pisces,
asc boms, would also encourage persons to show more and more
involvement and dedication towards this sport, during its dasa,
bhukthi or antharaa periods. Even the Moon may enable them
to level their respective national records and performances: If
Mars dasa is on, as Mars being the lord of houses 2 & 9, the
Pisces asc boras, in spite of struggles and financial difficulties,
would show consistent interest by undertaking long and difficult
journeys. During Rahu dasa, they may undertake foreign
journeys and would perform like strong winds at the international
levels. If Jupiter dasa is running, they may participate in the
regular annual events abroad. If Mercury dasa is running, they
may participate only in the local events and would remain as a
trainer and would associate themselves with framing schools
and sports clubs. They would also like to train one of their family
members in this field of sports. If Ketu dasa is running, they
may feel dejected in choosing this career and would not pay
sustained interest in this game and would prefer and practice
Annexure ( Sports )

for a different event in this same kind of sports. If Venus dasa is
running, they would become more nervous during their
performances and would subsequently end up with failures. Their
minds may remain as barriers to success.
During Saturn dasa, the Pisces asc boras would show needed
involvement in sprint. In its own bhukthi, the practice and
involvement will be there and they would become entertainers.
In Mercury bhukthi, they would opt for a different event in this
kind of sport. In Ketu bhukthi, they may lack practice due to
their diversion of attention in changing the style of performance
in the event. During Venus bhukthi, they may sustain injuries
and may lack concentration. During Sun bhukthi, they would
perform well and make achievements. During Moon bhukthi,
they will register their career-best speed. During Mars bhukthi,
they will sustain injuries during journeys. During Rahu bhukthi,
they will perform well in international events and during Jupiter
bhukthi, they will be on top of their career with international
status and prestige.
Now we have a different question before us as to whether all
the sprinters in the world would belong to the same category of
Pisces ascendant boras . It could not be rational. As in any other
case, there would be representations by all the twelve ascendant
boms. But on one condition; they must mn Saturn or Moon
dasa and Saturn or Moon should be in their V house or their V
house should have fallen in the stars of Saturn or Moon* Also
it should be important that any one of their houses should begin
in the first quarter of Pushyam. Only then, this Zodiac point of
Pushyam first quarter could suitably represent its signification
of sprint .
The combination of the Moon, the fastest planet and Saturn,
the karaka planet for legs is also available in the Shravana star
of Capricorn sign, which is again a movable sign. Only to those
who are bom in the Hastha star of Virgo as Asc, the V house
would fall in the star of Shravana. The planet Saturn becomes
the lord of houses V & VI and the planet Moon becomes the
lord of XI house to these people. Hence, the Virgo asc boms
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

could also become as sports persons in this field. But the
disadvantages to the Virgo asc boms are:
(i) The V house, Capricorn is an earthy sign whereas
Cancer is a watery sign.. Water flows speedily compared
to solid articles.
(ii) Leo, the V sign of Kaalchakra, is the XII house to the
Virgo bom. (XII is also Vm to their V house). So mostly,
the Virgo asc boms would not explicitly show their
interests in the field of sports. But to the Pisces asc boms,
the V sign of Kaalchakra, Leo is the VI house, i.e., the
house of physique and labour.
Before concluding, I would like to remind the readers about the
appropriate use of the transit of Saturn and Moon as they have
to transit in favourable houses for ensuring success. In the
Placidius method of house divisions, two consecutive houses
may fall in the same sign, depending upon different latitudes of
birth places. To Say ana births, the cusps may vary completely;
these factors should also be kept in mind before determining
the prospects of a person to become a successful sportsperson
of this field.
Of course, I am sure that the KP/KB followers would not forget
to apply the mles of merits of sublords for a comprehensive and
detailed study of cases. As a part of academic interest and
especially to the KP/KB followers of astrology, I think the
following may stand as a case of reverse study. We Indians could
never forget the name of the sprint queen of our nation, P.T.Usha
and her great contribution to our national pride. We may not
know the date and time of her birth; but we presume that she
had been bom in Pisces Ascendant for the following reasons;
she has often been described as the "Golden Girl of India”.
Jupiter, the karaka planet for gold, is the lord of Ascendant and
also the X house to Pisces. So name and prestige have been
awarded by Jupiter to her. Her X house would fall in
Sagittarius, the IX house, or the house of transport of Zodiac,
as she is working in Indian Railways. Her 2, 6 and 10 might
have fallen respectively in the stars of Krittiga, Uttarapalguni
Annexure (Sports)

and Uttarashada so as to enable her to receive the government
employment, scholarships and medals. She is also married to her
trainer, Shri Nambiar; Mercury, the lord of 7* house or the house
of life partner is also the lord of 4* house, the house of training. Her
Ascendant must have been linked with the planet Sun, as she carries
the name of ‘USHAI” which is related to the Sun God. Similarly,
we can presume the ascendants of eminent sports personalities with
available infonnation about their physical structure, appearance,
successful performances and so on.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Kaalchakra Principles
Applied to Residential
Positions of Planets
In the preceding chapters we attempted to get to the roots of the
fiindainental principles of Kaalchakra or the Zodiac . Now it is time
to demonstrate the applicability of these principles. In the current
as well as the following chapters, it is being discussed in full length.
Effects of Residential Positions of Planets
Following the foot-steps of Jothidamannan Prof K.S.
Krishnamoorthy, we advocate not to give extra or undue importance
to exaltation, debilitation, conjoinments and aspects of planets. The
reasons for the same have already been detailed in my previous
books.
Consider an example:
Date
Day
Time
Place
Lagna
Rasi
Nakshatra
Sidereal Time
Ayanamsa
Friday
: Madurai (JN)(Long.: 9°58’N, Lat\ 78o10’E)
: Aquarius (Ascendant Lord: Saturn)
: Aries (Rasi Lord: Mars)
: Aswani-l$l Qtr(NakLord: Ketu)
17H2M37S
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Residential Position of Planets 383

Traditional Chart
Going by the traditional concepts, (wherein usually the equal house
system is adopted), if the Lagna fells in the 6th navamsa of Aquarius
sign, all the other 1 1 bhavas will naturally fall in the subsequent 6th
384 A strologics of kaalchakra

navamsas of signs as tabulated below.
When we say that the ascendant falls in the 6th navamsa of the sign
Aquarius, i.e., Sathabisham 4th quarter, it only indicates the
beginning of the ascendant bhava. Similarly all the other 1 1 bhavas
begin at their respective star quarters.
The position of the various bhavas in the Rasichakra is called the
Bhavachakra and this is shown in the accompanying figure.
Here it may be so said that, all the planets which fall between
Sathabisham 4* quarter and Revathi 1st quarter at the time of birth
are actually residing in the ascendant and so on.
However if Placidus system for defining houses is followed, the
above statement may or may not be true. This is an illustrative
chapter to demonstrate the application of Kaalchakra principles .
We leave it to the readers to adopt it for Placidus House system,
which should be easily possible after the methodology detailed
hereunder is grasped Hilly.
The cusp of the first bhava (i.e., precisely the point where the first
bhava begins) for this Aquarius asc bom native, obviously has to
fall at some point in the zodiac , which in turn, will be mled by a
certain star. From what has already been elaborated in the preceding
pages, readers can draw general predictions for the first and also
the subsequent bhavas.
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Residential Position of Planets 385

Now, we will deal with the residential positions of the planets.
A planet will provide only the significations of the star in which
it transits at the time of birth.
SUN
The planet Sun is in the sign of Aquarius. The lord of 7* house is
in the ascendant.
.Aquarius is a fixed sign. So the Sun would make this native to
enjoy stability with respect to his physical health, mind, capacity,
colour, structure, beauty and characters like anger, shorttemperedness and activeness.
Aquarius being an airy sign would enable the Sun to cause the
native to have self-pride, sportive nature, lean body and pretentious
nature of showing affection.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

Sun itself resides in ascendant. Its planetary significations, would
make the native majestic and authoritative in appearance with selfpride, strong bones, status, leadership qualities, generosity and
prestige, etc.
Sun is the lord of 7th house. So it will also impart 7th house
significations to ascendant by bestowing the native with social
relationships and recognitions, tendency to abide by law and to
depend on others.
But statistically speaking, these significations are going to be
common for some 42 million births taking place between 14th
February and 1 4th March out of the pool of the possible 500 million
births with Aquarius ascendant in the global population of 6000
million. So to fine tune our specifications, we move on to identify
the star or the stellar position of the planet Sun. In this horoscope it
resides in Poorvabadra, the star of Jupiter. The domain of star
being shorter than that of the sign, the native now shares a 14
million strong community of those taking births between 4th March
and 1 4th March.
Jupiter is the starlord of Sun. Sun would therefore provide the
significations of Jupiter and not of its own. Jupiter is the lord of
houses 2 and II to all the Aquarius boms.
2nd house significations of Jupiter: Linkage with money in higher
denominations, treasury or banks, pawn brokers, gold articles and
truthful speech to respect others and teaching by using the voice etc.,
Ilth house significations of Jupiter: Friendships with truthful,
sincere, generous and intelligent people, expecting things to happen
through legal means and doing things through legal means.
In addition to the above mentioned common significations, we now
add yet another dimension to make it more specific to this nativethe residential position of the Jupiter.
Every year Jupiter changes its sign or for that matter, its residence.
So out of the likely 1 4 million births, 1.17 million would have taken
place resembling the current case wherein Jupiter transits in the
same sign of Capricorn, the 12^ house.
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Residential Position of Planets 387

So Sun would produce results of 12th house significations of its
starlord, the Jupiter.
12th house significations of Jupiter: Secret but legal activities,
secret but legal troubles, income-tax raids, seizure of binami
properties by the government, legal imprisonments, secret financial
reviews and printing of fake currency etc. These are the planetary
significations of Jupiteronly.
Further, the Sun, as stated above, resides in the ascendant. It is in
Aquarius sign, Poorvabadra star, It therefore has to deliver the
results of the matters specific to 2, 11 and 12th houses of the
ascendant related significations.
2nd house significations on ascendant: Ability to speak, activeness
and digestive capacity.
11th house significations on ascendant: Greedy nature, selfishness,
happy and joyful, counselor to societies or clubs, desires, fortunes,
success, achievements, cordiality and flexibility.
12th house significations on ascendant: Secret activities , loss of
energy, absconding, sacrifice, investigation, failures, blockages and
secret troubles , etc.
MOON
Moon is in Aries, the fiery sign. It suggests the native to possess
temperament of prideful speech, telling lies, being spendthrift and
carrying weapons on person.
Moon is in movable sign. The development and growing nature of
digestion capacity, besides the acquisition of valuable and costly
documents or articles made up of gold or diamonds.
Though Aries is the third sign from Aquarius, Moon is actually in
the 2nd house. But Moon is in the star of Aswani , which is ruled by
Ketu. Ketu is not a ruler to any house, but is in the 12th house to
Aquarius. So the Moon would act for its starlord Ketu for its
planetary and the bhava karakas.
Planetary significations of Ketu meant for 12lh house: Secret
plans, involvements in all kinds of illegal and subversive activities
and taking secret re venges , etc .
Astrologies of kaalchakra

As Moon resides in the 2nd house, so blended significations of
houses 2 and 1 2 will be manifested.
12th house significations in the 2nd house: Making gains from
secret activities, losing energy or body organs, hidden things/cache,
given or saved money, clandestine activities, getting back lost things
and re-joining family after separation, etc.
MARS
Mars is in Aquarius sign itself, but in the 1 2th bhava . Aquarius is
an airy sign so Mars would enable the native to involve in secret
research, investigations and research in the fields of archaeology
and education.
Mars is in a fixed sign. The secret activities, expenses, losses,
investments , comforts in travel , sexual pleasures , sleep , failures of
organs in the body would prolong to cause for pennanent disabilities.
Mars is the lord of houses 3 and 1 0 to Aquarius.
The planetary significations of Mars meant for the 3rd house:
Braveiy, confidence, encouraging acts, rumours, forged documents,
mental strength, arrogant use of intelligence, unnecessary deals
and incompetent agreements etc.,
The planetary significations of Mai's meant for the 10,h house:
Industries, fire-related professions, departments for housing and
land development, police, armed forces, administration officers,
responsible officers for government documents and executive posts
etc.,
Mars is in the 12lh house. So we will have to include the planetary
significations of Mars meant for the 1 2th house.
Planetary significations of Mars meant for the 12th house:
Improper and unbecoming activities, adulteration, hoarding*
smuggling, covert activities, and service in operation theatres,
prostitution dens , luxury hotels and investigation departments , etc .
Besides the above house significations related to 3, 1 0 and 1 2 of
Mars (being in the 12* house) are:
3rd house: Losing energy, press publicity about personal mishaps,
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Residential Position of Planets

breaks in agreements, hurdles in communication, book sales,
blockage of news, mistakes in accounts; loss of memory power
and selling things etc.,
lffk house: Responsible posts of secrecy, jobs with overwork and
doing double natured jobs etc
12th house: Losses through secret contacts, invested money, given
money, inability to get back binami properties, concealing already
hidden matters, strengthening of secret involvements and doing
continuous research activities etc.,
As Mars is in its own star of Dhanishta, Mars would independently
act for itself in this case.
MERCURY
Mercury is in Capricorn, the 12* sign and also in the 12th bhava.
Capricorn is an earthy sign so Mercury would make the native to
spend for the cause of affection and love and would involve him in
research ventures for the common and noble causes.
It is a movable sign. The secret activities, expenses, losses,
investments , comforts in travel , sexual pleasures, sleep , failures of
organs in the body leading to pennanent damages.
Mercury is in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars , which is in the
12th house arid is the ruler of houses 3 and 10. As an agent of
Mars, Mercury would assume the following significations:
The planetary significations of Mars meant for the 3rd house:
Bravery, confidence, encouraging acts, rumours, forged documents,
mental strength, arrogant use of intelligence, unnecessary deals
and incompetent agreements etc.,
The planetary significations of Mars meant for the 10th house
Industries, fire-related professions, departments for housing and
land development, police, armed forces, administration officers,
responsible officers for government documents and executive posts
etc;,
Mars is in the 1 2* house. So include the planetary significations of
Mars meant for the 12th house.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

Planetary significations of Mars meant for the 12th house:
Improper and unbecoming activities, adulteration, hoarding,
smuggling, covert activities, and service in operation theatres,
prostitution dens , luxury hotels and investigation departments etc . ,
Besides the above the house significations of 3, 10 and 12 of Mars
in the 1 2* house are to be included as Mercury would act for the
planet Mars.
3rd house: Losing energy, press publicity about personal mishaps,
breaks in agreements, hurdles in communication, book sales,
blockage of news, mistakes in accounts, loss of memory power
and selling things etc.,
10th house: Responsible posts of secrecy Jobs with heavy workload
and doing double natured jobs etc
12th house: Losses through secret contacts, invested money, given
money, inability to get back binami properties, concealing already
hidden matters, strengthening of secret involvements arid doing
continuous research activities etc.,
JUPITER
Jupiter is in Aquarius sign, in the 12* house. It is an airy sign. So
Jupiter would enable the native to involve in secret research,
investigations and research in the fields of archaeology and
education.
Further, Jupiter is in a fixed sign. Secret activities ' expenses, losses,
investments, comforts in travel, sexual pleasures , sleep , feet and
failures of organs in the body would remain stable and permanent
in ilature.
Lastly, it is in the star of Dhanishta, ruled by Mars, the ruler of
houses 3 & 10 and resident of 1 2th house . So J upi ter would act
for Mars in this case.
The planetary significations of Mars meant for the 3rd house:
Braveiy, confidence, encouraging acts, rumours, foiged documents,
mental strength, arrogant use of intelligence, unnecessary deals
and incompetent agreements etc .,
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Residential Position of ^Planets

The planetary significations of Mars meant for the 10th house:
Industries, fine-related professions, departments for housing and land
development, police, anned forces, administration officers, responsible
officers for government documents and executive posts etc.,
Mars is in the 12* house. So the planetary significations of Mars
meant for the 12th house should a Iso be included.
Planetary significations of Mars meant for the 12th house:
Improper and unbecoming activities, adulteration, hoarding,
smuggling, covert activities, and service in operation theatres,
prostitution dens, luxury hotels and investigation departments etc.,
Besides the above the house significations of 3 & 10 and 12 of
Mars in the 12th house are to be included, as Jupiter would aet for
the planet Mars.
3rd house: Losing energy, press publicity about personal mishaps,
breaks in agreements, hurdles in communication, book sales,
blockage of news, mistakes in accounts, loss of memory power
and selling things etc . ,
1 0th house: Responsible posts of secrecy, jobs with heavy workload
and doing double natured jobs etc.,
12th house: Losses through secret contacts, invested money, given
money, inability to get back binami properties, concealing already
hidden matters, strengthening of secret involvements and doing
continuous research activities etc.,
VENUS
Venus is in Pisces and in 1 st bhava. Pisces is a watery sign. So
Venus would impart die native a calm and soft spoken temperament,
devotion and faith in god, detachments, stout body, etc .
Venus is in a common sign. The physical appearance, anger,
memory power, intelligence, skills, natural characteristics, actions,
colour and beauty would fluctuate (i .e). would frequently rise and
fall qualitatively.
Venus, in this chart, is in Uttarabadra star, ruled by Saturn. So in
this c hart, Venus would assume the significations of Saturn. Saturn
is the lord of the houses 1 & 1 2 and is a resident of the 1 1 th house.
392 Astrologies of kaalchakra

The planetary significations of Saturn meant for the 1st house:
Sluggish, cynical, decision only after prolonged consideration,
research skills, dissatisfactions in everything and inferiority complex
etc.,
The planetary significations of Saturn meant for the 12th house:
Qandestine revenges, hoardings, hiding things underground, working
out secret plans, adulterations and unbecoming and immoral conduct.
The planetary significations of Saturn meant for the 11th house
by virtue of its resident-ship: Unfaithful, lethargic , immoral and
dishonest friends, daughters-in-law, sons-in-law: dishonest means
and properties with encumbrances etc.,
The house significations ofl,ll&l2in ascendant (as Venus is in
ascendant) are as follows.
Ascendant : Self-thoughts, ideas, brisk activities, skills, impulsive/
own acts and show of strength etc.,
11th house: Greed, selfishness, exuberant, happiness, club consultant,
desires, extremely lucky, successes, achievements, joyful and
accommodative etc . ,
12th house: Secret activities, losing energy and power, absconding,
self-dedication, investigation, secret troubles, hurdles and failures
in every effort etc.,
SATURN
Saturn is in Capricorn sign in the 1 1 Chouse. Capricorn is an
earthy sign. So this native would show attachment towards his
friends but would remain greedy .
Capricorn is a movable sign. So Saturn would enable this native
to have growths in the matters of self-cravings, happiness,
expectations, sons-in-law, daughters-in-law and vitamins in the body,
etc.
Saturn is in Shravana star, ruled by Moon. Moon is the lord of the
6* house and is in the 2nd house. So Saturn would assume the
planetary karakas of Moon with respect to the 2nd & 6th houses.
2nd house significations of Moon: Frequent income, clear speech
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Residential Position of Planets 393

and oratory skills, consultant in financial companies, quick acts
through money, pearl ornaments and silver articles etc.,
6th house significations of Moon: Weakness, labours in dams,
ship workers, fishennen, plumbers, water related diseases and
•labourers in agricultural fields etc.,
Besides planetary significations, Saturn would also acquire the
house significations of Moon (2& 6) through its resident-ship at
llthbhava.
T^house’Hnppy speech, profit through speech, getting gold articles
as desired, making profits through friends, sons-in-law and daughtersin-law, acquiring costly articles and changing things to their favours.
tf* house: Success in every venture, vitamin-related diseases, joining
in a desired job, capacity to diagnose diseases arid successful
opportunities etc.
RAHU
Rahu is in Cancer sign and in the 6th house. Cancer is a watery
sign to mean that the native would suffer due to water-borne
diseases and would involve in liquid-related professions.
Cancer is a movable sign so as to mean the growth or continuity in
service, diseases, litigations , borrowings, consumption of medicines,
success , costumes and food etc .
Rahu is in Aslesha star ruled by Mercury. So Rahu would presume
the planetary significations of Mercury , as lord of houses 5th & 8th
and as resident in the 1 2* house, besides the house significations of
5, 8& 12 in the 6th house, as Rahu resides in the 6* bhava.
Planetary significations of Mercury meant for the 5 th house:
Singers , famous actors , stage speakers, teachers of aits/vedas, visual
artists, sculpturers, musical instrumentalists and commission agents.
Planetary significations of Mercury meant for the 8 th house \
Forged cheques and documents, litigations of assets, disconnections
in power and telephones, negotiations, signatures of accountability,
unsigned letters, mix-up of messages, absent-minded, lack of
meaningful thoughts and neuro disorders.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

Planetary significations of Mercury meant for the 1 2th house:
Invention of sensitive instruments through secret research, secret
notes and accounts, statement of income and expenditure,
agreements, adulterations, photographs and documents etc.,
The house significations of 5, 8 & 1 1 in the 6th house are:
(i) Service as a share broker, preacher of religious texts, pimps,
proof-reader for writings about stories, poems, art essays,
politics and worker in the manufacture of sports goods and
at auditoriums, registrar offices for love marriages, prostitution
dens , halls for vulgar dancing, bars and places of religious rites .
(ii) Hard labour with heavy work load, disgraceful jobs, jobs
lacking in service amenities, repairing of old goods, lowly
jobs with poor working conditions and slavery etc.,
(iii) Obtaining loans through secret plans, repayment of loans
through fiesh loans, getting back lost things and due returns
on investments, getting medical treatment in hospital,
separated person pursuing us again, break-even in income
and expenditure and losing body functions through ill-health etc.
KETU
Ketu is in Capricorn sign and in the 1 2lh house. Capricorn is an
earthy sign. This means undue expenditure for the cause of
relationship and affection and making research attempts in
meaningful ways.
As Capricorn is a movable sign, Ketu would lead to growth in
secret activities , expenses , losses , investments , comforts in travel ,
sexual pleasures , sleep and failure of organs in the body.
Ketu is in the star of Shravana ruled by the planet Moon, which is
the lord of the 6th house and resident of the 2nd house. So Ketu
would act according to the planetary significations of 2nd & 6* of
Moon and the bhava significations of 2 & 6 in 1 2lh house.
II house significations of Moon: Frequent income, clear speech
and orator, consultant in financial companies, quick acts through
money, pearl ornaments andsilverarticles etc.,
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Residential Position of Planets 395

VI house significations of Moon: Weakness, labours in dams, ship
workers, fishermen, plumbers, water-related diseases and labourers
in agricultural fields etc.,
The house significations of 2nd & 6th houses in the 1 2th house are:
(i) Getting back what was given, eye defects, digestion related diseases,
making investments in gold articles and secret monetaiy income.
(ii) Success through secret means, losing consciousness through
allergic food intake, transfers in job as desired, servant leaving,
inability to identify disease and low success potential in enterprises.
In the above manner, with their general and the stellar potentials,
the planets would render results for the native during their Dasa,
Bhukthi, Anthara and Sookshama periods as per their planetary
and house significations.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Kaalchakra Principles
Applied to
Dashas, Bhuktis etc....
In this chapter, we are going to study about the significance of
applying the concept of Kaalchakra to Dasha, Bhukthi and Antharaa
periods . There are several kinds of Dashas prescribed in the classical
texts. Some of the important ones are introduced here.
1 . Maha Dasha (Vimsothari Dasas)
These Dasha period calculations are based on starlord of the natal
Moon. Those bom with Moon in Aswani. Makha and Moola stars
have Ketu Dasha as their first Dasha. The length of this Dasha
extends to a maximum of 7 years. Similarly those born in other
stars and their respective maximum durations are tabulated below:
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Dashas , Bhuktis , etc*... 397

The sum total of all the Dashas works out to 1 20 years . Though all
tne traditional texts have directed the same durations and sequence
of Dashas, they all are silent about the basis of this division.
These Maha Dashas are quite long, the shortest is being as much
as 6 years. But in our daily lives, we observe diverse types of
happenings taking place. To explain this , our seers have made further
subdivisions of Maha Dashas which are called Bhuktis. The ratio
of dividing the time allotted to each Bhukti within a Maha Dasha is
exactly the same as tabulated above. One may go deeper to
subdivide Bhukti as well, to further levels, named as Antara and
then each Antara to Sookshma, etc.
2. Prana Dasha
Prana Dasha is worked out from the natal Sun Star. ■
3. Lagna Dasha
It is the Dasha arrived at from the natal Lagna (Ascendant) star.
4. Niraayana Dasha
Ths Dasha is calculated from the natal Saturn star.
5. Urpanna Dasha
Urpanna Dasha period is deduced using the sixth star counted from
the birth Moon star. For example, if a person is bom in Aswani
star ruled by Ketu , his Urpanna Dasha will be (Arudra) Rahu as it
is the sixth one counted from the birth star.
6. Mridhyu Dasha
Just as explained under Urpanna Dasha, Mridhyu Dasha is the
Dasha of the third star from the natal Moon star.
7. Aad nana Dasha
Aadhana Dasha is of the eighth star fiom the natal Sun star.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

8. Vaama Dasha
It is the Dasha arrived of the twenty-fifthstar or the fourth star in
reverse from the natal Sun star.
9. UduDasha
This Dasha is arrived at by identifying the respective star in which the
sum of the ephemeris of the natal Sun and the natal Moon falls.
10. Maha Praria Dasha
This Dasha is arrived at by identifying the respective star in which
the sum of the ephemiris of the Lagna, natal Sun and the natal
Moon fall.
11. Kaalchakra Dasha
To the Aries and Scorpio boms it is 7 years of Mars Dasha. To
Taurus and Libra boms, it is Venus Dasha, for 16 years . To Gemini
and Virgo boms , it is Mercury Dasha for 19 years . For Cancer
boms , it is Moon Dasha for 2 1 years . For Leo boms , Sun Dasha
runs for 5 years. Sagittarius and Pisces boms have Jupiter Dasha
of 10 years while for Capricorn and Sagittarius borns, Saturn
Dasha for 4 years. Again, as is in the case of Mahadasha, there is
no reference available about the basis of ratio employed in feting
these periods. Further, there is a completely different methodology
adopted for calculating Kaalchakra Bhukthies which uses rightoriented or the left-oriented stars, etc.
Also there are some other varieties of Dashas which are mentioned
in the traditional texts.
As written in the theory of "Survival of the fittest" by the popular
scientist Darwin, most of these Dasha calculations have withered
away either due to their complexity or probably due to their
irrelavance to this modem time. The days, months and the years
are arrived at in accordance with the Lagna, the Moon and the
Sun or the rotation of earth abouUts axis or the rotation of Moon
around earth or the rotation of earth around the Sun. So the Lagna
Dasha, Prana Dasha and the Maha Dasha may be more relevant
to our present day. The confusion further surmounts as , for Lagna
Dasha, there are more than one method to determine it. The
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Dashas, Bhuklis, etc.,.. 399

extensive use ofMaha Dasha ratio to the starlords of lagna in
Lagna Dasha or to the starlords of Sun in Prana Dasha is
meaningless unless we are sure about the fundamentals regarding
application of this ratio. Hence, we are left with no other option but
to accept the popular nMaha Dasha” .
According to Prof. K.S. Krishnamoorthy, Fate is the origin of
thoughts. Moon is the actual executor of thoughts or ■events.
According to me, only the concurrency of moment of the origin of
thoughts (i.e., Lagna) and a favourable Moon, is responsible for
an event to take place. That is why it is always advisable to study
the potentiality of an event, giving full cognizance to all the twelve
houses and the Dasha period using the Maha Dasha system, which
is ascertained from the natal Moon position.
Now we refer to illustration chart of the chapter on Kaalchakra
Principles Applied to Residential Position of Planets.
Sun is in Jupiter star Poorvabadra in first bhava. So during its Dasha,
Sun would act to render the significations of its starlord, Jupiter,
which itself is the lord of houses 2 and 1 1 and resident of twelfth
bhava. Under the circumstances. Sun would give the results of the
significations of houses 2, 1 1 and 12.
The significations of 2, 1 1 and 12 would mean the followings to
each and every bhava.

A planet will carry out the significations of its starlord more on
the basis of its actual residentsliip in the chart at the time of
birth than the starlord k actual ownerships.
The triangle houses (i.e., the trigonasthanas), the houses of 1 , Sand
9 to any house are highly favourable. The houses 2, 3 and 1 1 , (the
vrithisthanas) would be favourable to a limited extent The houses
4, 8 and 1 2 are highly unfavourable. The houses 6, 7 and 1 0 would
remain neutral. But more complex situations arise when
combinations of different characters appear together. For instance,
the II house, a vrithisthana, the VIII house, the house of danger
and the VI house the house of neutrality jointly appear as the
significations of a particular planet. We should not hastily jump on
to a conclusion that a highly favourable house would nullify the
demerits of a highly unfavourable house. These combined
significations are notthe mixtures of energy but are the compounds
of synergy. Also we should not opt to decide on the number- wise
majority of nature within the list of significations. We must understand
that each and every combination of significations bears a different
interpretation.
Dasha designates strength of potentialities of different attributes in
one’s life during a particular phase. In the example chart, we
demonstrate the derivation of predictions for Sun Dasha. Houses
2, 1 1 and 12 would mean an unfavourable combination to Ascendant.
On one side it would enhance the financial capabilities , being 1,10
and 1 1 to the II house, the house of finance while bringing trouble in
the family life, as it is 5th, 6th and 8th house to the VII house. 6 years
span of Sun Dasha would be characterized by an excellent
materialistic life of the native along side not so good personal life.
The details of events could be drawn with the appropriate use of
principles of links. The method of using the principles of combinations
have been detailed in my previous books, "The Principles of Cuspal
Interlinks" and "The Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" (Vol 1&2).
Bhukti periods mean the mind or native's current involvement in a
set of particular fields, as permitted by the Dasha either favourably
or unfavourably. Here the Sun Bhukti enhances its significations of
2, 1 1 and 12 in a more pronounced manner.
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Dashas, Bhuktis, etc .... 401

A Bhukthi is always subservient to its Dasha. It cannot overrule
Dasha potential. For example, the Sun Dasha has the sgnifications
of houses 2, 1 1 and 12. The Moon Bhukthi has the potential of the
12th house signification, as it is disposed in the Aswani star which is
ruled by Ketu, located in 12th house. The overall life, financial
position and quality of married life of the native would be influenced
more by the 12* honse significations of Moon. In his personal and
married life, this Bhukthi would bring ill-effects; and in the financial
life, it would induce the native to make more investments.
Likewise, if we further consider the anthara period, during Sun
antharaa, the communications, negotiations and agreements towards
improving the financial status would bring expected favours.
But let ns take the case of Mars anthara in Moon Bhukthi of Sun
Dasha. Mars is in its own star Dhanishta and is the ruler of the
houses 3 and 10 to Aquarius while being the resident of 12th house.
So the houses 3, lOand 12 would act alongwith the combination
already indicated by the Dasha and the Bhukti. This will boost
native’s financial positon (anthara’s 3 is favourable to the Dasha’s
2) , Moreover, lack of fulfillment of desires (anthara’s 1 0 becomes
unfavourable to the Dasha’s 11) and involvement in making
investments (12 remains the same) for the native will be prime
characteristics during Mars anthara.
Antharaa cannot overrule the Bhukthi just as the Bhukthi cannot
overrule Dasha. Dasha goes along with the birth potential. (Please
refer P.N. 1 6 and 17 of my book "Secrets of RP and the Birth Time” ,
published by Krishman and Co., Chennai).
Besides the above discussion, there are few other items worth being
taken care of.
Sun is in a fixed sign, the Aquarius. The course of the Dasha
significations would almost remain permanent.
Aquarius also happens to be an airy sign, the Dasha significations
would fly at a faster speed with economic motives usually
byepassing grace, love and affection.
Astrologies ofkaalchakra

Since, it is the 1 1 th house of Kaalchakra, the sources would mostly
be friends, elder brothers, sons-in law, daughters-in law, happy
occasions and entertainments.
The bhava or the house significations of Sun (2, 1 1 and 12) are
derived hum its starlord Jupiter. However, in the present case,
there is no planet transiting Sun's star. This causes Sun to grant the
results through its own planetary significations e.g., government
officials, political means or generosity of persons bora in its own
stars i.e., Krittiga, Uttarapalguni and Uttarashada etc.
In the same way, during Moon bhukthi, as the planet Moon is in a
fiery and movable sign, it would lead to more activeness towards
investments (the significations of the 12th house).
On the same analogy, during Mars Artthara, the investments would
be with a greater speed and also with a human touch on account of
Mars residing in a movable and earthy sign.
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Dashas, Bhuktis , etc..*. 403

Kaalchakr a Principles
Applied to Transit
Transit is yet another and an extremely important dimension of
predictive astrology. Natal chart itself is only a transit chart at
the time of birth. The pundits of astrology depend heavily on
transits while giving predictions. This is also evident from the
fact that there are so many publications available in the market
today detailing minutely the consequence of transits of Saturn,
Jupiter or the Lunar Nodes in different signs and houses. But
these predictions are manifested only when the native runs the
corresponding Dasha, Bhukti, Anthara, Sookshma periods.
Even in the case of a particular Dasha period, if we forget
applying the logics of Kaalchakra, we may go wrong in our
interpretations . Let us consider an example. Saturn takes about
30 years to complete a full transit of the Zodiac. It can therefore,
not transit all the 12 signs in its Dasha period of 19 years. Saturn
is the lord of the VIII house to Gemini and Cancer boms. It
may transit its own star up to maximum of two times during
this period. It would reside in its own star for about 13 months
during which Sun; the monthly planet will transit at least 3 times
in Saturn stars, i.e., for approximately 40 days in all. In the
mean time, the day planet Moon will transit the stars of Saturn
for about 4 times in this period. Does that mean that the Gemini
or Cancer boms are to meet with same kind of accidents atleast
four times in a row and that too within a period of 1 3 months?
The readers will agree that this is an absolutely incorrect
deduction.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

In our example chart (given in the chapter Kaalchakra Principles
Applied to Residential Position of Planets) let us study the
outcome of Sun Dasha by way of transit. Sun is in the I bhava.
It is in Jupiter star, which is lord of houses 2 and 1 1 and resident
of the 12th house. So the planet Sun has the linkage to 2, 1 1 and
12 through its starlord. What about the significations of the
remaining 9 houses? Will it influence through the remaining
houses to the native? Sun is the karaka planet for bones. Bones
constitute the structure and are part of every organ in the body. If
Sun is linked only to these 3 houses, what would happen to the
bones in the remaining organs of the concerned houses. This is
exactly where the importance of transit of planets come in to picture.
Sun, with its natal potential of significations of houses 2, 1 1
and 12 would transit in all the 9 stars in 4 months. To elucidate
the approach of applying the logics of transit, let us study the II
house karaka of Sun in our example chart. The results are
tabulated in the following.
House Starlord of Result of Sun transiting
the House such Star
I Rahu Native uses his income for himself
II Mercury Native converts liquid cash into jewels
III Venus Increase and stabilization of flow of income
through valuable documents
IV Moon Native multiplies his sources of income
V Rahu Native spends his money on entertainment
VI Mercury Native lends his money as loans to others
vn Venus Native keeps his money in the personal
custody of others
VIII Moon Native's money remains as outstanding
IX Rahu Native faces financial difficulties
X Mercury high turnover of money in Native's
profession
XI Venus Enables the native to have cash in hand
XII Moon Induces the native to invest his money in
• profession
^(^^c^<Tj?7ma^^^Iie^o^ransits

These are all academic deductions. In real terms, however, the
transit of Sun would not be as simple as this. The reason is that,
it has got combined signification of houses 2, 1 1 and 12.
If Sun transits in the star of the 9th house, the combined
significations of houses 2, 11 and 12 would mean a different
thing to the native. For 2nd house, transit in the star of the 9*
house would not be favourable. For 1 1 * house, Sun favourably
transits in the 11* house to the 11th house (i.e., the 9* house)
and for the 12* house it transits in its 10*, to show the neutral
linkage. The results would vary accordingly.
During the course of its Dasha, Sun would transit about 6 times
in every star and at least 18 times in the group of stars of the
same lord. In the example chart, Mrigasira, Chithra and
Dhanishta are the stars of Mars , the lord of houses 3 and 10 and
resident of the 12* bhava. Sun would transit in a Mars star
eveiy four months. Will it render the same set of results to the
native each time? Certainly not. Again it is the principles of
Kaalchakra that distinguish them.
When Sun transits in the star of Mrigasira (of Gemini) it renders
a different set of results from those shown up while it transits
same star-lordship in the previous sign (Taurus). Taurus being
a fixed sign will grant a higher percentage of permanency in
results whereas Gemini as a common sign, would offer more
fluctuations. This way the nature of motion, the elements, the
planets and the house of Kaalchakra at the time of transit would
lay their influence in deciding the courses of the events.
The transit routine of all the planets is also fixed at the veiy
time of birth of the native alongwith natal potential and the
potential of the Dasha, Bhukti, Anthara, Sookshma (DBAS)
periods. Marriage and the character of the spouse are assured in
the natal potential. The period of marriage could be determined
by identifying the corresponding DBAS periods. But the other
shades of the event, like venue, menu in file feast, dance, music,
number of guests, gifts, joy and happiness and the decorations
may be studied only with the transit of the appropriate planets.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Transit of Sun would be influenced by the transit or the
respective positioning of the remaining six planets and the nodes.
Transit results are team work of the planets put together. In our
example chart, let us presume that the native is running Sun
Dasha. Imagine that the native is a cricketer and is playing a
cricket match during Sun Dasha, Mars Bhukthi, Rahu Antharaa,
Jupiter Sookshama, Saturn Prana on a Mercury star day which
falls on a Friday. Here we may study the transit of all these
seven planets for identifying the pattern of performance of the
native on that particular day. The bowlers, the composition of
the opposite team, umpires, venue, partners while batting, runs
scored in singles, twos, threes, boundaries, sixers, the LBW
appeals faced, the balls that beat the hat, the catches offered,
the catches dropped and catches taken as a fielder, the bowling
statistics like the wide balls, no balls, runs given away in his
over, wickets taken, appeals made, end at which he is batting or
bowling, balls stopped and the balls missed by a fielder etc.,
cannot be studied either from the natal potential or from the
DBAS potential. These particulars may only be deciphered
through an appropriate use of transit. May be, one or two of
these planets have the potential to affect native’s performance
on that particular day. All the planetary effects, whether negative
or positive, will have to gain their sources from their respective
transits only.
Transit, on its own has no power or authority to change the
course of an event. When planets tend to act for the schedule of
the natal chart in their respective DBAS periods, they produce
colours as per their respective transits and for the same, the
principles of Kaalchakra work. Study of a horoscope can be
considered complete in scientific terms only if it is done oy
correlating all the three factors of predictive astrology — natal
potential, the current DBAS periods and the current transit of
relevant planets. .-
T^c^^alTr^TinclpIerAppftedToT' ransits

Kaalchakra Principles
Applied to
Cuspal Interlinks
Majority of KP/KB followers can understand and follow the
theory of Cuspal Interlinks . Those pursuing Vakya System
consider the sign of Ascendant. In Drik System the Ascendant
and other houses are identified using Bhava Maddhima (centre).
In KP/KB System, wherein Newcombe Ayanamsa is used,
Placidus System of cuspal division is adopted. In Placidus
System, the houses are identified with their respective Sign,
Star, Bhukthi (Kaalamsa or the sub) and the Antharaa (the
subsub).
The cusps or the houses vary in consonance with the changes in
the latitudes and longitudes of the birth-places alongwith the
time. So a minor difference in time (even a few seconds) affects
so as to make every birth a unique event!
KB’s theory of cuspal interlinks moves a step forward in
identifying interlinks of the bhava beginnings or the cuspal
points. These interlinks are mainly of two types. The first type
involves identifying the cusps to which the starlord of the sublord
of a particular house is the cuspal sublord to ensure the strength
and the potential of that particular house. The second type
involves identifying the planets, which are in the stars of the
sublord of the particular house for finding the favourable periods
of events of that particular house.
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Whenever an exercise to decipher an attribute is taken up under
the KB system of astrology, first of all, the inherent strength of
the horoscope is examined from the point of view of the same.
We call this as ‘potential’ of the horoscope. Then the favourable
period (DBAS) is established during which an event concerning
the attribute under examination is likely: Finally the precise
element of time is earmarked within the selected DBAS where
the transit agrees.
In this entire process, the principles of Kaalchakra become very
relevant to KB followers. The order of importance to a planet
is: its role as sublord to cusps , subsublords to cusps , starlords
to cusps and the bhava occupied at the time of birth.
Moon is the owner of the sign Cancer, a watery and movable
sign. In each horoscope there would be at least one house
wherein the Moon will be significant. In one third of the
horoscopes , Moon would be starlord of at least one or two houses
and would seldom be sublord or subsublord to more than four
houses. But Moon becoming significant for four or five houses
would be possible only in KP/KB astrology. In addition, Moon
as a sublord or subsublord of houses, could make a unique
combination of all the four elements (fire, earth, water and wind).
It is basically a watery planet and if it happens to be the sub or
subsub lord of the VIII house, a fiery sign, the native faces
dangers to his life caused by boiled water. On the same analogy,
if it happens to be an earthy sign, the native faces dangers to his
life caused by the landslides caused by heavy rains. Thus, the
basic karaka of the planet changes according to the basic karaka
of the sign.
Take the case of an air accident. Rahu is the karaka planet for
aeroplanes^ Speaking from potential point of view, all the
passengers taking the same flight are likely to face death during
air travel, yet in the same accident, all of them may not die due
to the same reason. Rahu as an airy planet with its ownership
as sublord or subsublord of the VIII cuspal points, of fiery, earthy,
watery, etc. sign in the respective charts of each passenger, brings
death to them in a way typical to these four elements, one by one.
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Cuspal Interlinks 409

For example, let us consider the case of the noble death of
astronaut Smt. Kalpana Chawla.
(i) She died while she was rendering her
professional service : 6
(ii) It is a noble sacrifice for the cause of mankind : 1 & 1 0
(iii) She is the only women astronaut of
Indian origin— an achievement : 1 & 1 1
(iv) She was of Indian origin but an American Citizen
(v) She Was part of a noble group of astronauts : 1 & 7
(vi) The event took place in the course
of return journey : 1&3
(vii) The space venture is research oriented : 9 & 12
(viii) The space vehicle was also destroyed
and damaged in the accident : 4 & 1 1
(ix) It happened unexpectedly : 1 & 8
(x) The space vehicle lost communication : 2 & 8
(xi) She was traveling in the space vehicle With the
fastest, at a maximum speed of all the vehicles : 1 & 5
This shows that all the 1 2 bhavas carry linkages. Similarly, the
planets:
(i) She represented a nation : Sun
(ii) She was in the company of fellow astronauts : Mercury
(iii) The journey was adventurous :Mars
(iv) The journey was for global research : Jupiter
(v) The journey was on a scientific research : Saturn
(vi) She was with people belonging to
foreign origins : Rahu
(vii) The accident was cruel : Ketu
(viii) The spacecraft fell in a sea : Moon
(ix) Karaka planet for space craft (Vehicle) : Venus
41 0 Astrologies of kaalchakra

Again, all the 9 planets carry linkages.
(i) The accident was on the return course to
the earth : Earth
(ii) It was caused by the liquid fuel : Water
(iii) It happened while entering the atmosphere : Air
(iv) The vehicle got burnt to ashes : Fire
Here all the four elements have linkages.
(i) It was a return journey : Common
(ii) The accident was caused by the inability to
detach that part of fuel mechanism . . . Fixed
(iii) from the moving main space vehicle : Movable
All the rules of motion are also shown up!
Such justifications to this event is not possible using the
traditional rules of 108 yogas and the same number of doshas.
Only when the same planet ha$ a linkage either as sublord or as
subsublord to all the 12 bhavas during the course of which it
also establishes linkages with houses of all the four elements
and the three kinds of motion, the event gets matured. At that
time, the remaining eight planets are also bound to the said main
planet, by residing in the star, sub or subsub of the main planet,
either in natal chart or in transit. Thus a person becomes famous
or notorious depending upon the domination of a planet in its
linkages to majority of cusps as lord of star or sub or subsub
and also during the corresponding DBAS periods of the said
planet. The cuspal strength of a chart could easily be assessed
by observing the dominations of the current and the subsequent
dasalords. (PI. refer PN 1 93 of Part II of my book, "Applications
of Cuspal Interlinks", published by Mother Mera Publications,
Madurai).
In the Placid ius system of cuspal division, two bhavas may fall
in the same sign. Sometimes a single planet may become the
owner to more than one house, unlike in the Vakya or Drik
systems. Supposing if bhavas 1 and 2 fall in the same sign, say
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Cuspal Interlinks 411

Leo, the person carries self-pride both in his fiery behaviour
and in his fiery speech. This is unique from the other Leo-borns.
In most of the horoscopes in northern latitudes, one can easily
find a single planet appearing as sublord or subsublord to more
than two or three consecutive houses to add more complexity
to impart a peculiar nature/temperament to the native.
Imagine that the 5* cuspal sublord is Sun and it resides in the
star of Moon and the sub of Mars . The potential of the 5th cusp
depends upon the starlord Moon to be finally confirmed by the
sublord Mars .
(a) Suppose Moon is the cuspal sublord of the 4* house
(12th to the 5lh) and Mars is the cuspal sublord of the
3rd house ( 1 2th to the 4th and 1 1 th to the 5lh), the child
birth is assured.
(b) If however, Moon becomes the cuspal sublord of the 3rd
house and Mars becomes the sublord of the 4th house,
then the possibility of pregnancy prior to marriage and
subsequent abortion is indicated.
Thus we can appropriately apply the principles of Kaalchakra
along with cuspal interlinks. (Ref. PN 20 of my book on
" Principles of Cuspal Interlinks" published by Sagar
Publications, New Delhi).
Astrologies of kaalchakra

SCOPE FOR FURTHER WORK
In the principles of Kaalchakra, the twelve signs denote
everything under the Sun. The varied natures of these twelve
signs are very much needed in the predictive part of astrology.
For example, some of us show interest in the field of politics
and others in the fields of arts, culture, sports or games. But all
these fields lie in the same bhava, the 5th house, the Leo sign in
Zodiac. Few people have interest in more than one fields like
Shri Navjoth Singh Siddhu, who is a popular cricketer alongside
an elected member of the Parliament. Similarly, some film
personalities have drifted to politics, taking advantage of their
glamour. Now, we have a question before us: how to distinguish
between the involvement of a person in the fields of arts , culture ,
etc . and also in the field of sports. The answers to these questions
could not easily be traced from our traditional texts, as they
were basically framed to cater to the requirements of onedimensional feudal istic society of Indian village community
system. Due to the increasing divisions of labour and the
evolution of multiple fields of professions in modem day life,
we need to draw derivations from the basic principles of
astrology to suit to everybody's requirements. Attempts to
answer the astrological question of why a person likes to play a
particular game like cricket were tried by eminent astrologers
in the past. To carry out such subtle, fine and hairsplitting
analysis, the principles of Kaalchakra become handy. These
principles could be extended to almost all walks of life.
Everything in the world, from left to right, from top to bottom
like, the seeds, vegetables, trees , fruits, metals, coins, currency,
cities, towns, professions, courses of education, diverse fields
of arts and culture , sports, etc., are to be classified appropriately
among the 1 2 signs of zodiac. In this process of classification, I
would like to quote a translated part from the article,
"Kaalachakra and major cities of Tamil Nadu" by Shri. M.
Parthiban, one of my students, hi association with the KB Astro
Research Centre, Madurai, published in the Tamil astrological
monthly, Jothida Murasu, in its May 2004 issue:
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Cuspal Interlinks 413

"Every town has a character; it is identified with one or
two major things of importance. For example, take the
case of the city of Madurai. It is an ancient city; it is a
city of pilgrimage importance; the economy of this city
depends much on tourism; at the centre of the city, the
holy temple of Goddess Meenakshi is situated; the city
is situated at the northern and the sourthem banks of
the river Vaigai; the three schools of sangam poets of
Tamil hailed from this city; the ancient Shiva temple is
popularly worshipped as a holy place of Mercury. Now
with the above karakas, we can try to evolve a suitable
identification for this city in the Kaalchakra. Towns with
pilgrimage and religious importance will fall in the 9th
house of Kaalchakra, the sign Sagittarius. Sagittarius
has three stars, Moo la, Poorvashada and Uttarashada
ruled respectively by Ketu, Venus and the Sun. Ketu
would act like Mercury. So Moola star would be
appropriate for Madurai. This Ketu star has four quarters.
The third quarter falls m the navamsa owned by
Mercury. So the city of Madurai falls in the III quarter
of Moola star, ruled by Ketu.
Those who are bom in the stars of Ketu either as lord of
the lagna or as the lord of the Moon may reside in this
city; People who are running Ketu dasa would be able
to live for some time or work in this city; People who
are running Ketu Bhukthi would be able to study or
undergo medical treatment at this city or many someone
from this city; People who are running Ketu Antharaa
may undertake long and repeated visits to this town;
People who are running Ketu Sookshama may visit this
city. The purpose of study, living, tours, profession and
other things would vary depending upon the respective
cuspal significance gained by the planet Ketu in thennatal charts and in transit."
In the above manner my associate Shri S.Gnanasambandan has
also made an attempt to study the karakas for the Sprint (sports)!
Astrologies of kaalchakra

Shri Vigneshwer Raja, one of my students, had recently
attempted to classify different academic courses of higher
education. According to him, the study of medicines or the
MBBS course would fall in the sixth sign of the Kaalchakra
Virgo, as it is the house of medicines. The post graduate study
of medicines would have to fall in the vrithisthanas, the sign
Libra for Medicines (MD) and the sign Scorpio for surgeiy
(MS). These findings were verified after studying quite a few
horoscopes.
Still, there remains a long way to go in this direction. This also
calls for a coordinated, strong and dedicated teamwork* I pray
for your assistance in this attempt. This will help in the much
needed elimination of baseless superstitions from the field of
astrology and restore its due glory. The ‘Principles of Kaalchakra’
laid down in this book is just a small step forward in this
direction.
Kaalchakra Principles Applied to Cuspal Interlinks 415
