READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_kp_the_times_horary_astrology_prabhakar.json
Dataset number: 240 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 198,216 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_KP_The times_Horary Astrology_Prabhakar
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_KP_The times_Horary Astrology_Prabhakar
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 186
  • total_words: 35127
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.967
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The times
HORARY ASTROLOGY
A NOVEL APPROACH
TO
PREDICTIONS
(Based on K.P.)
Dr. ARASTU PRABHAKER

The contents of this book need a thorough &
deep knowledge of the Vedic concepts & other
related classical texts of Astrology. If some reader,
without having understood completely the principles
underlying within this book, tries the same & does
not get benefit as suggested or rather gets hurt
on account of his faulty interpretation/understanding
of the subject, it will be against the intent &
good wishes of the author as well as publishers.
May God bless the readers.

INDEX
Foreword 9
Preface 1 1
Part - A (Theory)
1. Brief History of Horary Astrology 17
2. Important Nomenclatures and explanations 19
3. Importance of Horary Astrology 23
4. Brief Description of Ancient Text
Books of Horary Astrology 25
5. Significations of Planets & Signs 42
6. Houses 52
7. Sub Lord 59
8. Ruling Planets & Signficators 62
9. Cusp (Bhava) Determination 68
10. Some important Subjects of Horary Astrology 73
11. Discussion on Cuspal Chart and Traditional Chart 80
Part - B (Case studies)
First House
3. How will be the tenure in the office 89
4. Court decision - 1 91
5. Decision delivered by lower court 93
would be stayed or not 95
6. Court decisions - 2 97
7. Party will give ticket or not 99

FOREWORD
Indian astrology is called the third eye of vedas. It has perception of
past, present and future. Therefore It is said :
t wft, 3F7t w I ]
It is not only divine knowledge but. a proved science.
Many pseudo intellectuals who hoax this knowledge are not
aware of its basic foundation. What is astrology ? The music generated through the motion of stars , and planets . It is
the permutation and combination of light emanating from
various planets.
It is the music of cosmos
wm faun i i
Our ancient seers studied this divine knowledge from
various angles and formulated their own principles. The
work of Bhragu, Parasara, Gemini, Varhamihir etc. are still
the basic foundations of<all astrological calculations.
The name of the Late Professor Krishnamurtis is well
known in modern astrology. He did sincere and serious
research in the field of astrology and given it a new
dimension. Nadi shastra of traditional astrology had divided
time into seven hundres twenty parts. Our ancient seers had
divided 27 stars or constellations into 108 parts of time. Nadi
shastra through the division of time into seven hundred

twenty parts provided oportunity for deep and minute study.
But seven hundrd twenty nadis are now not available. Late
Krishnamurti divided 108 parts of stars into 249 parts. This
division proved to be a milestone in astrology.
This novel approach of prognostication of future as
invented by KP. was not given its due honouf. But many
astrologers later followed it. Dr. Arastu Prabhaker one of
the prominent astrologer of India made deep research over
K.P. and has made astonished predictions. Dr Arastu
Prabhaker has added new dimension to the work of KP. and
has refined it through research. I have personally got
benefited from the predictions of Dr. Arastu Prabhaker. The
present book is the English translation of Prasna Jyotish
whcih received warm response from readers. I am grateful
to Shri Dayashanker who himself is a scholar of astrology
and Smt. Rajeshwari Shanker The Editor and proprietor
of The Times of Astrology and Nishkaam Peeth Prakashan
forbringing out the present book. I offer my blessings to Dr.
Arastu Prabhaker and also expect same warm response to
this book like previous one by all sections of astrologers and
lovers of astrology.
Blessings and congratulations to Dr. Arastu Prabhaker.
Dr. Gopal Dass Neeraj
Chairman
U.P. Bhasha Sansthan (Govt, of U.P.)
Lucknow

PREFACE
After overwhelming response of Times Prasna
Jyotish (Hindi) the need of English version of this
book was greatly felt by astrologers across the
country. The present book is the translation of Hindi version
with new added live examples. The defects which persisted
in Hindi version have been rectified to make it more and
more useful to esteemed readers. K.P. astrology is getting
momentum day by day due to its Practical utility and for
making scintillating predictions. The importance of
traditional astrology can neither be mitigated nor ignored
because all systems of prognostication of future have got
generated from it. K.P. too is not exception. The book is
unique blending of K.P. as well as traditional astrology. The
proved principles of traditional astrology have been
beautifully incorporated with K.P. to make it more
meaningful and trustworthy. After making tedious research
over a decade of time various confusions which persisted
even in the books of KP. have been sorted out with logical
explainations. In present time the utility of horary astrology
as compare to natal astrology is much more and unparallel
due to its practical utility. Horary astrology has given rise to
mobile astrology or telephone astrology. The querent need
not to present himself or herself before astrologer but simply
can ask any question any time from any part of world on
mobile or telephone. Within 10 minutes he is given clear cut
answer either in yes or no. Thus horary astrology has not
only saved the time of people but also saved their energy
and money. There is a some sort of confusion over selection
of ruling planets. This confusion is not only present in

software of astrology but also persisted in the book of KP.
After solving more than one thousand questions of horary
astrology I have reached the conclusion that selection of
ruling planets is almost incorrect and erroneous. Proper
explanation have been given in the book over selection of
ruling planets . The another important feature of this book is
that practical case study examples have been classified into
house wise. Now it is very simple and convenient for the
readers to select to which query which house or cusp is to be
considered. Few questions for which no particular house is
judged have also been included in this book so that reader
may become familiar with such type of queries. 1 would
like to bring to the knowledge of reader that any book of the
world is only a source of information. The intellect and
wisdom convert it into knowledge . Thus the ultimate source
of knowledge is intellect and wisdom of the readers. I would
also like to make it clear that the contents of whole book
are the out come of research and deep concentration only
on horary astrology. Each sentence and all the examples
included in the book have been found to be practically correct
without exceptions.
The theory part of this book is absolutely based on proved
cases therefore each word each sentence is very important
for the readers. Specific comments have also been given in
few cases in which a confusion may arise in the mind of
readers.
I hope readers will give same warm response to the book
what they gave to Hindi version. I also request to the readers of this book to bring to my knowledge any fallacy or
missing part which they think ought to be included in the
book.
I am thankful to my all clients whose continuous interaction helped me to deal with questions of different nature
and different varieties.
I owe my sincere thanks to the editor and publisher of this

book smt Rajeshwari Shanker for encouraging me to write
the book in English and also taking all pains from cover
designing to printing and ultimately bringing out this book.
I am also thankful to my all students who provided me
opportunity to teach them and also for different questions they
posed during classroom lectures due to which I could update
my knowledge as well could go deep into horary astrology.
I also pay my special thanks to my student Shri Anuj Jain
Delhi based astrologer who is always in touch with me with
different type of questions. He devoted a lot of time and energy
to proof corrections and advised me to concentrate on various
aspects of this books. This book could never be completed
without his sincere and selfless service. May god bless him
and all my students.
In the last but not least I pay my sincere thanks, respect
and love to my wife Dr. Vatsala Prabhaker who inspite of
her busiest schedule burnt mid night oil with me in the
completion of this book. As 1 did not have time but her
timely support helped me to complete this book.
I also bow my head before almighty God Lord Ganesha
for his grace which ignited in me a passion for astrology.
May Lord Ganesh grant peace and happiness to all.
Goodluck
April 2006
Dr. Arastu Prabhaker
14, Saraswati Nagar,

PART — I
(Theory)

Brief History of Horary
Astrology
Horary Astrology - (Indian) It is very difficult to
answer when Horary astrology came into existence.
However it could be assumed that with the dawn of human
existence the astrology too got evolved with the evolution
of mankind. Vedas have mentioned about astrology and the
oldest Veda is Rig Veda. Therefore origin of Vedas as well as
of astrology could be inferred some three thousands years
before Christ.
Horary astrology used to be‘ called Hora Shastra as per
ancient classical literatures. It means Horary astrology was
studied as separate branch or quite distinct subject from
general astrology. The word Horary is derived fromthe word
Hora means Hour. In ancient times astrologers used to make
predictions on the basis of words uttered by the querent. In
later stage the predictions were made on the basis of sitting
gesture of the querent, Nadi breaths, articles in the hand of
querent, etc. In the time of Prithuyasas the son of Varahamihira
this system of prediction was developed, refined, rectified and
advanced in well manner and systematically. This branch of
astrology flourished well in Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh A.D..
Many traditional authors have written many books on this
subject. Among them few noteable worth work is mentioned
herewith for the benefit of the readers. Prasnachintamani,
Prasnajnanam, Prasnamarga, Prasna Bhusana, Prasnatantra,
Satpanchasika. Prasna-Bhairava, Bhuvan Deepika Prasna
Churnamani etc.

1 8 The Times Horary Aslrology A Nova] Approach to Predictions
Astrologer used to deliver forecast on the basis of words
uttered by the querent or his sitting gesture, direction etc. were
the guiding principles for the astrologer, to reach the
conclusion regarding the query of the querent. In later stage
Astrologers resorted to different method of prediction i.e.
querent used to mention one number out of 108. The
Ascendant was erected on the basis of number as mentioned
by querent and the results were read. What is the mystery of
taking number up to 108? The answer is that whole Zodiac is
divided into 27 constellations or Nakshatras. Each
constellation is divided into four padas. Therefore, 27
constellations have 27 x 4 = 108 padas. In this way the number
up to 108 consists of whole Zodiac. This makes amply clear
that constellations were used in making predictions which
later on developed and advanced by Late K.S. Krishnamurti.
Horary Astrology (Western) Westerners believed that Seth
was the founder of Astrology and existed in 3769 B.C. It is said
about the Seholan that he divided the whole Zodiac into 12
parts. He was the first to announce that the sun rotates and his
rotation is responsible for day and night to occur. He also
divided the elliptic and the divided part was called Mazzaroth.
Chaldean in 2600 B.C. studied and advanced this science
and was able to maintain a relationship between planets and
their impact on life. According to Dr. Thompson the
Sumerian studied the Zodiac and. the universe. Astrology
flourished well in Babylon, Egypt and Greek.
"I h the field of Horary astrology William Lily is well
known name both in India as well as in West. He lived in
1602-81 A.D. Apart this legend, Alan Leo, Edwin Castle,
John Wilson. Charles Hathfiedetc worked untiring for the
cause of horary astrology. They developed this science up
to the perfection. There is some difference of opinions
between Indians and westerners, as far as reading of nativity
is concerned. Indians take seriously the position of planets
in particular house and the aspect tamong the planets is
secondary in importance to them, where as Westerners
decide on the basis of Aspects formed among the planets.
Indian adopt Niryana basis while westerners advocate
Sayana basis.

Important Nomenclatures and
Explanations
1 . Zodiac According to traditional astrology the Zodiac
commences from a constant point. This constant point is 1 80°
away from chitra (spica) Nakshatra. While according to
western astrology the zodiac commences from Aries sign O
degree and retreats back by 50.23 seconds per year.
2. Sayana and Niryana system According to western
astrology the sun is pivot to calculate or delineate the results.
Moon is the central point for all calculations in Indian astrology.,,
According to western astrology the Sun moves on Aries ^ig^
to between 21 March to 20 April while the Sun moves onPisqej^
sign between this period as per Hindu Astrology. ,v ^
Example The position of sun as per Niryana system on
In order to get sayana position of the Sun, add
Ayanamsa of this year to Nirayana position of the Sun.

20 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Conversion Formula is -
i. Sayana position of the planet - Ayanamsa of that
year= Niryana position
ii. Niryana position of the planet + Ayanamsa of the year
= Sayana position
3. What*is Ayanamsa? In Western Astrology or Sayana
system for the calculations of constellations & planets an
imaginary constant point is conceived. This constant point
never changes. Therefore the position of constellations &
planets also do not change. The distance between this
constant point and vernal equinox (The beginning point of
Aries sign) is called Ayanamsa.
The tropical & sidereal point coincides in 285 A.D. On 22
March 285 A.D. The tropical and sidereal point were the
As per late K.S. Krishnamurti the tropical & sidereal point
were same in 291 A.D. Therefore, there is a difference of six
minutes between the Ayanamsa of N.C. Lahari and that of
Krishnamurti. Horoscope prepared on the basis of K.P. must
strictly follow Ayanamsa as propounded by late
Krishnamurti.
4. What is Day The sunrise to next sunrise is termed as
day in traditional astrology while in civil time the day
changes after 12.00 Midnight.
Example-: A baby is born at 3.00 midnight on dated 3
March 2002. The Sun rises at 6.45 amon 3 March 2002 and at
6.46 am on 4 March 2002. As per traditional astrology the
date of birth of this baby is 3 March while as per civil time
the date of birth of the newly bom baby is 4 March. In Horary
astrology always take civil time because day is one of the
important ruling planets.
5. House or Bhava and Cusp-: According to Indian astrology
the Zodiac is divided into twelve parts. Each part is called house
or Bhava. The longitude of Zodiac is 360°. Therefore each part

Important Nomenclatures and explanati ons 21
is of thirty degree in longitude. The word cusp though signifies
a house yet it has different meaning from general sense of a
house or Bhava. Cusp is actually the beginning point of a house.
The beginning point of a house *is considered to be very
influential as well as powerful. This is generally a western
concept and quite scientific in nature. In Placidus system of
house division each Bhava or House Varies in longitude. A
particular Bhava may be of thirty degree or more or less from
thirty degree but the total of 12 cusps or houses will always be
three hundred sixty degrees in longitude.
6. Transit or Gochara The entrance of the planet into
the sign is called transit or Gochara. The Transit effect of the
planets is studied in respect to the position of moon at the
time of birth. Now a days many astrologers read transit
results in respect to Ascendant.
7. Which house signify Father Few Astrologers read
results pertaining to father from tenth house. The logic
behind is that since fourth house denotes mother therefore
seventh to fourth house is tenth house. However many
astrologers assign ninth house to father. We take ninth house
as the seat of father. In Horary questions pertaining to father
always take ninth house for judgment.
8. Constellation There are 27 constellations. Though one
more constellation i.e. Abhijeet find place among the
constellations but it is not used. Each constellation measures
13° - 20‘ or 800 minutes in longitude. These 27 constellations
are divided among nine planets. Each planet consists of 2Va
stars or 9 Padas. These 27 constellations are further divided
into 249 parts and each part is called sub lord.
9. Sub lord The 27 constellations were divided into 249
parts. Each part is called sub lord. It was the valuable
contribution of Late K 5. Krishnamurti to Astro-world. How
this sub lord is worked out and what it signifies has been
explained at appropriate place?
10. Ruling Planets It is also an innovation of KP. Inorder

22 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
to reach the timing of any event ruling planets are most
helpful. With the help of Ruling planets one can pin point
the event with correct date & time.
XI. Significators It is also the new concept. Significators
signify the matter in question. In fact the Significators
hypothesis rest on the use of constellations lord in
predictive astrology.

Importance of Horary Astrology
rie utility of any science, whether it is astrology or
any other subject lies in the fact what the society in
general gets benefit of it. If any subject which ceases to yield
benefic results to society it becomes obsolete in due course
of time. Time is an important factor in astrology. In fact
Astrology cannot be imagined without time. Therefore, in
some sacred texts time is declared to be God. Horary
astrology has greater utility than natal astrology in today's
fast changing world.
1 . Almost in all the horoscopes time is not recorded correctly.
This error lies in the fact that even two watches in the same
room do not show identical time. When a baby is bom either
in hospital or in a nursing home the watch in the labour room
is un-identical to the watches of the parents waiting outside
the labour room. The difference between watches may range
from four minutes to eight minutes. The Minute difference
of three to four minutes changes sub lord of cusp which
ultimately changes the reading of entire nativity.
2. The principles governing natal astrology cannot be
verified easily. Whereas predictions made in horary
astrology may be verified within hour, days or months
because query is always related to coming days or months.
Therefore, horary astrology is the best method for cany out
research in the field of Astrology.
3. Horary astrology works on certain proved principles.

24 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
The significations of planets and houses can be easily
ascertained. There are many significations of planets and
houses but the particular signification of a particular planet
or house is only known with the help of horary astrology.
4. Pin point prediction devoid of double meaning sense
could be possible only in horary astrology. In horary
astrology the answer is given either in Yes or No. Apart that
horary astrology gives the exact date and time for the
fructification of any event, which is never possible in Natal
astrology.
5. Day to day events like arrival of friend, light gone when
will come back, rumor is false or true, reservation of berth
in train is possible or not, love affairs will materialize or
not, etc can be answered only by the horary astrology.
6. Horary astrology has greater utility when question
pertaining to wining or losing of three or four persons who
are in election fray comes up. Horary astrology deals
effectively with such questions.
7. Horary astrology is also helpful in deciding bride &
bridegrooms among the list. It not only clearly & effectively
decides but also gives precise judgment about the character
and nature of bride & bridegroom.

Brief Description of Ancient
Text Books of Horary Astrology
The principles enunciated in traditional text book on
horary astrology can not be branded as whole thing
in general. It should be admitted candidly that progress
made in recent times in astrology is the out come of serious
work on traditional books. Therefore the importance of traditional astrology can neither be minimized nor overlooked.
The principles found in old books are cosmopolitan in
nature and deep study of these principles reveals unfailing
predictions.
Today in fastmoving word it is not possible to give much
time and energy to study these principles and majority of
astrologers need easily remembered, research proved and
least time consuming formula which could be applied even
while moving on a busy road.
For the benefit of the readers of this book, translations of
few old books on horary astrology have been made.
Prasna Gy ana
1 . Bhattotpala is the author of this book and work
commences with the bowing of all the planets(Sloka - 1)
2. Horary astrology never fails boldly declared by
Bhattotpala. Ten conditions of planet are to be kept in mind
before answering any horary question. (Sloka- 2)

26 The Times Horary Astrology A Novaf Approach to Predictions
The ten conditions are as follows
i. Deepta If the concerned planet is found to be either
in exaltation sign or in Mooltrikona sign, the planet is said
to be in Deepta stage. This condition shows good results.
ii. Swastha When the planet is found to be in own sign,
the condition is called Swastha and shows good results.
iii. Pramudita Planet in friendly sign. Result is
moderate.
iv. Shanta The planet if placed in the Vargas of any
benefic planet is called Shanta. Maharishi Parasara
propounded Vargas kundali viz. Navamsa, Dasmansa,
Dwadasamsa etc'. If planet is found to be in benefic sign in
these Vargas is called Shanta. Such planet offers positive and
favorable results.
v. Shakta The planet if not eclipsed is called Shakta
and the result of such planet is good.
vi. Prapidita The planet defeated in war by another
planet. The result is bad.
vii. Deena The planet if posited in inimical sign is called
in Deena condition. Result is bad.
viii. Khal : When planet is placed in the sign of a malefic
planet. Result unfavorable.
ix. Vikala When planet is eclipsed. Result is bad.
x. Bheeti When planet is debilitated or in the sign of
inimical planet. Result is bad.
3. The face of querent should always be towards east. The
seat of Astrologer be adjusted in the manner that querent is
facing either east or Northeast. (Sloka - 3)
4. The querent must offer flowers, fruits, clothes etc to the
astrologers. The place of astrologer is surrounded by calm &
pleasant environment. The querent should be attended to
either in the morning or during midday. Preference is given
to morning time. Avoid answering in the evening or during
sunset. (Sloka -4)

Brief Description of Ancient Text Books of Horary Astrology
5. If benefic planets viz. Venus, Mercury or Jupiter be
posited or aspect the house concerned with query, the result
is favourable. (Sloka - 8)
6. Positive result may be declared if 1,4,7,8,10 and 12
Houses are devoid of placement of malefic planet and. 1, 4,
7, 10 houses are occupied either by lord of ascendant or friend
of lord of ascendant. (Sloka-11)
7. Benefic planets (Mercury, Jupiter, Venus) if placed either
in fifth house or Ninth house or malefic planets (The sun,
Mars and Saturn) are placed in 3, 6 or 11 houses, the result
obtained in such condition is good. (Sloka- 12)
8. If malefic planet is posited in horary ascendant then
the result is diseases and dispute. If malefic planet is placed
in fourth house, the result is disagreement among the
relatives. (Sloka - 13)
9. If seventh house of horary chart is occupied by malefic
planet, there are obstacles and impediments in the journey
met with difficulties. All undertakings show failure if tenth
house is occupied by a malefic planet. If malefic planets are
conjoined with benefic planets in above said conditions then
malefic planets create obstacles while benefic planets remove
obstacles and give auspicious results. (Sloka - 14)
10. If horary ascendant falls in fixed sign viz., Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio or Aquarius the querent will not be defeated. He
suffers from diseases; stay at one place but begets the desired
position. (Sloka -15)
11. If horary ascendant happens to be either Aries, cancer,
Libra or Capricorn one will be. defeated, free from diseases,
make journey but will not have any position or improvement
in status. (Sloka - 16)
12. If benefic planets are posited in 1,4,5,7,9/Or 10 houses
and malefic ones are posited in 3, 6, 11 then success and
return of gone person is indicated. (Sloka - 17)
13. If Jupiter or Venus is placed in either second house or

28 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
third house the gone person will return soon. If suchbenefic
planets are placed in fourth house, it indicates quick return.
(Sloka - 19)
14 Jf mercury and Venus are placed second or twelfth to
either ascendant or moon sign the native will return soon.
(Sloka - 20)
15. The enemy will come with forces if ascendant and
Navamsa fall in movable sign (Opposition, litigation or
enmity can also be taken as result of such conditions). If moon
is placed in movable sign, Ascendant and Navamsa fall in
immovable sign then enemy does not come. (Sloka - 21)
16. The enemy can not dare to attack in spite of having
adequate might if Mercury, Jupiter and Venus are placed in
sixth house and Moon occupy common sign and ascendant
happens to be in immovable sign .(Sloka - 22)
17. The enemy proceeds but goes back if fifth and sixth
houses are occupied by malefic planets (This general
condition may be taken as Litigation will start on but soon
come to an end.) the enemy can reach to the home but will
retrace back if fourth house is occupied by malefic planets.
(End of litigation) (Sloka - 23)
1 8 . The querent will be free from disease if J upiter aspects
ascendant and Moon & Venus are posited there in or Jupiter
occupy 1, 4, 7, lOthhouse. (Sloka - 28)
19. The querent will be married if moon is either in 3, 6, 7,
10 and 1 1th and aspected by Jupiter. If moon is aspected by
malefic planet it indicates delay in marriage. (Sloka - 29)
20. The querent will be married or one will be married if
benefic planets are placed in 1,4,5 ,7 ,9 or 10 houses. The
characteristics of future partner i.e. status, character, outer
appearance etc. will be good, if seventh house is occupied
by benefic planet. (Sloka - 31)
21. Child is born if benefices are placed in fifth and
eleventh houses. Male child is born if the Sun, Moon Jupiter
and ascendant fall in 1,3,5,7,9,11 signs. (Sloka - 32)

Brief Description of Ancient Text Books of Horary Astrology 29
22. Female child is born if said planets & ascendant falls
in 2,4,6,8,10,12 signs. If few planets & ascendant falls in male
sign & few in female signs then sex of to be born child should
be determined according to the strength of planets falling
in a particular sign. Male child is to be predicted, if Saturn
falls in either 1,3,5,7,9,11 houses. (Sloka - 33)
23. Male child is to be predicted if Jupiter & Venus are
placed in male signs. If Jupiter, Mars & Moon are placed in
even signs then female child is to be predicted. (Sloka - 34)
24. Rain
i. If ascendant falls in Cancer, Capricorn or Pisces sign
and both Venus and Moon are posited there in.
ii. Good Rainfall is to be predicted if Venus & Moon are
placed with Ketu and aspected by benefic planets. If above
configuration of planets is aspected by malefic planets then
scanty rainfall is to be predicted.
iii. If query is during rainy season andif Venus and Saturn
are either placed seventh to the sun or moon or placed
second, third, fourth or eighth house from ascendant, the
rain will occur, should be predicted.
iv. If watery sign falls in ascendant and Moon or benefic
planet is placed in ascendant or placed 2,4,7, or 10th house
from ascendant indicates the possibility of rain.
25. Theft-:
i. The thief will be short stature if ascendant happens to be
Aries, Taurus, Aquarius or Pisces. The height will be average
if ascendant happens to be Gemini, Cancer, Sagittarius or
Capricorn . Tall height is to be predicted if ascendant happens
to be Leo, Virgo, Libra or Scorpio . (Sloka - 47)
ii. What is Concealed in Palm The concealed material is
made of metal if the sun & Moon are placed in angular houses
from horary ascendant. The material may be part of a plant

30 The Times Horary Astrology A Nova) Approach to Predictions
like leaf, branch or root, if Mercury & Saturnare placed either
in angular houses or ascendant. The material may be of any
living thing if Jupiter or Moon or Venus is placed in any of
the angular house of horary ascendant. (Sloka - 49)
iii. Colour The sun indicates red colour, Moon - white
colour, Mars - red colour, Mercury - green colour, Jupiter -
yellow colour, Saturn - black colour.
iv. Shape The planets indicate following shapes :
i. Sun - Cuboid
ii. Moon - Hollow shape
iii. Mars - Round shape
iv. Mercury - High & long shape
v. Jupiter - Spherical shape
vi. Venus - Good height
vii. Saturn - Wrinkled & long shape (Sloka - 50, 51)
V.? The query is about mineral if ascendant happens to be
either Leo, Aries or Scorpio and if the siinandMars are placed
there in or aspect ascendant. The question is related with either
root or wood if ascendant happens to be Gemini, Virgo,
Capricorn or Aquarius and Mercury or Saturn are placed
either in ascendant or aspect it. The question may be about
any living person if ascendant happens to be Taurus, Libra,
Cancer, Leo, Sagittarius or Pisces and Venus, Mars, and Jupiter
are placed in ascendant or aspect it. (Sloka-52, 53)
vi. The theft is committed by some relative if ascendant
or Navamsa Ascendant or Vargottam Ascendant happens
to be Taurus , Leo, Scorpio or Aquarius . If ascendant happens
to be in movable sign stranger commits the theft. The stolen
article is at the threshold of the door if ascendant falls in
first decanate. The stolen article is inside the house if
ascendant falls in second decanate. The stolen article is in
the back yard of the house in third decanate. The stolen
article is recovered if following conditions are present

Brief Description of Ancient Text Books of Horary Astrology 3 1
i. Moon is placed in ascendant
ii. If benefices are placed in ascendant.
iii. If ascendant happens to be Gemini, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
Scorpio or Aquarius and ascendant is aspected by
benefic planets.
iv. If benefic planets are placed in 2,4,7,3,6,10,11 houses.
Uttarkalamratam Few slokas of Uttarkalamratam which
are related to horary astrology have been explained here with
for the benefit of readers. Only those slokas have been taken
which may be useful for the purpose of horary astrology.
1 . Querent must offer one fruit as donation to Astrologer
before asking any question. If querent is asked to mention a
number between 1 to 108, then querent must give any one
number between 1 to 108. On the basis of number as
mentioned by querent, calculation must be done to foretell
future whether it is favorable or unfavorable. Astrologer
must pray his or her family deity then offers prediction about
past & future. (Sloka -2)
2. The query is related with secret relationship with
women other than his wife if ascendant falls in Virgo sign.
The query is related with business if ascendant happens to
be Libra. The Scorpio rising indicates query related with fear
from enemies. Sagittarius sign indicate lost money. Capricorn
sign reflects own unscrupulous actions. Aquarius sign
indicates prestige, status and home. Aries sign indicates
query to be related with some person. Taurus rising indicates
Quadruped. Gemini rising indicates pregnancy. Cancer sign
indicates court and court cases. Leo sign indicates
Government and government related activities. Astrologer
must judge the strength of Ascendant and Navamsa
Ascendant. The prediction must be given afterweighing the
strength of Ascendant or Navamsa ascendant.
3. The result of query will be experienced soon if the lord of

32 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
the house related with query is exalted. If lord of the house
occupy own sign the result is experienced after some time. The
result will be experienced after some time if lord of the
concerned house is placed in a friendly sign. If lord of the house
does not occupy either exalted sign, own sign or friendly sign
then the result will be experienced after some years. The result
of the question asked will miserably fall if the lord of the house
is associated with malefic planets or aspected by malefic planets.
The question is honoured with success if lord of ascendant is
placed in the house concerned with query or lord of ascendant
is aspected by benefic planets. (Sloka - 10)
4. The result of the query is obtained very soon if the lord
of the house concerned with query and lord of ascendant are
placed in auspicious houses or aspect each other. (Sloka -19)
Shatpanchasika (Chapter - 1)
1 . Prithuyasas prays lord sun and writes a book named
Shatpanchasika for the benefit of astrologers. (Sloka - 1)
2. The rising sign at the time of query indicates condition,
position and transfer. Efforts will be crowned with success*
or miserably fail is indicated by fourth house. The seventh
house indicates arrival of a person if Ascendant orNavamsa
ascendant falls in sheersodya sign. One will meet failures if
ascendant is occupied by malefic planet or Navamsa falls in
Pristhodya sign. One begets success after failures if malefic
as well as benefic planets are associated with Lagan or
Navamsa Lagan. The person will return to his home if any
planet enters into fourth house. (Sloka - 2)
3. The results obtained are auspicious if lord of the house
concerned with query aspects its own house or benefic
planets are placed there in. The contrary results are obtained
if malefic planets either aspect concerned house or posited
there in. This Principle works for both natal as well as for
horary astrology. (Sloka - 3)
4. Efforts will be crowned with success if

Brief Description of Ancient Text Books of Horary Astrology 33
i. Benefic planets are placed in Ascendant
ii. Navamsa ascendant falls in a benefic sign
iii. Ascendant or Navamsa ascendant falls in
Sheershyodya sign.
Ascendant Or Navamsa ascendant if occupied by malefic
planet indicates failure or same results are obtained if
ascendant happens to be in pristhodya sign. But if both
malefic as well as benefic planets occupy Ascendant or
Navamsa ascendant then success is assured after some
failures. (Sloka - 4)
5. The lost articles are recovered if ascendant is occupied
by moon and aspected by Jupiter or Venus. Auspicious
results shall be further begotten if benefic planets in adequate
strength are placed in eleventh house. (Sloka - 5)
Chapter - Second
1 . No information regarding journey or return to home is
received if horary ascendant falls in either Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio or Aquarius sign. These sign indicate neither death
nor damage . (Sloka - 1)
2. The result will be just opposite what has been told in
Sloka 1. Mixed results are obtained if ascendant falls in
mutual sign. Efforts of the querent are crowned with success
if ascendant or Moon is aspected by benefic planets. The
aspect of malefic planets indicate failures. (Sloka - 2)
3. The enemy will go back without battle if malefic planets
are placed in fifth and sixth houses. The enemy is defeated
if fourth house is occupied by benefic planets. (Sloka - 3)
4. The arrival of enemy is doubtfulif ascendant happens
to be in movable sign and moon in immovable sign. But if
ascendant falls in immovable sign and moon in movable
sign, it is the indication of arrival of enemy. (Sloka - 4)
5. The enemy comes half way and go back if moon
occupies movable sign and ascendant falls in mutual sign.

34 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
The opposition of above condition ensures battle in which
both the parties suffer losses. (Sloka - 8)
6. The enemy speedily moves forward if ascendant falls
in movable sign and the sun or Saturn or Mercury or Venus
is posited in ascendant. The enemy has not moved if above
said planets are in retrograde motion. (Sloka - 9)
7. The arrival of enemy is indicated if the SunandMoon are
placed in fourth house. The enemy returns quickly if Mercury
or Jupiter or Venus is placed in fourth house. (Sloka-11)
8. The planet in strength be determined and also
ascertain its placement in a particular Bhava. The person
gone to far off places will return in such months as
denoted from house in which planet in strength is placed
counted from Lagna. (Sloka - 14)
9. If planet in strength is placed in movable Navamsa the
calculation as applied in Sloka 14 will be taken as it is. The
time will be just double what is mentioned in Sloka 14 if planet
in strength is placed in fixed Navamsa. The time will be triple
if planet in strength is placed in mutual sign. (Sloka - 15)
10. The person gone to far off places will return if the lord of
seventh house is retrograde or about to retrograde. (Slola-16)
Chapter - Third
1 . Both the parties will come to an agreement if benefic
planet is placed in either ascendant or eleventh house or
twelfth house.
The battle will take place if malefic planet is placed in
mutual sign. Both the parties will come to an agreement and
the battle is converted into treaty if ascendant or fourth or
seventh or tenth house is occupied by benefic planets and
aspected by benefic planets. The battle will continue if
angular houses are occupied by malefic planets and aspected
by malefic planets. (Sloka - 3/1)
2. The enemy willgoback quickly if both occupy by either
Jupiter or Venus or second or third house. The same rule

Brief Description of Ancient Text Books of Horary Astrology 35
also applies for the person who has gone to far off places
will return soon. , (Sloka - 5)
Chapter - Fourth
1 .The native attains his first ambition if malefic planets
are not placed in 1,4 ,7 ,8 and tenth hpuse and benefic planets
are placed in 1,4 ,5,7 ,9 and 10th houses. The opposite
condition indicates adverse results. (Sloka - 1)
2. The native will get success if benefic planets are placed
either in third or fifthor sixth or eleventh or twelfthhouse. The
results are desirable if ascendant happens to be Gemini, Virgo
or Aquarius and benefic planets are posited there in. (Sloka - 2)
3. The aim of the querent is achieved and status also
improves if benefic planets are placed in fourth & tenth
houses. The native earns recognition in society and also gets
money if benefic planets are placed either in First, or Second
or Fifth house. The good results are not mitigated even if
malefic planets are placed either in eleventh house or twelfth
house. No gains' if moon is placed in Lagna. But moon in
tenth house gives good results. (Sloka - 3)
4. Gains through opposite sex are indicated if moon is
placed either in second, third, sixth, seventh, tenth or
eleventh house and aspected by Jupiter. Malefic planets
either in 1, 3, 5, 8 or 9 house cause losses and failures in
business . Success is assured when their houses are occupied
by benefic planets. (Sloka - 3)
5. The patient recovers quickly if benefic planets are placed
either in first, fifth, seventh or eight house and aspected by benefic
planets and moon be placed in Uppachaya Bhava. (Sloka - 5)
Chapter - Fifth
1 . The person will return his home if all the planets are
placed in second, third and fifth houses. The lost person and
lost article both are recovered if benefic planets are placed
in above said houses. The person returns quickly if Jupiter
and Venus are placed in above houses. (Sloka-1)

The Times Horan' Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
2. The person gone to far off places returns quickly if
Jupiter is placed in one of the angles. The person returns
quickly if Venus and Mercury are placed in fifth or ninth
house. (Sloka- 2)
3. The person returns safely if moon is posited in eighth
house and malefic planets do not occupy angular houses.
The person returns with gains if benefic planets are placed
in angular houses. (Sloka - 3)
4. The native suffers a lot and likely to be imprisoned if
ascendant happens to be inpristhodyasign aspectedby malefic
planets. The person moves to foreign countries from his native
place if malefic planet is placed in third house without any
benefic aspect. The person is assumed to be dead if malefic
planets are placed in sixth house. Thieves kidnap the person if
malefic planets occupy angular houses. (Sloka - 4)
Chapter - Sixth
1 . The querent himself has stolen the article if horary
ascendant falls in fixed or Navamsa ascendant falls in fixed
signor Ascendant happens to be Vargothama.(Sloka-l)
2. The lost article is at the main door of the house if
ascendant is within ten degrees. If ascendant is between 10
to 20 degree the article is in the middle of the house. The
articles are in the backyard of the house if ascendant is found
between 20 to 30 degrees. (Sloka - 2)
3 . The lost article is recovered if Moon in strength is placed
in ascendant or ascendant happens to be in sheersodya sign
or any benefic planet is placed in ascendant or benefic planet
aspects the ascendant. If eleventh house is occupied by
benefic planet then the lost article is recovered. (Sloka - 3)
4. The planets in 1, 4, 7, lOhouses indicate about the lost
article to be kept in. Direction of the lost article is ascertained
through ascendant if angular houses are vacant. How far
away is the lost article is determined through Navamsa
ascendant. The nature of the lost article is determined
through Navamsa Lagna.

Brief Description of Ancient Text Books of Horary Astrology 37
i. The rising decanate at the time of query gives
information about thieves.
ii. Lagna indicates the time of lost article, direction and
place where lost article have been kept. The lord of ascendant
indicates age, cast and other characteristics. (Sloka - 4)
Chapter - Seventh
1 . The birth of a male child is to be predicted if Saturn is
placed in 3, 5, 7 ,9,1 house in horary chart. If Saturn is not
placed in one of such houses then birth of a female child is
to be predicted. The married life will be happy if Saturn is
placed in uneven sign in an horary chart. (Sloka - 1)
2. The marriage will take place if Moonis posited in3,5,6,7,
or J 1 house and aspected by Jupiter & Mercury. The marriage
will also taken place if benefic planets are placed in angular
houses. (Sloka - 2)
3 . The rain will take place in rainy season if Venus is placed
seventh to moon and Saturn is placed seventh to the Sun or
Venus is placed in fourth house or Saturn in eighth house.
(Sloka - 3)
4. Benefic planets along with watery sign if falls in
1,2,3 ,4 ,7, or 10th house then rain takes place. There will also
be rain if moon sign happens to be watery sign. (Sloka - 4)
5 . The birth of a male child is to be understood if male sign
falls in ascendant and ascendant is aspected by male planets.
Female sign in ascendant and aspect of female planets over
ascendant indicate birth of a female child. The woman is
pregnant if mercury is placed in ascendant. (Sloka - 5)
6. The question is related with girl if moon and mercury
are placed in ascendant or aspect ascendant. The question is
related with old lady if Saturn is placed in ascendant or aspect
it. The woman has recently delivered if Jupiter and the sun
are placed in ascendant or aspect it. The woman will have
good health if mars and Vertus are placed in ascendant or
aspect it. The same rule will also apply to man. (Sloka - 6)

38 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
7 . The question is related with kith and kin of the querent
if planet in strength is placed in ascendant. The question is
related with younger brother if planet in strength is placed
in third house. The planet in strength in fifth hofrse indicates
query related with children. The question is related with
either mother or sister if planet in strength is placed in fourth
house. Planet in strength in sixth house indicates query
related with enemy. (Sloka - 7)
8. The question is related with wife if planet in strength is
placed in seventh house. The question is related with some
outstanding personality if planet in strength is placed in ninth
house. The placement of a planet in tenth house indicates
query related to either Guru or preceptor. The question is
related with querent himself if lord of Navamsa lagan is in
strength. The question is related with friend if lord of Navamsa
lagan is a friend of lord of horary lagan. If they are enemy
then question is related with enemy or opponent. (Sloka - 8)
9. The person makes relationship with the wife of others
if the Sun, Mars and Venus are placed in seventh house in
horary chart. The man cohabits his wife only if Jupiter is
placed in seventh house. The person makes relationship with
prostitutes if Moon and Mercury are placed in ninth house.
The person is related with low caste lady if Saturn is placed
in seventh house. The nature of Moon decides the age of
woman. (Sloka * 10)
10. The person will fall sick in foreign country if Saturn
or any other malefic planet is placed in ninth house. The
man will die in foreign land if Saturn is placed in eighth
house. (Sloka -11)
1 1 . The father of the querent who has gone to abroad will
further move to another country if eighth house is occupied
by the Sun and other benefic planet and aspected by benefic
planets. (Sloka* 12)
Sinendramala Few slokas of Sinendramala have been
translated which have been found to be useful to the readers.

40 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Comments The principles propounded in traditional
texts cannot be out rightly rejected. The aim behind the
translations of these texts is to make readers familiar with
the knowledge of different principles so that they could
understand the basic nature of planets & signs.
Only those shlokas have been translated which have been
found to be useful to readers. Readers may take long time to
verify the practicality of the principles. But these principles
can provide adequate knowledge about the nature &
behavior of the planets as well as signs and may be applied
in solving day-to-day problems of horary astrology. Above

Brief Description of Ancient Text Books of Horary Astrology 41
principles can also be used in K. P. astrology. It will not only
enhance the quality of horary astrology but also make it
refined and rectified.
I too have found few principles to be absolutely correct.
For example Uttarkalamratam Sloka 10 states that result of
the question is obtained shortly if the lord of the house
concerned with query is exalted. Similarity Shatpanchasika
chapter 1 Sloka 5 states that lost article is recovered if moon
in ascendant is aspected by Jupiter & Venus, Both examples
have been found to be correct in many cases.
It is humbly requested to readers that the foundation of
astrology lies in the permutation & combination of lights. If
astrologers give logic in the explanation of any combination
of planets then the mystery of planets can be revealed. In
foregoing examples Sloka 5 of Shatpanchasika chapter I
states that lost articles will be recovered if ascendant with
moon is aspected by Jupiter & Venus. The Logic behind is
that moon & ascendant both are aspected by two most
benefic planets viz. Jupiter & Venus. Both the Lagans i.e.
moon & Lagna are under the influence of most benefic
planets.
As I have said above that astrology is the permutation &
combination of lights and Thus the impact of lights
emanating from various planets is studied in astrology.
Whenever planet comes at a particular degree in space many
important events take place. The research should be made
on such particular degrees attained by planets during their
motion in zodiac.

Signif ications of Planets &
Signs
T'he Sun The Sun is the significator of soul,
represents father of the native and a source of divine
knowledge. The Sun is known as kroor Graha, means
intensity to results. Following significations are ascertained
from the Sun particularily in horary astrology.
1. Father, Relationship with father, longevity of father
2. Popularity and degree of popularity
3. Service
4. High post in service
5. Ministership
7. Governor
8. Eldest son
9. Eye sight
10. Inter caste marriage
11. Constitution
12. President
Moon Moon is very important planet in horary
astrology. Moon is the significator of mind. Therefore it
reveals the immediate condition of mind. Non co-relation
between query and the position of moon in horary chart

Significations of Planets & Signs
indicates insincere attempt to test the knowledge of the
astrologer. The natural and sincere desire to know the result
of horary question absolutely gives pinpointed correct
results. The moon assumes greater significance in horary
astrology therefore its study from various angles is necessary.
These are the following significations of moon:
(i) Mind, (ii) Mother, (iii) Water, (iv) Ups & down
(v) Imagination, (vi) Dream, (vii) Daughter, (viii) Gains,
Through, women, (ix) Change & changeability, (x) Happy
family life, (xi) Sea Voyages (xii) Brain (xiii) Young girl (xiv)
Rains, (xvi) Flood, (xvii) Milk etc.
Mars Mars is predominantly significator of energy.
Other significations of mars are as follows
(i) Brothers, (ii) Properties, (iii) Disputes & Quarrels
(iv) Legal matters, (v) Police, (vi) Army (vii) Surgery
(viii) Operation (ix) Blood (x) Cut (xi) Boldness (xii) Engine
(xiii) Railway (xiv) Aero plane (xv) Factory (xvi) Iron (steel)
(xvii) Engineer (mechanical) (xviii) Will power.
Jupiter (i) Money (ii) Son (iii) Children (iv) Divine
knowledge (v) Banker (vi) Teacher (vii) Professor (viii) Vedas
(ix) Perceptor (x) Illegal relationship (xi) Sanskrit (xii) Judge
(Mars + Saturn + Jupiter) (xiii) Doctor (Mars + Jupiter + Sun)
(xiv) Love marriage (xv) Flatulence (xvi) Cancer (xvii) Windy
trouble (xviii) Food.
Venus (i) Wife, (ii) Vehicle, (iii) Sex (iv) Beauty (v)
Beautiful clothes (vi) Perfume (vii) Tailor (viii) Readymade
garments shop (ix) Cow, Buffalo (x) Beautician (xi)
Relationship with woman other than wife (xii) Emotion (xiii)
Worldly happiness (xiv) Luxury or luxurious life style.
Mercury (i) Child (ii) Intellect (iii) Astrology (iv)
Practical knowledge (v) Secret treasure (vi) Divorce (vii) Love
marriage (viii) Illegitimate relationship (ix) Easily get
influenced (x) Hesitation (xi) Speech (xii) Education.
Saturn (i) Torture (ii) Sufferings (iii) Philosophy (iv)

The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Hath yoga (v) Theft (vi) Bad company (vii) Selfishness, (viii)
Mean mentality (ix) Poverty (x) Dejection (xi) Impediments
(xii) Delay (xiii) Reserved nature (xiv) Loneliness (xv)
Conspiracy (xvi) Spy (xvii) Secret love affairs (Venus &
Saturn) (xviii) Skin (xix) Debris (xx) Servant (xxi) Public.
Rahu & Ketu Indian astrology does not assign any
particular signification to Rahu and Ketu. Rahu, generally
denotes thief, jail and Jailor. Ketu shows liberation or final
emancipation. Rahu & Ketu have got special attention and
importance in horary astrology. Therefore, appropriate
discussion on Rahu & Ketu have been included for the
benefit of the readers at appropriate place.
Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto Westerners have done a
lot of research on these planets. Though late Krishnamurti
had advocated the distinct effect of these planets yet he
himself did not take into account their impact on human
beings. I too personally have not verified their impact on
human behaviour and nature. Therefore nothing is written
here about these planets.
Signs Krishnamurti Paddhati has not given much
importance to the signs. However this unique link of
astrology as a whole can neither be under estimated nor
overlooked in any way because it is primary determinant to
the strength of any planet. Secondly in various questions of
horary astrology viz. theft, marriage etc direction of
materialization of event is indicated by the signs.
Aries-: Sign lord Mars
Behaviour Hot
Direction East
Element Fiery
Gender Male
Body Parts Head & Face
Place inhabited Dry Place, Thorny land,

Significations of Planets & Signs
Exalted planet
Stature
Nature
Symbol
Taurus Sign lord
Behaviour
Direction
Element
Body parts
Gender
Exalted planet
Stature
Symbol
Gemini Sign lord
Behaviour
sandy, Stables, Hilly area.
Sun
Tall
Movable, Sterile,
Quadruped
Long neck, Round face
with little fat, Broad
temple, Pointed chin,
Scar or mole over face.
Venus
Hot
South
Earthy
Throat, Ear, and Neck
Female
Moon
Short
Fixed, Fruitful,
Quadruped
Tailor, Shop of fancy
items, Flowers shop,
Shed of buffaloes
Broad shoulders, Thick
neck, Short height/Deep
eyebrows, Beautiful
eyes, Broad fore head,
Dense hairs.
a
Mercury
Mediocre
Physical structure
Nature
Place inhabited
Physical structure

Cancer -
The Times Horary Astrology A Nova! Approach to Predictions

Exalted planet Venus
Nature Common, Fruitful, Biped
Place Pond of sweet water, Sea,
Fish pond, Harbour,
Mental asylum, Lonely
place, Jail, Hermitage
Body part Palm
Physical structure; Short hand, Short palm,
Knocked shoulders, Pale
complex, Short height
M
Svmbol

Houses
Introduction As per Hindu traditional astrology the
entire zodiac is divided into twelve equal parts. Each
equal part is called house or Bhava. Each Bhava or house
measures 30° in longitude. Thus 30 x 12 = 360°. Thus the
entire zodiac is 360° in longitude. Krishnamurti Paddhati
has used the word 'cusp' for a particular Bhava akin to the
concept advocated by western astrologers. Cusp is actually
the beginning point of a house. KP. advocates the birth chart
or horary chart to be cast on Placidus system. Placidus system
encompasses unequal house division in sharp contrast to
equal division as propounded by ancient Indian Astrology.
In Placidus system a cusp or house varies from other house
in longitudes i.e. a particular Bhava may be of thirty degrees
or less than thirty degrees or more than thirty degrees.
Each house denotes a number of significations. Here a
number of significations of each house is given forthe benefit
of the readers. These significations without an iota of doubt
can be used both in horary as well as in natal astrology.
First house or Ascendant
(i) External appearance, (ii) Character (iii) Health (iv)
Concept towards life (v) Peculiar nature (vi) Success and
failure in life (vii) Popularity & fame (viii) Particular place
or state or country (ix) Merits & demerits (x) Head & face.
Specific information
(i) The first house denotes the ascendant of the querent.

Houses
(ii) Profit or advantage to younger brother as being
eleventh to third house.
(iii) Death or sufferings to maternal uncle being eight to
sixth house.
(iv) Neighbor to elder brother being third to eleventh
house.
(v) Loss to native himself or herself being twelfth to second
house (bank position).
Specific effectof planets in Ascendant
(i) The placement of Rahu in ascendant in horary chart
always shows failure. But if Rahu in ascendant is aspected
by Jupiter then desire is fulfilled after some delay and
impediments.
(ii) Saturn, Ketu and Rahu makes one lazy and shows
abortion of wife if either of them is placed in ascendant.
(iii) The aspect of Jupiter over ascendant gives auspicious
results. The placement of Jupiter in ascendant is not good.
Second house Financial status (ii) Family (iii) Speech
(iv) Jewellary (v) Bond, Securities, Debentures, Shares (vi)
Eye sight (left) (vii) Memory (viii) Imagination (ix) Nails
tongue, throat teeth (x) National treasure (xi) Banking &
revenue (xii) Second marriage (xiii) Death.
Specific information (i) In horary astrology second
house denotes all money matters, loss & gain.
(ii) Speculation & matters related to business.
(ill) Loss or Incarceration to younger co-borns (being 12th
to third hbuse) ,
(iv) Purchase of house, land, vehicle by elder brother
(fourth to eleventh)
(v) Journey by maternal uncle (ninth !to sixth)
(vi) . Sufferings of father (sixth to ninth)

54 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Specific effect of planets in second house
(i) Rahu in second house gives very good service.
(ii) Rahu - Mars together gives throat problems.
(iii) Ketu or Saturn or both may make one to stammer.
(iv) Child will stammer if Rahu is the sublord of second
cusp and simultaneously ascendant happens to be either
Taurus or Scorpio.
Third house (i) Younger co-boms (ii) Nature (iii) Right
ear (iv) Valour, Courage (v) Mind and Tendency of mind
(vi) Neighbour (vii) Colleague (viii) Short journeys (ix)
Information (x) Letters (xi) Radio (xii) Means of information
(xiii) News (xiv) Publication (xv) False news or information.
Specific Information (i) Rahu in third house makes one
either younger or eldest in the family.
(ii) Ketu in third house gives dual personality.
(iii) The lord of ascendant in third house makes one man
of deeds.
(iv) Jupiter in third house takes one to dizzing heights.
Fourth house (i) Education (ii) Properties (iii) Land
(iv) Vehicles (v) Family & happiness (vi) Mother (vii) Secret
activities (viii) Ancestral properties (ix) Digging of well
(x) Properties either to take or give on rent.
Specific information (i) Mines (ii) Agriculture
(iii) Termination of any undertaking (iv) Public places
(v) Financial position of younger brother (vi) Loss to children (vii) Sufferings or hurdles to father (eighth to Ninth)
(viii) Sufferings disease of elder brother (sixth to eleventh)
Specific effect of planets in fourth house Venus in
fourth house gives a number of vehicles.
(ii) Mercury in fourth house gives break in education.
(iii) Rahu in fourth house makes one aimless wanderer.
(iv) Saturn in fourth house makes one bereft of family
happiness.

Houses 55
(v) Mars in own sign or in the sign of exaltation in fourth
house gives landed properties.
Fifth house (i) First child (ii) Vedic knowledge
(iii) Wisdom (iv) Pleasure (v) Society & social activities
(vi) Creativity (vii) Recreation (viii) Cinema (ix) Dance, opera
(x) Speculation (xi) Gambling (xii) Horse racing (xiii) Rape
(xiv) Kidnapping
Specific information (i) Friendship (ii) Pre and post
marital relations (iv) Ambassador (v) Minister (vi) Success
in politics (vii) Gains through wife (eleventh to seventh)
Specific effects of planets in fifth house
(i) Jupiter & Venus are considered to be very auspicious if
placed in fifth house.
(ii) The association of fifth house with 1 1th either through
lord of ascendant, benefic planets or through star lord or
sub lord of first cusp is very auspicious and portends success.
(iii) The native suffers on account of children if Jupiter is
placed in fifth house.
(iv) Fifth house gives magnetic personality if benefices
are placed there in.
Sixth house (i) Debt (ii) Disease (iii) Enemy or enmity
(iv) Service (v) Maternal uncle (vi) Irregular dirty habits (vii)
suffering (viii) Brutal actions (ix) Receive donations (x) Loans.
Specific information (i) Purchase of properties or
vehicles by younger co-boms (fourth to third) (ii) Journey
of mother (third to fourth) (iii) Financial status of first child
(second to fifth) (iv) Loss to partner (twelfth to seventh) (v)
Profession of father (tenth to ninth) (vi) Overdr^ftfacilities.
Specific effects of planets in sixth house (i) If the lord of
seventh house is placed in sixth house or the lord of sixth house
is placed in seventh house shows discord in married life.
(ii) The married life is also onrock if the sub lord of seventh
cusp is placed in sixth house.
(iii) The placement of Jupiter or Mercury in sixth house
gives service either in teaching line or in bank.

56 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Seventh house (i) Husband or wife (ii) love (iii) Married
life (iv) Partner (v) Agreement (vi) Transaction or deals in
any manner (vii) Fine (viii) Danger to longevity (ix) Thief,
Description of thief (x) Pick pocket.
Specific information-: (i) Question related with thief and
theft (ii) foreign relations (iii) War (iv) International trade
(v) General opinion of masses about national policies (vi)
Second son or daughter of the querent (vii) Properties of
mother (fourth to fourth) (viii) Adopted child.
Specific effects of planets-: (i) The sign falling in seventh
house or planet placed in seventh house gives information
about thief & stolen article.
(ii) Jupiter in seventh house causes delay in marriage
(iii) If the sub lord of seventh cusp happens to be mercury
and placed in any of the dual signs portend divorce and
more than one marriage.
Eighth house -: (i) Life (ii) Headache (iii) Insult (iv) Sorrow
(v) Disputed activities (vi) Death (vii) Hurdles (ix) Impurity
(x) Secret knowledge (xi) Dowry (xii) Bonus (xiii) Life
insurance (xiv) Will
Specific information -: (i) Banking position of wife
(second to seventh) (ii) Bribe (iii) Occultism (iv) Suicide (v)
Accidents (vi) Famine (vii) Natural calamities (viii) Export -
import (ix) Foreign debt (x) Rate of interest (xi) Deficient
budget (xii) Investment by father (twelfth to ninth) (xiii)
Mother's gain through speculation gambling share bond
(fifth to fourth) (xiv) Good service (eleventh to tenth) (xv)
Final liberation to father (Twelfth to ninth) (xvi) Drought.
Specific effect of planets in eighth house -: (i) Sat - Rahu
together in eighth house gives frequent accidents.
(ii) Jupiter or mercury in eighth house tends to turn the
mind to occult knowledge.
(iii) Unafflicted benefices or two benefices in eighth house
gives very good service.

Houses
Ninth house (i) Fate (ii) Father (iii) Long journeys (iv)
Warship (v) Religion (vi) Grand son (vii) Rituals (viii)
Meditation (ix) Temple, Mosque, Church (x) Religious journeys.
Specific information (i) Higher education, higher
knowledge, higher thoughts (ii) Research (iii) Ph.D. (iv)
Dreams (v) Strangers (vi) Religious literatures viz. astrology,
Vedas, Upanishad etc (vii) Sea voyages (viii) Judge (ix)
Religious master (x) Commerce (xi) Short journey of wife
(third to seventh) (xii) Short journey to partner (third to
seventh) (xiii) Wife of younger brother (seventh to third)
third son or child.
Specific effect of planets in ninth house
(i) Grand success is assured if the sub lord of ninth cusp
is placed in eleventh house.
(ii) Saturn in ninth house tends towards renunciation
(iii) Native visits foreign countries if lord of ascendant is
placed in ninth house.
Tenth house (i) Profession (ii) Deeds (iii) Success (iv)
Status (v) Conduct (vi) Control (vii) Merits (viii) Honour
(ix) Promotion.
Specific information (i) Final rites of father (ii) Death
of father (second to ninth) (iii) Employer (iv) Senior officer
(v) Government (vi) Command (vii) Agriculture, Doctor,
Medicine (viii) Authority (ix) Pilgrimages (x) Judge (xi)
Decision (xii) Party president (xiii) Prime minister (xiv)
President (xv) Political situation (xvi) Financial position of
father (second to ninth) (xvii) Sufferings to younger brother
(Eighth to third) (xviii) Sufferings to children (sixth to fifth)
(xix) Negation of desire (twelfth to eleventh )
Specific effect of planets in tenth house (i) The sun in
tenth house gives government patronage to the native.
(ii) Rahu in tenth house strains relationship with father
but provide grand success to the native.

58 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
(iii) Saturn in tenth house takes native to dizzing heights
but also bring ultimate fall down.
Eleventh house (i) Profit (ii) Multiplicity (iii) Income
(iv) Desire and fulfillments of desires (v) Sycophant (vi) Fans
(vii) Advisor (viii) Close acquaints (ix) Elder brother
Specific information (i) Relation with lover (ii) Social &
financial status (iii) Children (fifth to seventh and seventh to
fifth) (iv) Financial status of employer (second to tenth) (v)
Left ear (vi) Loss of interest on capital (vii) Sufferingto mother
(eighth to fourth) (viii) Fate of younger co-boms (ninth to
third) (ix) Daughter in law (seventh to fifth) (x) Minister.
Specific effect of planets in eleventh house
(i) Eleventh house is considered to be very important in
horary astrology. The fulfillment of desires of the querent is
always>judged from this house.
(ii) Rahu in eleventh house makes one either elder or
younger in the family.
(iii) Political success is judged if eleventh house is having
association with fifth house.
(iv) All the planets are auspicious if posited there in
however Saturn delays but not denies.
Twelfth house (i) Expenditure (ii) Loss (iii) Change of
place (iv) Transfer (v) Termination (vi) Hospital (vii) Jail (viii)
Jailor (ix) Liberation (x) Sorrow (xi) Left eye (xii) Bed comforts.
Specific information (i) Purchase (ii) Investment (iii)
Donation (iv) Doubt (v) Sacrifice (vi) Restrictions or
limitations (vii) Secret mental activities (viii) Conspiracy (ix)
Fraud, Peculation (x) Murder (xi) Suicide (xii) Chronic
disease (xiii) Foreign visit (xiv) Sufferings (xv) Lunatic
asylum (xvi) Secret enemy of nation (xviii) Spy.
Specific effectof planets in twelfth house (i) The native is
likely to visit foreign countries if Rahu is placed in twelfth house.
(ii) Moon in twelfth house gives very good service.
(iii) In horary question pertaining to legal matters, if Rahu is
placed in twelfth house, indicates either termination or sentence.

Sub lord
The zodiac is divided into 27 constellations or stars. Each
constellation is 13° - 20' or 800 minutes in longitude.
Each constellation is divided into 4 quarters or pads. Each
sign or Rasi consists of 2V4 constellations i.e. 9 pads .
Each sign or Rasi = 30° or 30x60 = 1800 min.
Each quarter of constellations= 3°- 20 or (3 x 60) + 20
= 200 minutes
Each sign consists of 9 quarter of constellation i.e.
Each constellation has four quarters. Therefore 27
constellations will have 27 x 4 = 108 quarters.
These 108 quarters have further been divided into 249
parts. Each sub divided Part is called sub lord.
For example Aries sign consists of 4 quarter of Ashwini
star, 4 quarters of Bhami star and one quarter of Krittika star.
Ashwani star is ruled by Ketu and have been allotted 7
years out of 120 years of Vimshottari dasha pattern. Ashwani
star is 13° - 20 or 800 min. in longitude. Now 800 min of
ashwini star are further divided in respect to 7 years of Ketu.
The result obtained is called sub or sub lord of Ketu.
How to work out sub lord

60 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Ashwani is the first constellation of Aries sign ruled by
Ketu. Therefore the first sub will be of Ketu followed by
Venus, Sun etc, It could be understood as, in Jupiter
Mahadasha and Ketu antardasa the first pratyantara dasa
will be of Ketu , second belongs to Venus and so on. Sub lord
can also be assumed to be pratyantara lord.
Example 1- Aries sign consists of four quarters ofashwini
star
In sub lord calculations the first quarter of ashwini which
extends fromO0 - O' to 3° - 20' has been divided. Now first
quarter that is ruled by Ketu as per traditional astrology is
now divided into 3 parts that are successively ruled by Ketu,
Venus and Sun.
0"=Venus
When any planet or cusp falls in between these longitude
in Aries sign will have sub lord as per extension it has got as
per above calculation.

Sub Lord
Example - 2
Aries sign - Bharni star (13° - 20' to 26° - 40')
After adding the value of other sub lords the extension of
other sub lords is determined. It means if any planet moves
or cusp falls between 16°- 13'- 20" to 17° - 20' - 0" in Aries
sign will have moon as its sub lord.
Comments The concept of sub-lord is the out come of
research carried over decades by late Krishnamurti. It is
positive out come and has universal applications. The
principles enumerated in traditional astrology have their
own utility without an iota of doubt. But such principles
cannot be applied to know the event of day-to-day activities
and miserably fail to answer the questions like light gone
when it will come back? Son gone to school when he will
return? When and which time result of examination will be
declared? There are many more questions pertaining to day
to day life can be answered positively with the help of sub
lord theory. It is an innovative discovery of astrology which
has given scientific approach to astrology and this is no
doubt a discovery equals to miracle.

Ruling Planets & Signif icators
Ruling Planets The discovery of ruling planets is
another milestone of astrology. To pinpoint the timing
of events with great accuracy is another great service of
astrology by Late Krishnamurti. Ruling planets means the
planets which rule the moment at the time of judgement of
any question. Ruling planets are worked out from ascendant
and the position of Moon at the time of judgement.
Ascendant is the bassic foundation of planetary influence
and Moon is the significator of mind. Mind receives
influence of planets more quickly and more over one has td
interact with worldly matters with the application of mind.
Secondly the position of Moon either in horary chart or natal
chart is considered to be ascendant and called Moon Lagna.
Desires, will etc are the functions of mind. Therefor, planets
influencing mind and acendant are taken ruling planets to
co-relate querry asked and its ultimate future.
In KP. there are major five ruling planets
(i) Ascendant Lord
(ii) Ascendant star lord or constellation Lord.
(iii) Moon Sign Lord
(iv) Moon Constellation lord or star lord.
(v) Lord of Day.
Lord of day means judgment day. Each day is ruled by a
planet. Monday is ruled by moon, Tuesday is ruled by mars
and so on. For the benefit of the readers a table showing
day and its ruler is given below. '

Ruling Planets & Significators ' 63
Apart above said five ruling planets Rahu Ketu too are
considered ruling planets with the following conditions:
(i) If Rahu & Ketu are either associated or conjoined
with one or more of the ruling planets.
(ii) If Rahu or Ketu have occupied the sign the ruler of
which in one of the ruling planets.
(iii) If day lord appears once among the ruling planets
then Rahu & Ketu though conjoined with day lord or occupy
the sign of day lord are not reckoned as ruling planets.
The followers of K P in later stage also considered sub
lords of ascendant & the moon as ruling planets. We have
not considered sub lord of either ascendant or the moon as
ruling planets. Sometimes we have considered Hora lord as
ruling planet replacing day lord. For the benefit of the
readers Hora table is given

The Hora lord rules the moment at the time of judgment of
query. For example a question is asked on Wednesday at 4
PM. On Wednesday the Hora between 4 to 5 PM. is ruled by
Jupiter. So Jupiter may be taken as Hora lord in place of day
lord Mercury among the ruling planets. The actual Hora is
determined with the rising of the sun and extends for one
hour as the word Hora itself signifies. The first Hora is always
of the day lord followed by planets in increasing velocities.
For example the first Hora of Monday is ruled by moon
followed by Saturn Jupiter etc. As the cycle of seven planets
ends again new cycle start with first Hora lord i.e. the Hora
lord that ruled the moment at the time of rising of the sun. In

Ruling Planets & Significators 65
the above table a standard time i.e. 6 to 7 A.M. has been taken
as the rising time of the sun to any locality of India.
COMMENTS ON RULING PLANETS: -
Ruling planets are very important to decide the future of
any event or also speak well whether the desire of the
querent will be fulfiUedor not. If desire is to be materialized
then timing of the event?
Following tips regarding ruling planets would be of
immense use to the astrologers: -
1. Ruling planets are always linked with the success or
failure of the query.
2. If ruling planets are associated with the houses
concerned with query and simultaneously the instant
antardasa is related with ruling planets the desire of the
querent is fulfilled.
3. If ruling planets are concerned with the houses related
with query but the instant. Antardasa if not linked with
ruling planets shows delay or failures of the query.
4. If Rahu or Ketu or both becomes ruling planets, then
Rahu & Ketu are considered seriously because Rahu & Ketu
are always stronger than the planets.
5. Ruling planets are the only key to select beneficial
Significators that contribute to materializations of the desire.
6. The delay is portend if any of the ruling planets are in
retrogression.
7. The ruling planets in order of their strength to bestow
results are as follows
i) Ascendant Lord
ii) Ascendant star lord
iii) Moon Star Lord
iv) Moon sign lord

66 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
v) Day lord or Hora lord
Specific Comments over selection of Ruling planets: -
There is some sort of confusion over the selection of ruling
planets. Few section of astrologers take ascendant lord and
star lord of rising sign at the time of Judgment of query even
if the question is solved with the help of horary number
between 1 & to 249. Here we would like to clarify and
emphasis that this way of selection of ruling planets is
completely fallacious and may lead to confusing predictions.
The sign lord and star lord of ascendant of rising sign are
taken only when the query is solved without horary number
and simply the judgement time is taken. If one is proceeding
with the help of horary number then one should take sign
lord and star lord of the horary number. After solving more
than one thousand horary questions, it has been found that
sign lord & star lord of ascendant of horary number
without exceptions always help to reach right conclusion.
So one should not fall victim to illogical method of selecting
ruling planets . The ruling planet taken in Part 2 of this book
comprises sign lord & star lord of ascendant or 1st cusp of
horary number. Readers must not get confused.
SIGNIFICATORS
The term Significators implies those planets that
contribute towards fructification of the results of a particular
house or houses.
According to K.P. Significators are determined as follows:
i) The planet or planets posited in a house . Such planet or
planets are called occupants.
ii) The planets posited in the constellation of the occupant.
iii) The planets posited in the constellation of the lord of
the house.
iv) The lord of the house.
v) The planets which are conjoined with above said

Ruling Planels & Significators
Significators.
vi) The planets those are aspected by Significators.
vii) If Rahu or Ketu or both are conjoined with above
Significators.
The above Significators have been listed below as per their
strength to offer the results: -
i) The most powerful Significators are Rahu and Ketu if
they are conjoined with other Significators.
ii) Next in strength the planet that is posited in the
constellation of the occupant.
iii) Next in strength is occupant.
iv) The planet posited in the star or constellation of the
lord of the house.
v) The least effective is the lord of the house.
vi) The planets other than Rahu & Ketu that are
conjoined with significators.
vii) The planets those are aspected by significators.
The above list shows strength in decreasing order i.e. (i)
is more powerful and (vii) is least powerful.

Cusp (Bhava) Determination
There are two methods for the determination of cusp.
i) The first method comprises taking ascendant at the time
of judgement.
ii) The second method takes ascendant of the number from
the range of 1 to 249 as mentioned by the querent.
FIRST METHOD: (Taking rising sign at the time of
Judgement)
EXAMPLE: A question is asked on 17-01-03 at 10 A.M.
Place of Judgement is Agra.
SOLUTION: If the question is solved on 17-01-03 at 10 A.M.
then ascendant is worked out. If the question is not
immediately solved then later time and date be taken to work
out the ascendant. In order to answer any horary question
the best method is K.P. However due to shortage of time such
questions may be solved as per traditional method. If
question is attended as per traditional method it is advisable
that sub lord of planets must be given serious consideration.
How to workout the cusp is same as mentioned in second
method with little difference. In this method the degree and
minutes of rising sign is taken where as in the second method
the lagan is taken of the number as mentioned by the querent.
SECOND METHOD:
Example: A querent gave No 137 in between 1 to 249. The
question was judged on 17-01-03 at 10.00 A.M.

Cusp (Bhava) Delerminalion 69
HOWTO WORKOUT CUSP: -
No. 137 means Libra Sign 18°-6’-40” (See horary no table)
In order to solve any horary question with the help of
numbers, the commencing number is taken. As horary No.
commencing parti.e. 6S 18o-6’-40" will be taken. The number
137 shows Libra Lagna 18°-6'-40" of Niryana.
Therefore the first Cusp (Bhava) is 6S 18°-6-40".
The other Cusps are worked out as follows.
1. The longitudes of first cusp are converted into Sayana
longitude by adding Ayanamsa of the year 2003. The reason
is that the best book available in the market to workout cusps
is Raphael's table of houses for Northern latitudes. The
position given in this book is Sayana position.
2. The Ayanamsa of the year (KP.) 23°-47'-40"
3 . Add this Ayanamsa to longitudes of first cusp (Bhava).
Or
Or
Or
7S 11° - 54' (seconds can be omitted.)
It means. Now the Sayana position of 1st cusp (Bhava) is
4. The latitude of AGRA is 27° - 11H. Open the page of
Raphael book where latitude 27° - 11' is given.
5. At the latitude of 27° - 11' the page show Scorpio

70 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
ll°-48'. But we require ascendant Scorpio ll°-54\ The
difference is 6 minutes. In order to get the value of 6 minutes.
The following calculations are made:
i) There are two values given on the page where
longitude 27°-H' is given ll°-48' and 12°-39'.
Difference: 12°-39'
i.e. what the value is given for second, third and other
cusps add 7' to these values.
6. The value of second cusp in Raphael table is 8$ 11° - O'.
Add T to this value. Thus the second cusp will be 8S ll°-7\
11. Now the cusps in Sayana position are as follows
Second Cusp = 8S ll°-7’
Third Cusp = 9S 12°-7'
Twelfth Cusp = 6S 17°=7’
Eleventh Cusp = 5S 17°-7'
Tenth Cusp = 4S 15°-7’
12. Now deduct Ayanamsa to get Niryana position
Sayana Position Niryana Position

Cusp (Bhava) Delerminalion
13. Now add 180° to each cusp to get other cusps i.e.
Fourth, fifth etc.
(Seventh Cusp)
(Eighth Cusp)
(Ninth Cusp)
(Sixth Cusp)
(Fifth Cusp)
(Fourth Cusp)
Comments -
l.ln order to solve horary question with the help of
number in the range of 1 to 249, the commencing position is
taken as evident in the foregoing example in which the
commencing position of Number 137 was taken.
2. The longitudes of cusp shows sign lord, star lord and
sub lord of the particular cusp. For example the position of
third cusp as shown above is 8S 18°-19,-20‘'. Look this
longitude in horary table in Sagittarius sign. This number
falls between 18°-6'-40" to 20 - 6'-40" in Sagittarius which
means Jupiter sign lord, Venus star lord and Rahu sub Lord
of the third cusp.
3. Time is an important factor in horary astrology.
According to K.P. the longitudes of the number mentioned
by querent does not change with the change of time. The
longitude of the number remains the same though the

72 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
planetary position changes with the change of time of
judgement. Suppose a question of Number 137 was to be
judged on 17-03-06 but due to some reason this question
could not be attended on 17-03-06. Now this question is
judged on 18-03-06. In this situation the longitude of cusps
will be same but the planetary position of 18-03-06 at the
time of judgement will be taken. The ruling planets will
also change with this new time.
4. Cusp determination takes much time. Therefore it is
advisable to esteemed readers that they must prepare Cuspal
table for all the numbers for the place where astrologer
permanently resides. Ayanamsa increases 50" every year.
This value is negligible as for as change of longitudes of
cusp year after year is concerned.
5. The astrologers can also purchase Cuspal table book
that is in Niryana position and can save valuable time of
astrologers. Nishkaam Peeth Prakashan R-12 A, Hauz Khas
New Delhi has brought out table of houses (Nirayana
Position) for the latitude of Delhi.
6. It is also to be kept in mind that the place is also
important in working out cusps. If question is judged at
Agra as shown in example then latitude 27°-ll’ will be
judged If the same question is judged at Delhi then Raphael's
book will be consulted for latitude of Delhi i.e. 28°-39’. In
that case Cuspal position of various cusps may change and
sub lord will also change though sign lord & star lord will
be same.

SOME IMPORTANT
SUBJECTS OF HORARY
ASTROLOGY
I . Retrograde planets & their impacts: - There are various
theories prevalent in astrological world regarding retrograde
planet and their ultimate impacts. According to one school of
thoughts retrograde planets give the result of previous house.
Another school of thoughts say that retrograde planets are
more powerful to give the result because during retrogression
the planet comes near to the orbit of the earth therefore its
impact is greater at the time of retrogression. Whatever
arguments may be but it is beyond doubt that retrograde
planets have their distinct impacts. The study of retrograde
planets is much more important in horary astrology than natal
astrology. Retrograde planet has direct relation with the query.
Retrograde planets have following effects: -
1 . Retrograde planet always shows negation in horary
astrology.
2. Retrograde planet shows failure of the question asked.
3 . If a retrograde planet is posited in the star of a retrograde
planet the result is failure of the query.
4. The result will be positive with some delay if retrograde
planet is posited in the constellation of planet in direct
motion. The positive result will be obtained when the planet

74 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
in retrograde motion will attain direct motion and reaches
the position from where retrogression was started.
5. The result after initial delay will be positive if a planet
in direct motion is placed in the constellation of planet in
direct motion but in the sub of retrograde planet.
6. The result will be absolute negative if sign lord, star
lord and sub lord are in retrogression.
7. The result will tend to be favorable after some delay
and impediments, if retrograde planet in posited in the
constellation of the planet in direct motion but in the sub of
retrograde planet.
8. The result will be delay or failure of the query if any
retrograde planet or planets find place among ruling planets.
Even day lord or Hora lord the weakest ruling planet among
ruling planets is found to be retrograde, shows at least delay
in the fulfillments of desire of the querent.
9. Apart from horary astrology it has been found in natal
astrology that retrograde planet weakens the results of the
house where they are posited. More than one planets in
retrogression are found to be present in natal chart portend
a struggling life to the native. The lord or star lord or sub
lord of seventh cusp is found to be in retrogression in natal
Horoscope indicates delay in marriage.
2. Rahu & Ketu in the mirror of horary astrology;
As the nature and behaviour of retrograde planet is always
a riddle & complex matter to understand. Similarly the
nature and behaviour of Rahu and Ketu have always been a
mystery to astrologers. A section of astrologers consider
these two shadow planets to offer results like other planets
and like other planets their strength; exaltation, debilitation,
aspect etc must be taken into account while delineating
results. Another section of astrologers treats Rahu & Ketu
as mere shadow planets and does not take into account their
aspect, strength based on debilitation or exaltation etc. Our

Some Important Subjects of Horary Astrology 75
object is not to fall in any controversy regarding various
views of astrologers on the nature of Rahu & Ketu. But we
want to bring to the knowledge of readers the modus
operandi of Rahu & Ketu which has been found to be correct
after a long research carried over more than a decade.
According to Hindu mythological stories a ferocious battle
ensuedbetween god and demons during churning of ocean.
Both the parties agreed over the pact that whatever begotten
through churning of ocean would be equally distributed
between both the parties i.e. god and demons. As a result of
churning of ocean a pot of nectar was obtained. Since Gods
were of opinion that demons would create large scale
destruction if they got nectar. Therefore, Gods planned to
trick them. Lord Vishnu in disguise of a beautiful woman
appeared and suggested that Gods and demons sat
separately in a queue so that everybody could get a drop of
nectar. Rahu the demon doubted the plan and sat in the
row among the Gods in disguise of Gods. As soon as Rahu
got the nectar and drank it he was detected by the Sun &
Moon. The Sun informed the lord Vishnu who in turn
immediately beheaded Rahu but till the time nectar reached
to the throat of Rahu so he was half immortal and could not
be killed. Neither the parts of the body could unite together.
The head part was called Rahu while the part below head
was called Ketu.
Analysis of the Story: Mythological stories if properly
understood and analyzed, reveals hidden facts regarding
behaviour and nature of planet. The above story reveals
following facts: -
1 . Rahu was the only demon that could detect the plan of
gods therefore an intelligent planet.
2. Rahu has nectar in his throat therefore, also gives
auspicious results.
3. Rahu was detected by the Sun & Moon therefore an
enemy to the Sun & Moon.

76 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
4. Jf Rahu is conjoined or associated with the Sun and the
Moon the native suffers on account of his father and mother.
He or she is obstinate, egoist, a perfectionist liar and dramatic
in behaviour.
5. Ketuis abortive and confusing planet because nectar could
not reach to the stomach of Rahu . Ketu represents this part.
Modus operandi of Rahu & Ketu:
1 . Rahu and Ketu give the results of those planets with
which they are conjoined.
2. The result of the sign they have occupied.
3. The result of the lord of the constellation in which they
are posited.
4. The result of the planets by which they are aspected.
Importance of Rahu & Ketu in horary astrology: -
1. If Rahu is placed in ascendant the ascendant is
completely spoiled. The desire of the querent is not fulfilled.
2. The results are intensified and offered by Rahu & Ketu
if they happen to be either ruling planets or occupy the sign
of ruling planets.
3. If Rahu along with the Sun or Moon is placed in
ascendant and the Sun or the Moon being ascendant lord
even then ascendant is considered to be spoiled.
4. Rahu or Ketu in ascendant and aspected by Jupiter
portends fulfillmentsof desire after some delay and problems.
3. What will be the result of query: -
After a long research if has been foundby us that following
tips are quite useful for the readers in order to judge the
result of the query.
The result will be positive:
i) If the sub lord of first cusp in direct motion in posited
in eleventh house the desire of the native in fulfilled. There

Some Important Subjects ofHorary Astrology 77
will be some delay or impediments if sub lord of first cusp
is placed in eleventh house in the sign of debilitation.
ii) If lord of ascendant is placed in eleventh house the
desire of the querent is fulfilled. If lord of ascendant is
debilitated but placed in eleventh house even then desire is
fulfilled. If lord of ascendant is retrograde planet but posited
in eleventh house, the desire is fulfilled after delay dejection
and problems.
iii) If sub lord of first Cusp or lord of ascendant is placed
in fifth house then desire is fulfilled. Saturn being sub lord
of first cusp or lord of ascendant in fifth house fulfills desire
after delay and mental torture.
iv) Fulfillment of desire is promised if the sub lord of
concerned house is having connection with either fifthhouse
or eleventh house. Suppose in Leo ascendant if mars the
ruler of fourth house or cusp or sub lord of fourth cusp is
having connection with fifth or eleventh house then query
related with purchase of a property in fulfilled.
v) If Jupiter aspects ascendant or the cusp concerned with
the query then desire is fulfilled.
vi) If the sub lord of first cusp becomes one of the ruling
planets
The result will be negative:
i) If ascendant lord of the horary chart is in debilitation
and not placed in eleventh house.
ii) If lord of the ascendant of the horary chart is retrograde .
iii) If the sub lord of first cusp is retrograde and also not
placed either in fifth or eleventh house.
iv) If lord of the ascendant or sub lord of first cu sp is placed
either in eighth house or twelfth house.
v) If the sub lord of the concerned cusp or lord of the
concerned house is retrograde or placed in eighth house.
vi) If Rahu or Ketu is placed in ascendant.

78 The Times Horary Astrology A Nova! Approach to Predictions
vii) If the sub lord of eleventh cusp or lord of the eleventh
cusp in either retrograde or placed in the sign of debilitation.
viii) If Saturn is placed in the ascendant or aspects
ascendant.
ix) If ascendant lord or more than one planets among
the ruling planets are retrograde.
x) If ascendant is not aspcted by Jupiter or other benefic
planets like Venus, Mercury and Moon.
4. Importance of Omens in Horary astrology:
Horary astrology is the best method to know the will of
god. Each and every particle of this universe vibrates due
to the cosmic will. This vast universe is the outcome of divine
dance of matter and spirit therefore; nature itself wants to
convey its message to mortals (Jeeva) through various
omens . Some people listens to nature while other take them
as ordinary events and ignores the voice of nature.
Omens have great utility in prediction in horary astrology
andmany queries can be answered simply on the basis of keen
observations of omens presented by nature at the time of query.
I share my few experiences regarding utility of omens.
One day a friend of mine came to my residence to know
the time and date of his promotion. He mentioned one
number that I did not recall because this incident was five
years old. But I remember the number mentioned by him
showed Libra ascendant and the lord of sixth house (service)
Jupiter was exalted in tenth house. As soon as I could make
prediction the light of my residence went olf. I thought a
while and said that he had to wait for promotion for some
time. While we were discussing the promotion episode the
light came. I told him that the promotion list that was to be
issued within three days would not find his name. The next
list would give him promotion. Exactly the same happened
what 1 told him. Here the omen was light that helped me to
reach right conclusion about the query. This prediction was

Some Important Subjects of Horary Astrology 79
made in the presence of other officers, who took the
prediction as miracle.
One more incident will reveal the utility of omens. One
day few persons were going to attend some important job.
As soon as they came out of their office and sat into the car a
boy aged around seven years crying loudly came before the
car and also sat in front of the car. I noticed the event and
advised gentlemen to come back to office because the task
would not be accomplished for which they were going. They
did not heed the advice and gone and came back without
any gain but suffered some kind of humiliation there.
There are many more events that can depict the
importance of omens or voice of nature . Any astrologer who
is accustomed to listen to the voice of nature can make
prediction even while moving on road. Every moment such
omens are taking place around us. Sometimes we recognize
them and beautifully blend in the prognostications of future.
Horary astrologers must have keen observation about such
omens while attending horary query. Few cognizable omens
like entry of child into room, behaviour of child, direction
occupied by querent who enters the room at the time of
query, light gone or come, falling down of water, telephone
call and discussion made over telephone etc must also be
taken into account. Apart that omens can be presented into
any form, sound, shape etc by the nature and how these are
to be apprehended depends on the intelligence of the
astrologers. We intend to advise readers that many books
provide information regarding utility and description of a
particular omen but the own judgement of astrologer on any
omen is much more useful than any bookish knowledge.

Discussion on Cuspal Chart &
Traditional chart
Indian astrology has equally divided the zodiac into
twelve parts. Each part measures 30° in longitude hence
twelve parts count 360° of Zodiac. On the basis of this division sign or Rasi too has been considered to be of 30° in longitude . The chart prepared to read the results as per KP. is called
Cuspal chart and it is based on Placidus system of Arch division. How to workout cusp has been dealt with elaborately
in previous chapters. The reading of nativities on the basis of
Cuspal chart is western concept. Western astrologer more
goes by astronomical principles rather than perception. They
take into account degree to degree motion of the planets and
their particular relation they form with other planets and
cusps which is known as phenomenon of aspects. This concept of aspect is also different from Indians. As per Indian
astrology each part of the Zodiac is always 30° in longitude
neither more nor less. While in Placidus system of house
division each house varies in longitudes. One house may be
of 30° or more than 30° or less than 30°. But the total of zodiac is always 360°. Cusp means the beginning of the house.
Due to variation of longitudes in each house in Cuspal chart
a planet seems to be placed in different house when compared with that of chart prepared as per Indian systems. This
discrepancy creates confusion in the mind of astrologers and
often put them in dilemma pertaining to the different place-

Discussion ori Cuspal Chart and Traditional Chart 8 1
ment of planets in Cuspal chart and Indian chart. It has been
found by us that horary question must be solved through
Placidus system i.e. Cuspal chart.
Indian astrology recognize the importance of sign (Rasi)*
and on the basis of sign the strength of the planet is judged.
In KP. such importance has not been given to sign and
astrologers following K.P. does not mind the planet which is
placed in second house seems to place either in ascendant or
twelfth house in Cuspal chart. They are much more concerned
with the longitudes of cusps and planets. Now the question
is whether the importance of sign be recognized or not? Which
method should be adopted to answer horary query. It is our
humble suggestion that astrologer must always open his mind
to welcome new ideas and new concepts. The importance of
sign cannot be ignored and the relation between sign and
planets viz. a viz. cusp be studied properly. Sign (Rasi) shows
the area of influence of any planet andalso shows the strength
nature and behaviour of a planet in a particular area. Apart
that in many questions it is only through the help of sign, the
queries are solved. Few questions like theft, description of
thief, direction where one will move etc are answered on the
basis of sign falling in a particular Bhava. Now the question
is how to get rid of the discrepancies pertaining to placement
of planets in Cuspal chart and Indian traditional chart. We
are solving such major discrepancy, which is explained with
the help of examples: - ,
1. Suppose a querent gives number 27 for any question.
This question was solved on a particular date and time.
Horary Number 27 means Taurus ascendant at 7o-0’-0" . Now
at this particular date let us say Venus is in Taurus sign at 4°-
30’. Indian traditional method of casting horoscope shows
Venus in ascendant while Cuspal position shows Venus to be
in twelfthhouse because 1st cusp begins from 7°-0'-0" and the
longitude of Venus is 4°-30'. Therefore, Venus will shift back
to Twelfth house. Astrologers must not read the influence
of sign, planet and cusp separately but approach to

82 The Times Horaiy Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
integrated relationship among sign, planet and cusp. Now
this approach of integrated relationship be applied to
understand the effect as well as influence of Venus over
twelfth cusp and first cusp. Venus is at 4°-30' and is in direct
motion and is 2°-30' away from ascendant. It means Venus is
advancing towards ascendant. Therefore astrologer must
predict that Venus in twelfth house shows temporary
negations of query but the desire will be materialized in due
courses of time because Venus being fast moving planet is
ready to leave twelfth house and advancing toward ascendant.
Had this Venus been in retrograde motion then it would have
been retracing back from ascendant and would be staying in
twelfth house, which shows failure of query. Suppose querent
would have given number 36 instead of 27 . It means Taurus
ascendant at 20°-26'-40H. Venus is in Taurus sign at 4o-30' is
16° away from ascendant. It means Venus will give the effect
of twelfth cusp rather than ascendant. In order to get the
result of next Bhava the planet must not be away from cusp
more than 10°. If the planet is at less than 10° from the cusp
of next Bhava it is assumed to give, the result of next Bhava.
Late Krishnamurti had included two or three house to answer
any question that showed that every house was concerned
with another house and developed the integrated system of
prediction . This integrated approach proved to be more fruit
full rather than unitary system of prediction followed by
Indian astrologers.

PART - II
Case Studies

Health -1
Example No.1
Oats 0603/2002 Tima 19:05:00 Plaea SWvpurt Day Friday
Lai 25:26:00 Norm Long 77:39:00 East Zona 62:30:00 East TlmeCorr -0:19:24
KPAyanamaa 23:46:59 Fortuna : Arias 4:49:1 1 Seed : 48Aao. : 3:56:44 Vlr
Balanea of Daaa : Verna 5 Year* 0 Month* 29 Days
Planets Nkayana Bhava
Liana Nirayana Bhava Chaltt (Cuapal)
Example- 1-: A gentleman wanted to know about his
health. He gave number - 46
Horary No. 46,
DOJ. = 08-03-02, TOJ =19-05, POJ= Shivpuri (MP.)
This gentleman was suffering from headache for the last
three or four days and wanted to know the cause Of
headache. Such questions must be studied from ascendant

86 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
because health good or bad depends on the strength of the
ascendant and the relationship of ascendant with that of
other houses.
The following rules should be taken into account
(1) If the sub lord of ascendant is also the significator of
sixth house the native never keeps good health.
(2) If the sub lord of sixth house is also the significator of
ascendant.
(3) If the sub lord or lord of fifth cusp is placed in eighth
house the native is likely to be patient of migraine, brain
tumor, etc.
In the above question the sub lord of first cusp is not
having any connection with sixth cusp. The sub lord of fifth
cusp Jupiter is not placed in eighth house but having ruler
ship over eighth house. Therefore eighth having connection
with fifth as well as with ascendant. Therefore he is a patient
of headache, which erupts occasionally. But this is not a
dangerous case or neither showing any complex problem
because neither fifth lord nor sub lord of fifth cusp is posited
in eighth house. This kind of headache is the result of mental
exertion due to the fact that sub lord of first cusp moon is
also significator of third cusp (mental exertion) aspecting
ascendant. This mental exertion may also be due to some
secret activities of mind (connection of eighth to ascendant),
which cannot be expressed, and native is again and again
thinking over that.

Health- 2
Example No.2
Date 09109/2003 Tima 18:13:00 Place Morera Day Tuesday
Lai 26:24:00 North Long 76:04:00 East Zone 62:30:00 East Tima Corr >0:17:44
KPAyanamaa 23:48:14 Fortune: Virgo 26:29:53 Seed : 9Ase. : 10:50:55Cap
Balance of Daea : Rahu 16 Tfeara 8 Months 27 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna
Nirayana Bhsva Cham (Cuspal)
Example - 2 One man aged around fifty years posed a query
regarding his health problems. He mentioned number 9.
The question was judged on 09-09-03 at 4:13 PM. at
Morena (MP.)
This man is always suffering either due to fever, Diarrhea
or Blood pressure. He is also weak in constitution.
In order to judge the question related with health

88 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
ascendant is properly scrutinized along with six, twelfth and
eighth houses.
1 . The lord of first cusp i.e. mars and sub lord of first cusp
i.e. mercury both are retrograde. Rahu is placed in ascendant.
In this way ascendant is fairly weak. Though aspect of Jupiter
over ascendant will keep the native alive but native will
always be ailing with various ailments.
2. The placement of either Rahu or Saturn in ascendant
makes one to suffer from blood pressure. In this query Rahu
is placed in ascendant showing high blood pressure.
3. The sub lord of sixth cusp i.e. Jupiter denotes windy
element. Sub lord of eighth cusp mars denotes watery
element and twelfth cusp sub lord Rahu denotes fiery
element. Thus querent is suffering due to disequilibria's of
wind, water and fire elements.
4- Since ascendant is completely spoiled therefore there
is no possibility of recovery. It is important to not that Rahu
will not let him recover and Jupiter due to aspect over
ascendant will not allow him to die.

How will be the tenure in the office?
Example No.3
Dat* 25/08/2003 Tima 18:30:00 Place Agra Day Monday
Lai 27:08:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zone 82:30:00 East Tima Corr -0:18:00
KP Ayanamaa 23:48: 12. Fortune : Leo 1:44:51 Seed : 105 Aac. : 4:01:00 Aqu
Balance of Daea : Saturn 8 Yeara 6 Months 30 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
8ji*
Example - 3 One officerwho was transferred to another
place wanted to know how his tenure would be at this new
place?
Judgement Horary No - 105
When such type of questions are posed before the
astrologer then a particular house is not judged but the

90 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
strength of whole chart is to be judged. In this question the
officer wanted to know whether his tenure would be
peaceful or some dispute would arise. In that particular
question the strength of ascendant and instant Vimshottari
Mahadasha are to be judged.
The sub lord of firstcusp Rahu is placed in ninth house in
the star of the sun that is placed in. twelfth house. Since sun
is the lord of first cusp is placed in twelfth house is not
conducive because twelfth is the negation of 1st cusp. The
lord and star lord of eighth cusp mercury is placed in
ascendant that is again negative sign. It is also interesting to
note that mercury is lord of second cusp placed in ascendant.
Ascendant is twelfth to second cusp shows negation to
second cusp. Therefore it can be safely said that this officer
will not stay longer and will not have peaceful tenure.
At the time Of judgement the Mahadasha running was
that of Saturn and antardasa was of the sun. The Saturn was
placed in the star of Rahu and in the sub of Venus. Rahu
was placed in ninth house while sub lord Venus was placed
in twelfth house. The sub lord of the sun was Jupiter that
was placed in twelfth house. Thus this dasa and antardasa
might bring his shifting from present place because Decanate
and Antardasanath are strongly related with twelfth house.
Twelfth house not only shows mental tensions but also
indicates unexpected journeys.

q:ou rt Decision - 1
Example No.4
Date 23/08/2000 Time 15:37:00 Place Agra Day Wednesday
Lat 27:09,00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zone 82:30:00 Eaat Time Corr -0:18:00
KP Ayanamsa 23:45:42 Fortuna : Leo 29:45:22 Seed : 161 Aac. : 14:34:39 Sag
Balance of Daaa : Moon 6 Years 2 Months 27 Days
Planets Nlrayana Bhava
Lagna
Nlrayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example - 4 A person wanted to know the judgement
of the court, which was to be delivered on 28-08-2000
Horary No - 161
A case in the court was dragging in for a longer time and the
judgement was to be delivered on 28-08-2000. This person wanted
to know whether the decision would be in his favour or not.

92 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
I declared that decision would not be delivered on 28-082000 because of the following reasons
1 . Ascendant is not aspected by any planet. The sub lord
of first cusp is placed in the sub of Rahu, which is very slow
planet and alsoplaced in eighth house a house of hindrance.
2. It has been found by us in a number of cases if at the
time of query Saturn and moon are conjoined the matter is
inordinately delayed. In this query Saturn and moon are
conjoined showing delay.
3. The sub lord of eleventh cusp is Ketu which is confusing
and abortive planet. But Ketu is aspected by Jupiter therefore
if will not give result against the interest of querent but will
delay the matter and also maintain status quo of the case.
Comment -: The decision could not be delivered on 2808-2000 and due to aspect of Jupiter over Ketu later on the
case was sent back to district administration with the
comment to settle the case within two months.

Decision delivered by lower court would be stayed or
not?
Example No. 5
Dale 26/05/2001 Time 20:51:00 Place Agra Day Saturday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zone 82:30 00 East Time Corr -0:18:00
KP-Second.Ayanamea 23:46:55 Fortuna : Capricorn 1:1 1:01 Seed : 167 Asc. : 5:54:47 Sag
BalenCa of Daea : Jupiter 6 Years 5 Months 18 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspai)
Example -5 A gentle man from Delhi asked the question
over telephone if the judgement delivered by lower court
would be stayed or not.
' Horary No -157
A court of Delhi sentenced this gentleman for two years.

94 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
J already advised the gentleman before the Judgement that
he would be sentenced. The prediction came very true and
he was sentenced and three months time was given to file
an appeal against the order. This question now was asked
in that reference.
Analysis-: Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Mars (R)
Ascendant star lord - Saturn
Moon sign lord - Mercury
Moon star lord - Jupiter
Day Lord - Saturn
1 . Lord of ascendant mars is retrograde and placed in
ascendant showing agitating mind. The sub lord of 1st cusp
Jupiter is placed in 7th house aspects ascendant.
Though ascendant is weak due to placement of retrograde
mars yet not completely damaged due to aspect of Jupiter
over ascendant.
2. The sub lord of 1 1th cusp is Rahu, which is in the sub of
mercury the lord of 1 1th house placed in 7th house. Therefore
ascendant is aspected by two benefic planets shows that
decision given by the lower court would be cancelled.
3. It is also important to note here that in case of
imprisonment either Rahu or Saturn must be strong
significator of 12th house. In this query neither Rahu nor
Saturn is the significator of 12th house. Therefore further
sentence or imprisonment is out of question.
4. At the time of query Jupiter Mahadasha and Venus
antardasa is running up to 27 may 2002. Venus being in the
star of mercury is stronger than mercury will bring relief to
the querent. However the fine imposed on the querent by
the lower court will not be reckoned due to aspect of Saturn
over 12th house.

Court decision - 2
Example No.6
Dale 06/04/2006 Tima 2100 00 Place Agna Day Thursday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 Eaet Zone 82:30:00 East Time Carr -0:18:00
KP-Second Ayanamaa 23:50:09 Fortune : Virgo 23:1 6:27 Seed : 49Aec. : 24:40:29 Lib
Balance of Daea : Sattm 19 Years 8 Months 1 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Example - 6 An I.A.S. officer's case was running in the
court and decision is to be delivered Soon. She in anxious
state of mind asked what would likely be the decision of
court.
Horary No - 49
The court case was pertaining to her transfer to another

96 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
state as a result of division of the state. She does not want to
go to newly created state and wants to stay in original cadre.
Analysis
1. The ascendant is aspected by Jupiter. The ascendant
lord mercury too is aspected by Jupiter in ninth house
showing fulfillment of her desire.
2. The sub lord of first cusp Saturn is one of the ruling
planets again shows fulfillment of her desire.
3. However it is to be noted here that at the time of
judgement of query the Jupiter was retrograde showing
delay. Moon and Saturn were together again showing delay.
On the basis of above analysis if may be concluded that
there may be problems but she will stay in her original state.

Party will give ticket or not
Example No.7
Dart* 19/09/2003 Tim* 02:22:00 Place Moran* Day Friday -
Lai 28:24:00 North Long 78:04:00 East Zona 82:30:00 Eaot Tim# Corr -0:17:44
KP-8eeond Ayanamaa 23:48:51 Portuna; Placet 15:15:46 8**4 : 51 Aae. : 11:59:07 Can
Balance of Dasa : Mara 2 Ybare 2 Worths 2 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt(Cuspal)
Example 7: A young man desirous of contesting election
on the ticket of a national level party posed the query
whether he will get the ticket or not.
He mentioned No. 51 .
Horary No = 51

The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Analysis
l.ln order to ensure political success Vth cusp and Xlth
cuspmusthave relation with each other and simultaneously
must have connection with Jupiter and mars. Jupiter^and
Mars together show courage as well as authority.
2. This gentleman will get the ticket or not will be decided
by the strength of ascendant.
Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord = Mercury (R)
Ascendant star lord = Rahu
Moon sign lord = Mercury (R)
Moon star lord = Rahu
Day lord = Venus
Ticket will be given to him or not
1 . Ascendant is occupied by Saturn. Therefore ascendant
is quite weak. Ascendant lord mercury is retrograde andlord
of 1 1th house is also retrograde.
Therefore there is no possibility of getting him ticket.
2. The lord of Vth house Venus is debilitated.
3 . As has been described in previous chapter if one or more
than one ruling planets are retrograde then desire is not
fulfilled. Therefore, this young man will not be able to get
the ticket.
Comment: - He was denied ticket.

Reinstatement in service
Example No. 8
Date 29AK/1 999 Tima 06:43:00 Place Agra Day Saturday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 Eaat Zona 82:30:00 East Time Corr -0:18 00
KP-8*eond Ayanamaa 23:45.15 Fortune : Libra 2:08.44 Seed : IIAsc. : 1:49:26 Gem
Balance of Data : Jupiter 3 Years 10 Months 20 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt(Cuspal)
Example - 8 - : One officer who was suspended and wanted
o know when he would be reinstated in Job? He mentioned
lumber 1 1 .
Suspension is a temporary set back to continuous flow of
noney earned in the form of salary. In order to maintain its
ycle the second house is given importance because second

100 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
house denotes liquid assets and financial position with
depreciated or improved banking position. Since matter is
related with Job therefore sixth ho use (service) andeleventh
house (fulfillment of desire) apart from second house are
considered.
Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord = Mars (R)
Ascendant star lord = Venus
Moon sign lord = Mars (R)
Moon star lord = Jupiter
Day lord = Saturn
It is always important to see the strength of ascendant
irrespective of the nature of the query. Secondly for the quick
fulfillment of desire ascendant must have connection with
eleventh house.
Analysis (i) The ascendant lord mars is retrograde and
also posited in own star showing failure of the question.
(ii) Saturn is posited in ascendant.
(iii) Thus ascendant is fairly weak.
(iv) The sub lord of second cusp Jupiter is in the sign of
mars the lord of sixth house and in the star of Ketu, which is
placed in tenth house . Thus Jupiter becomes the significator
because Jupiter having connection with sixth house through
sign not through star or sub.
(v) Ascendant is not having connection with eleventh
house.
(vi) The positive feature is that sub lord of eleventh cusp
mercury is placed in second showing maintenance of flow
of money and increased bank position.
(vii) From above analysis it is evident that after delay and
mental torture the querent will be reinstated with following
conditions.

Reinstatement in Service
(i) The salary of the suspension period will not be paid
because the star lord of second cusp moon is debilitated.
(ii) The sub lord of sixth cusp is placed in twelfth house
shows transfer after reinstatement.
(iii) The suspension will be revoked during Jupiter
Mahadasha moon antardasa and Venus pratyantara which
runs from 22-09-99 to 22-12-99. Venus is one of the ruling
planets and also lord of second and is placed in third house.
Venus is in the star of Jupiter, which is placed in twelfth
house. Thus Venus is having connection with third, second
and twelfth houses respectively.
Note -:
The querent was reinstated on 10-11-99 and transferred
to Rewa (MP.)

The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Example N0.9
Data 22/04/2006 Tima 16:30:00 Plica Agra Day Satuday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zona 82:30:00 Eaat Tima Corr -0:18.00
KP-SecondAyanamea 23:51:02 Fortune: Aquarius 20:13:15 Seed : 25Aae. : 9:08:59 Vlr
Balance of Daaa : Mars 6 Years 10 Morthe 1 Days
Planata Nirayana Bhava
Pin -P Rail Dagraa R-L N-L Sub 3-8 Cuap Raal Dagraa R-L N-L Sub 3-8
Sun Ari 8:19:34 Mar Ket J up Kat 1 Tau. 3:00:00 Van Slt Sat Sat
Mon Cap 25:32:50 Sat Mar Rah Van 2 Tau 29:21:49 Van Mar Sat M'.r
Mar Gam 11:01:37 Mar Rah Sal Mar 3 Gam 22:55:09 Mar Jtp Sat Slti
Mar Pis 14:28:48 Jup Sat Rah Van 4 Can 17:48:24 Mon Mar Mar Rah
Jtp -R Lib 21:39:59 Van Jtp Jtp Rah 5 Lao 17:34.31 Sun Van Mar Jtp
Van Aqu 23:52:08 Sat Jup Sat Jtp 8 Vlr 24:04:54 Mar Mar Mar Mon
Sat Can 10:48:59 Mon Sat Sun Mar 7 Sco 3:00:00 Mar Jtp' Rah Sin
Rah Pis 10:13:55 Jup Sat Van Kat 8 Sco 29:21:49 Mar Mar Sat Mar
Ket Vir 10.13:56 Mar Mon Mon Rah 9 Sag 22:55:09 Jtp Van Sat Van
Lira Aqu 19:36:07 Sat Rah Mar Sat 10 Cap 17:48:24 Sat Mon Mar Mar
Nep Cap 25:43:13 Sat Mar Rah Van 11 Aqu 17:34:31 Sat Rah Sui Rah
Plu -R Sag 2.45:16 Jup Kat Van Mar 12 Pla 24.04.54 Jtp Mar Mar Mon
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt (Cuspal)
Example - 9 A lady asked the query when her financial
position will improve?
Horary No - 25
For improvement in financial position either the sub lord

Importanl of Financial Position ] 03
of second cusp or star lord in which sub lord of second cusp
is posited must have connection with eleventh cusp.
If the sub lord of second cusp is also the significator of
ascendant then it shows negation of the query.
Analysis
(i) The sub lord of second cusp Saturn is also the sub lord
if 1st cusp. Therefoifcit shows negation of the query.
(ii) Saturn is also the lord of eleventh cusp shows slowly
the financial position will improve.
(iii) The ascendant lord Venus is placed in eleventh house
in the sign of Saturn. Therefore the banking position will
improve but with very slow pace due to influence of Saturn.
Ruling Planets
Asd lord = Ven
Asd star lord = Sun
Moon sign lord = Sat
Moon star lord = Mars
Day lord = Saturn
At the time of judgement Mars Mahadashawas operating.
Mars is placed in second house in the star of Rahu in the
sub of Saturn. In this way mars has got connection with
second, sixth and eleventh. Thus Mars mahadasha is more
promising for loan, overdraft facilities etc. Through such
facilities her financial position may improve.

104 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
How long one will stay at a place
Example No.10
Data 26/08/2003 Tima 18:30:00 Placa Day Tuaaday
Lat 26:30:00 North Long 77.13.00 E«at Zona 82:30:00 Eaat Tima Corr -0:21:06
KP-Sacond Ayanamaa 23:48:48 Fortuna : Oa mini 29:46:46 8aad : 74 Aac. : 3:43:21 Aqu
Balanoa of Dasa : Marciry 7 Vaar* 6 Mortta 10 Daya
Planet* Nirayana Bhava
Example - 10-: An officer who was transferred to Morena
and he wanted to know how long he will stay in Morena.
He mentioned No - 74
Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Moon
Ascendant star lord - Saturn

How long one will stay at a place
Moon sign lord - Moon
Moon star lord - Mercury
Day lord - Mars (R)
The question is not related with transfer. Transfer or
shiftingfrom a particular place takes place when significator
of 3rd, 10th and 12th operates.
Analysis of the query
1- No - 74 as mentioned by querent denotes cancer
ascendant, which is a movable sign. Moon the planet of
journeys is placed in ascendant. Therefore this officer will
not stay for a longer time at his present place.
2- The sub lord of 3rd cusp is Ketu , which is placed in
IVth house in the star of Jupiter and in the sub of moon.
Both moon and Jupiter are placed in ascendant fourth house
denotes present place. The sub lord of 10th cusp is Jupiter,
which is placed in ascendant. Therefore both Ketu and
Mercury are not having connections with 12th house.
Therefore he is not likely to be transferred in near future.
3- At the time of, query Mercury Mahadasha and Mars
antardasa is running up to 15-12-03. Since Mars is retrograde
therefore he will not be transferred up to 15-124)3.

106 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Sex of the child of the fourth Son
Example No.11
Date 16/09/2003 Time 19:05:00 Place Day Tuesday
Lat 28:39:00 North Long 7713.00 East Zone 82:30:00 East Time Corr >0:21:08
KP-Second Ayanamea 23:48:51 Fortuna : Scorpio 12:03:36 Seed : 235 Aac. : 27:46:38 Sag
Balance of Desa : Sun 3 Vijers 0 Months 14 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chaltt (Cuspal)
Example 1 1 An old man wanted to know about the sex of
the to be born child of his fourth son he mentioned No - 235
Horary No. 235
The father of a son who is fourth in number asked this
question and the old man is a grand father of to be born
child. If question is related with first son or daughter then

Sex of child of the Fourth Son 1 07
Vth house is considered. For second, Third children. 7th and
9th houses are considered respectively. When the query is
related will fourth son so 11th house is considered as the
ascendant of IVth son. The query is related with the first
child of fourth son hence 3rd house is Vth (first child) to
1 1th house (fourth son)
Analysis 1 - The sub lord of 3rd cusp is Rahu and lord of
3rd house is Venus. Venus and Rahu both are female planets
i.e. first child will be a female child.
2- The lord of 11th house is Saturn, which is also a female
planet.
3- The sub lord of Vth cusp (7th to 11th denoting wife of
fourth son) is Rahu and the lord is moon. They both are
female planets. Therefore the bom child is likely to be female.

The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Success in competitive examination - 1
Example No.12
Oat* 17/12/2001 Tim* 16:30:00 Plac* Agra Day Monday
L*t 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zon* 82:30:00 East ThnaCorr -0:18.00
KP Ayanamaa 23:48:48 Fortuna : Lab 21 59:01 8a*d : 78 Ate. : 16:58:04 Tau
Balanc* of Data : Sun 3 Ykara 6 Mortfha 0 Days
Planats Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nlrayana Bhava Challt(Cuapal)
Example - 12 A student appeared in competitive
examination and exams were conducted on 17-10-2001, 312-01 and 9-12-01. Whether the student will get through in
this exam? The grand father of this boy asked this question.
Horary No - 78
D OJ = 17-12-Ol/TOJ = 4:30pm, P OJ = Agra
The boy is the son of the elder's son of querent. Therefore

Success in Competitive Examination -1
fifth cusp will denotes the ascendant of grand eldest son
and fifth to fifth is ninth cusp. Hence ninth cusp will denote
grandson.
1- In order to get through any examination whether it is
competitive examination or college examination the dasa
and antardasa of 4,9, and 1 1 must operate.
2- The fourth house from ninth (grand son) is twelfth. 9th
house from 9in is fifth and eleventh house from ninth is
seventh. So houses 12, 5and 9 will be judged for the success
of grandson.
Significators
(i) Twelfth house Mercury (lord of twelfth) Venus (in
the star of mercury) Rahu (sign occupied of mercury and
aspected by Venus) Thus the significator of twelfth cusp are
Mercury, Venus and Rahu.
(ii) Fifth house Ketu, Mercury, Rahu, Sun, Moon, Mars.
Note How to find out significator has been described in
chapter eight .
Seventh house Mars, Rahu, and Saturn
Thus the significator are Mercury, Ketu, Venus, Sun, Moon,
Mars, Rahu, and Saturn. All the planets are significator. The
best method to sort out beneficial Significators is to match
them with ruling planets at the moment of Judgement.
Ruling Planets
Asd lord - Moon
Asd star lord - Mercury
Moon sign lord - Saturn
Moon star lord - Sun
Day lord- Moon
Mahadasha operating Sun Mahadasha and Jupiter
antardasa runs up to 27-04-02. Since Jupiter is not ruling
planet therefore the boy will not get success in examination.

1 1 0 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
The boy will be selected in sun Mahadasha and Saturn
antardasa because Saturn is not only Significators but also
lord of seventh house i.e. eleventh to ninth house. Sun is
placed in fifth house, which is 9th to 9th house. The dasa of
Saturn in sun Mahadasha will operate from 27-04-02 to 705-03. In this dasa and antardasa too the pratyantara of
mercury will bring success to the boy.

Will I get through P.G. exam of M.B.B.S?
Example No. 13
Oats 09/04/2002 Time 19:20:00 Place Bhopal Day Tuesday
Lat 23:17:00 North Long 77:20:00 East Zone 82:30:00 East Time Corr -0:20:00
KP-Second Ayanamaa 23:47:39 Fortune : Aquarius 13:18:48 Seed : 242 Asc. : 5:55:17 Lib
Balance of Dasa : J letter 15 Years 5 Months 11 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt (Cuspal)
Example- 13-: Will I get through P.G. examination of
M.B.B.S
Horary No. 242
A girl who could not be selected in her first attempt for
post graduation degree after MBB.S. Second time she

1 1 2 The Times Horary Astrology A Novel Approach to Predictions
appeared in the competition asked the question.
Analysis (i) The dasa of fourth, Ninth and eleventh must
operate to ensure success in examination.
(ii) Significators
(a) Fourth house Mercury, Sun, Ketu, Mercury is strong
significator being in its own star.
(b) Ninth house Ketu, Mars, Rahu
(c) Eleventh house Saturn
Thus the Significators of above houses are: Mercury, Sun,
Ketu, Mars, Rahu and Saturn.
Ruling Planets
Asd lord - Jupiter
Asd star lord - Mercury
Moon sign lord - Saturn
Moon star lord - Jupiter
Day lord- Mars.
Mahadasha Jupiter Mahadasha - Jupiter antardasa and
mercury pratyantara operates from 9-04-02 to 21-09-02.
Jupiter being lagan lord and very strong ruling planet
because Jupiter repeated twice among ruling planets.
Mercury is the lord of fourth house and very strong
Significators of fourth and Ninth (star lord of ninth cusp)
also eleventh (in the sub of Saturn lord of eleventh). Thus
this dasa brought success to querent. Her result was declared
on 15-04-02. At the time mercury pratyantara was operating.

Success in P.G. examination of M.B.B.S.
Example No.14
Date 1505/2002 Tima 20:00:00 Place Bhopal Day Wednesday
Let 23:17:00 North Long 77:28:00 East Zona 82:30:00 East Time Corr -0:20:08
KP*Second Ayanamea 23:47:44 Fortune : Leo 7:32:57 Seed : 64Asc. : 15:59:59 Sco
Balance of Daaa : Rahu 16 Years 5 Months 29 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna
Nirayana Bhava ChalHt{Cuspal)
Example -14-: One young lady doctor asked the question
whether she would be selected in M.D. examination?
Horary NO - 64
1- The sub lord of 1st cusp mars is placed in eleventh house
shows incomplete fulfillment of desire because the lord and

1 14 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
star lord of 1st cusp i.e. moon & Jupiter both are placed in
twelfth house. However sub lord of 1st cusp is having
connection with eleventh house therefore her desire would
be fulfilled partially i.e. she may be selected for diploma
course rather than degree.
Mahadasha At the time of judgement Rahu Mahadasha
and mercury antardasa was running up to 12-06-02. Mercury
the lord of fourth house and one of the ruling planets is
retrograde. Therefore mercury will not bring success to her.
However mercury is in the star of moon, which is placed in
twelfth house that she may go out of India for completion
of her post graduation in medicine. This too will happen
when mercury attains direct motion.
Comments It is imperative to mention here that to judge
queries of various natures different houses are studied. But
in horary astrology major thrust is always given to ascendant
and 11th house. A particular question may be tackled in
various ways. It is not necessary every time to know the
result of a particular question Significators of concerned
houses may be worked out. Significators are worked out only
when query seems to be affirmativeby judging the strength
of ascendant and 1 1th house. If query seems to be negative
than one should not proceed further. Even at the time of
judgement of query. Ruling planets indicate affirmation or
negation of the query. The main object behind working out
Significators it to reach out timing of events if query seems
to be positive. In various examples given in the book
Significators have not been worked out due to above reasons.

Purchase of Land - 1
Example No.15
Data 24/01/2003 Tim* 66:10:00 Ptaea Agra Day Friday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 76:00:00 Eatt Zona 82:3000 East Tima Corr >0:18:00
KP-Sacond Ayanamaa 23:48:19 Fortuna : Lao 8:11:13 8aad : 161 Aao. : 27:12:16 Cap
•aianc# of Daaa : Mara 6 Yaam 10 Months 28 Days
Planets Nlrayana Bhava
Lagna Nlrayana Bhava Chalit(Cu*pal)
Example 15 A businessman wanted to purchase a land
and he asked if the land would be gainful to him or not?
Horary No - 161
1- For purchasing of land houses 4th, 2nd, 11th and 12th
are to be judged. The sub lord of fourth cusp is Rahu , which
is placed in 6th house showing dispute in this land. It is

1 16 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
important to note that whenever there is a connection
between fourth and sixth house dispute arises.
2- The lord of 1st cusp the Mars is placed in 12th house
and ascendant is aspected by Saturn this shows weakening
of ascendant. Saturn also aspect 4th house again showing
some kind of disputes.
3- Either the lord or sub lord of 4th cusp is not having any
connection with 11th house i.e. this property will not fetch
any gain to the buyer.
4- To whom we deal is shown by 7th house . The placement
of Saturn in 7th house clearly indicates the doubtful integrity
of the seller. On the basis of above analysis we advised the
querent not to purchase this land.
Comment Later on we came to know that this land was
already sold to two persons who had filed cases in the court
pertaining to this land.

Purchase of land -2
Example No. 16
Date 01A32/2001 Tim* 10:07:00 place Agra Day Thursday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zens 82:30:00 Ea*t Tim* Corr -0:18:00
KP-8*eond Ayanamaa 23:46:39 Fortune: Sagittarius 27:55:15 Setd : 127 Ase. : 18:22:44 Pla
Bal*nc* of Da*a : Venus 19 Year* 2 Monts 15 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cusps!)
Example -16 A woman wanted to purchase a land when
the land would be purchase?
Horary No - 127
DOJ= l-2-01,TOJ = 10:07 am,POJ = Agra
Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Venus
Ascendant star lord - Mars

1 1 8 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Moon sign lord - Mars.
Moon star lord - Venus
Day lord - Jupiter
The sub lord of 4th cusp Saturn aspects ascendant and
4th house. Mars the significator of land also aspects 11th
house. The star lord of 4th cusp the sun is also placed in 4th
house being the lord of 11th house i.e. purchasing of land is
sure.
Mahadasha At the time of query Venus Mahadasha and
Venus antardasa was running up to 19-8-2003. Mars
pratyantara in Venus but of Venus Mahadasha would run
from 23-05-01 to 2-08-01 during this time the land would be
purchased. Actually for purchasing of this land advance
money of 1 lakh was given to the seller on 31-05-01.

Will my love affair Materialize - 1
Example No.17
Data 27A2/2003 Tima 19:00:00 Placa Agra Day Thursday
L»t 27:09:00 NOfth Long 78.00.00 East Zona 82:30:00 East TtmaCorr -0:18:00
KP-Saeond Ayanamaa 23:48:23 Fortuna : Libra 14:20:06 Saad : 185 A»c. : 25:02:06 Lao
Balanca of Daaa : Sun. 3 Yhara 2 Montha 1 Day*
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Nap Cap 17:52:30 Sat Mon Mar Mar 11 Lib 7:53:56 Van Rah Rah Kat
Pkj Sco 25:59:17 Mar Mar Rah Mon 12 . Sco 3:09:34 Mar Jmp Rah Mon
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chaltt (Cuspai)
Exam - 17 A young man in love of a beautiful
womanwant to know if his love affair would materialize or
not?
Horary No - 165
Rule: - In order to judge such type of queries following
rules should be kept in mind.

120 • The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
(i) If the sub lord of 5th cusp or lord of 7th cusp is having
relation with 7th and 11th houses then love affair is
materialize otherwise not.
(ii) If the lord of 7th house is placed in 5th house then
there are many love affairs.
(iii) If the lord of 7th house is placed in 1 1th house in its
own sign friendly sign or exaltation sign, than success is
ensure in love matter.
(iv) If the sub lord of 7th cusp is mercury and placed in
dual sign denotes many love affairs.
(v) If the sub lord of 7th cusp or lord of 7th house is placed
in 2nd house many love affairs.
Analysis of the query (i) The sub lord of Vth cusp is
Jupiter, which is placed in 8th house in the star of Saturn
which is placed in 7th house. Jn that question the connection
of 5th and 7th is formed to show a kind of infatuation or
attraction but will not turn into any bond of permanent ties
because 1 1th house is not in the picture.
(ii) The sub lord and lord of 5th cusp Jupiter is retrograde
i.e. love affairs will not materialize and Jupiter having
connection with Saturn will cause ultimate separation.

Will my love affair materialize - 2
Example No.18
Date 25/06/2003 Time 08:30:00 Place Agra Day Wadnesday
Let 27:09:00 North Long 78.00:00 East Zone 82:30:00 East Time Corr -0:18:00
KP-Second Ayanamaa 23:48:40 Fortune : Leo 21:01:55 Seed : 133 Aac. ; 13:38.00 Can
Balance of Daaa : Venus 13 Years 2 Months 28 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt(Cuspal)
Exam- 18-: A young lady wanted to know if her love affair
would materialize or not?
The sub lord of 5th cusp is Venus which is also the star of
1 1th cusp is placed in the star of mars the lord of Und and
7th houses i.e. there is a strong connection of 5th and 7th
11th and 2nd houses, i.e. love affairs will be materialized
but it will take time and face opposition due to placement
of Ketu in ascendant.

122 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Will my love affair materialize - 3
Example No.19
Oat* 27/02/2003 Tim* 19.00.00 Placa Agra Day Thvaday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 76:00.00 East Zona 62:30:00 East TbnaCorr -0:16:00
KP-Sacond Ayanamaa 23:48:23 Fortuna : Libra 14:20:06 Satd : 165 Aac. : 25:02:08 Lao
Salanca of Daaa : Sun 3 Yaara 2 Worth* 1 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chain (Cuapal)
JupW
Exam -19 A young man poses the query if my love affair
will materialize into marriage?
Horary No - 165
Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Mars
Ascendant star lord - Mercury

Moon sign lord Saturn
Moon star lord - Sun
Day lord - Jupiter(R)
1- The sub lord of 5th cusp is Jupiter, which is placed in
the star of Saturn. Saturn is placed in 7th house, i.e. affairs
may going on but will not materialize into a marriage.
2- If the sub lord of 5th cusp is having connection with
6th and 12th cusp than boy and girl may be moving together,
may have good relationship but will not have any sexual
relationship.

124 The Times Horary Astrology A Nova! Approach to Predictions
Admission of son in medical college
Example No.20
Date 06/09/2003 Tima 15:30:00 Place Agra Day Saturday
Lat 27.09.00 North Long 78,00.00 East Zona 82:30.00 East Time Corr -0; 18:00
KP-Second Ayanamae 23:48:50 Fortuna : Libra 29:07:18 Seed ; 57 Arc. : 25:41:55Sag
Balance of Data : Sun 5 Years 10 Months 16 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt(Cuipal)
Exam- 20 A lady from Lucknow asked the question over
telephone whether her son would be able to get admission
in medical College?
Horary No - 57
The question is about the only son of this gentlewoman.
So 5th house will be taken as the ascendant of the son.

Analysis The lord and sob lord of 5th cusp is Venus,
which is placed in 3rd house. Venus is posited in his own
star and in the sub or mercury, Which is retrograde. Mercury
too is placed in 3rd house. 3rd lord the sun is also placed in
3rd house.
2- Third house happens to be 11th to 5th house. In this
way 11th house is well fortified due to placement of three
benefices. This ensures admission of son in medical college
but he would have to wait because mercury is retrograde
but placed in 11th house. As soon as mercury attains direct
motion the son will get the admission.
Ascendant lord -
Ascendant star lord -
Moon sign lord -
Moon star lord -
Ruling Planets
Mercury (R)
Jupiter
Jupiter
Venus
Day lord - Saturn
3- As far as desire of mother is concerned desire is fulfilled
because ascendant is aspected by benefic planet like moon.
Secondly the sub lord of 1st cusp Saturn is posited in the
star of Rahu, which is placed in the 11th house showing
fulfillment of desire.

The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Determination of sex of child
Example No.21
Date 0504/2000 Tim* 20:30:00 PtaoaAgra Day Wadraaday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zona 62:30:00 Eaat Ttaia Corr - 0:16:00
KP-Saeond Ayanamaa 23:45:58 portuna : Ubra 9:06:37 Saad : 124 Aae. : 17:48:07 Lib
Salanca of Daaa : Katu 5 Yrnia 1 Month* 13 Day*
Planet* Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuipat)
Exam - 21 A man wanted to know the sex of to be bom
child as his wife was in a family way
Horary No - 124
Analysis The to be born child will be female because of
following reason.
(i) Horary ascendant itself falls in female sign.

Determination of Sex of Child 127
(ii) The sub lord of 5th cusp (1st child) mercury is placed
in 5th house. Therefore ascendant and 5th cusps both are
influenced by female planet.
Comments The wife of the querent gave birth to a female
child on 14-5-00
Certain rules related with the queries of to be born child
and others
(i) In Horary query the first child is denoted by fifth house.
The second child is denoted by 7th house. The third child is
denoted by 9th house, the fourth child is denoted by 11th
house and so on. For ex. A couple has three children. The
eldest child will be shown by 5th house, the second number
child is shown by 7th house and the youngest child is shown
by 9th house. The same rule will be applicable to the
horoscope of either husband or wife.
2- In order to make verdict over the to be born child the
fifth house of the querent mother or father will denote first
child. As it is clear from the above query. For the sex
determination of the to be born second child 7th cusp will
be considered.
(iii) A deep study of signs, Planets and stars is must while
making such type of predictions.
(iv) Whatever the nature of query may be the influence
over ascendant must be properly considered.

-8 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Litigation
Example No.22
Data 14^)1/2003 Time 16:50:00 Place Shrvpuri Day Tuesday
Lai 23:26:00 North Long 77:39:00 East Zone 82:30:00 East TlmaCorr -0:19:24
KP-Second Ayanamaa 23:48:17 Fortune : Lee 17:36:12 Seed : 5 Asc. : 17:36:16 Gem
Balance of Das a ; Moon 7 Years 10 Morths 0 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhav a
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chaiit (Cuspal)
Exam -22 An old man with many problems in the mind
posed a query about litigation regarding his property.
Horary No - 5
D O J = 14-1-03, TO J - 4:50pm, PO J= Shivpuri (MP.)
Analysis 1- For litigation always takes 6th cusp. If there
is litigation between husband and wife or Son and father.
Litigation involving property, service matter etc are always

Litigation 129
judged from the 6th house. This question is about the
property litigation.
2- A dispute may arise if the lord of 1 1th house or sub lord
of llthcusp is placed in 6th house.
3- Sub lord of 4th cusp Ketu is placed in 8th house along
with Venus. The lord of 11th house mercury though
retrograde is placed in the star of Venus. Ketu is having
connection with 8th house shows delay and impediments.
But both the parties will reach to an agreement out of the
court due to Venus. Venus the sub lord of 11th cusp is
associated with lithe cusp sub lord Ketu in 8th house. So
matter will be settled amicably.
Comments It is to be noted in this particular question
that querent himself was in a state of confusion and there is
likely to be many questions in his mind. It is evident from
the fact that at the time of query moon and Rahu were
together. This shows ingenuity or insincerity of the question.

The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
'Borrowing from Bank
Example No.23
Data 06/06/2000 Tima 20:34:00 Place Agra Day Tuesday
Lai 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zona 62:30,00 East Tima Coit -0:18:00
KP-Sacond Ayanamea 23:46:06 Fortuna : Sagittarius 27:17:56 Saad : 146Aac. : 12:15:57 Sag
Baianca of Daaa : Mercury 13 Years 1 Months 4 Days
Planets
Lagna
Nirayana Bhava
Nirayana Bhava Chailt(Cuspal)
Exam. 23 - A businessman wanted to take loan frombank
it if is possible?
Horary No. 146
Ruling Planets
Mars
Jupiter
Ascendant Lord
Ascendant starLord

Borrowing from Bank
Moon sign Lord Moon
Moon star Lord Mercury
Day Lord Mars
Rule - One will borrow either from a friend or from an
institution if the sub lord of 6th cusp is posited in the
constellation the lord of which is not retrograde.
Analysis - 1 . The desire of the querent will be fulfilled
because ascendant is aspected by Jupiter and Venus along
with Saturn and Mars. The aspect of Mars over ascendant
will not have deliterious effect because Mars itself is
ascendant lord. However the aspect of Saturn over ascendant
will delay the matter.
2. The Sub lord of 1st cusp Moon is placed in the star of
Mercury is the lord of 11th house but placed in 8th house
again showinghinderence and impediment in getting desire
fulfilled. But fulfilment of desire is promised because
ascendant is having connection with 1 1th house through
Mercury.
3. The sublord of 6th cusp is Rahu which is posited in the
star of Jupiter and in the sub of Mars. Both Mars and Jupiter
aspect ascendant i.e. definately he will get the loan from
bank.
Comments - It is thumb rule of horary astrology and
expecially astrology based on K.P, if the sub lord of 1st cusp
becomes ruling planet then the desire of the querent how
odds, it may be, is fulfilled.
2. In the query it is important to know that native will not
get the loan what he expects because Saturn is associated
with Jupiter. It has been found by us if Saturn is assoicated
with Jupiter the querent does not get what he expects but
less.

The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Borrowing from relative
Example No.24
Oata 02/08/2000 Tim* 21:30:00 Place Agra Day Wadnaeday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 Ee»t Zone 82:30:00 East Tima Corr - 0:18:00
KP-Second Ayanamea 23:48:14 Fortuna : Taurua 8:27:10 Seed : 3Aae. : 5:38:11 PH
Batanca of Oaaa : Venus 8 Year* 6 Mentha 2 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Exam. 24 :A very influencial man of Agra needs some
money. He wanted to borrow it from one of his relatives.
Whether he will get or not?
Horary No. - 3
Analysis : The sub lord of 6th cusp Saturn is posited in
the constellation unthe Sun and in the sub of Mercuiy . Saturn

Borrowing from Relalive
is placed inllndhouse while Sunand Mercury are placed in
4th house. Saturn is also associated with Jupiter in 2nd house
shows the borrowing amount will be le$$.what he expects
to borrow. At me time of query Shani (Saturn) party antar
dasa in Venus mahadasa was operating from 13-6-03. The
pratyantar of Saturn will operate up to 13-10-00. During this
time the transaction will take place because Saturn is in direct
motion, sub lord of 6th cusp and posited in the star of the
Sun which is one of the ruling planets.
Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord Mars
Ascendant star lord Ketu
Moon sign lord Sun
Moon star lord Venus
Day lord Mercury
Comments : Since sub lord of 6th cusp is related with 2nd
house and with the Sun (Saturn being in the constellation of
the Sun) either eldest brother (2nd house is 1 1th to 4th house)
or any financial institution (Due to Sun) will give loan to
this man.
2. We came to know that he borrowed from a bank.

134 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Entangled Money
Example No.25
Data 16*02/2002 Tim* 13:45:00 Place Agra Day Saturday
Lai 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zona 82:30:00 East Tima Corr -0:16:00
KP-Sacond Ayanamaa 23:47:32 Fortune : Lao 29:34:23 Seed : 74 Asc. : 3:20:08 Can
Balance of Data : Mercury 14 Yaaia 8 Months 20 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt(Cuspal)
Exam. 25 : A clerk working in an institution gave a huge
amount of money to a party. Now the party refused to pay
back his money. Now the querent wanted to know whether
his entangled money would be recovered or not?
Horary No.- 74

Entangled Money 135
Either to borrow or to take overdraft facilities or recovery
of money are all judged from the 6th house and there are
certain rules in this regard.
Rules : 1. The querent will not get back his entangled
money if the sub lord of sixth cusp is retrograde. The rule is
also applicable to borrowing or overdraft facilities.
(ii) The querent will get back his money if the sub lord of
6th cusp is in direct motion. He may also get loan or overdraft
facilities.
(iii) If the sub lord of 6th cusp is Saturn than after much
mental torture one gets facilities and only meager sum what
he expects.
(iv) Mercury being the sub lord of 6th cusp facilitates the
help of mediators. The recovery is fast.
(v) Jupiter indicates mediation of court.
(vi) Government or court will help the querent if sub lord
of 6th house happens to be the Sun.
(vii) Both the parties will settle the matter amicably if
either Moon or Venus happens to be the sublord of sixth
cusp.
The nature of the result will depend on the lord of
constellation in which Rahu and Ketu are posited. Ii they
happen to be sub lord of 6th cusp.
(ix) In the query related with either borrowing or recovery
of money the querent will get only 50% of what he expects
if Jupiter is aspected by Saturn.
(x) The same result (ix) will be experienced if Jupiter is
associated either with Saturn or Rahu.

1 36 The Times Horary Astrology A Nova! Approach to Predictions
(xi) The use of force or threats if Mars happens to be the
sub lord of 6th cusp.
Analysis of the queiy : What will be the result of query?
1 . The sub lord of 1st cusp Jupiter is placed in llthhouse
showing money will be recovered. But, Jupiter being in
retrogression will dealy the matter.
2. The sub lord of 1st cusp Jupiter is also one of the ruling
planets.
3. The sub lord 1st of Vlth cusp Venus is not retrograde.
SO above analysis shows that the querent will get back his
entangled money. But he will get part of it not full because
Jupiter is conjoined with Saturn and Rahu (Rule x)
star of Rahu and in the sub of Saturn. Both Rahu and Saturn
are placed in 11th house. This clearly shows that querent
will have to satify himself with a part of entangled money.
He will not be able to get back his full amount.

Well being of wife
Example No.26
Data 1502/2006 Tima 19:1 8:00 Ptaci SWvpurt Day Wedneaday
Lai 25:26:00 North Long 77:39:00 Ea«t Zbna 82:30:00 East Tima Corr -0:19:24
KP-8«cond Ayanamaa 23 .50:52 Fortuna: Pisces 23.00:44 8aad : 103 Aac. : 18:12.01 Leo
Balance of Data : Sun 5 Yfears i Montha 22 Days
Planats Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava ChalHt (Cuapaf)
Exam. 26 : A man in anxious state of mind wanted to know
about the will being of his wife.
Horary No. 103
DOJ = 15-2-03, TOJ = 7:18 PM, POJ = Shivpuri (MP.)
The man who asked this query was recently tranferred
from Bastar (a district) to shivpuri. Due to failure of

138 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
telephone lines of Bastar district. He was not able to make
any contact with her wife. So he was very much anxious to
know about her wife. Moon reveals the nature of query.
Moon is in star of Saturn which is lord of 7th house. Therefore
the question is related with wife and confirmed. Saturn is
planet of morbidity and gloom i.e. native is having
unnecessary fear about th well being of his wife.
Analysis : The sublord of seventh cusp is Venus. Venus is
posited in its own star denotes that at the time of query wife
is stayingin the house. She is perfectly all right due to aspect
of Jupiter and Saturn over seventh house.
2. The lord of seventh house Saturn is retrograde and
aspects seventh house denotes that wife is feeling depression
like condition. I told him that she was perfectly allright and
had been missing you therefore she had been feeling
depression like condition.
3. Next day the querent left for Bastar and telephoned me
onl6-2-03 at 8 pm that my analysis was absoultely correct.
Comments : Question related with wife, husband,
marriage, second marriage, integrity of partners, intergrity
of the person with whom we deal, Polygamy, polyandry etc.
are judged from 7th house along with 2nd and 1 1th houses.

.Integrity of Partner
Example No.27
Date 07/09/2003 Time 20:50:00 Place Agra Day Sunday
Lai 27:09.00 North Long 7800:00 East Zone 82:30:00 East TlmaCorr -0:18:00
KP-Second Ayanamaa 23:48:50 Fortune : PI seas 16:39:10 Seed : 141'Aac. : 9:14:15 Ari
Balanca of Daaa : Moon 7 Years 4 Months 3 Daya
Planets . Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt(Cuspal)
Exam. 27 : A business-man asked the integrity of his
partner and desired to know whether his partner could be
trusted?
Horary No. 141
This business man had a court case which had been
dragging in for a long time in court. The dispute is over a

140 The Times Horary Astrology A Nova! Approach to Predictions
piece of land. The man who wanted to help this business
man was none but the advocate of other party. The business
man now wanted if lawyer of opponent party could be
trusted or not?
Analysis : The sub lord of 7th cusp is Satun. Saturn is
placed in 8th house. 8th house shows inimical and secret
activites. Saturn itself is the planet of secret activities.
2. Saturn is placed in the star of Rahu which is placed in
7th house. Rahu is by nature a malefic and untrustworthy
planet.
3. 7thhouse is also aspected by Mars . In this way 7th house
is under the influence of worst malefics.
4. This lawyer can not be trusted.

Second Marriage
Example No.28
Data 14/04/1999 Tiro# 14:40:00 Place Agra Day Wednesday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 7*100:00 East Zona 82:30:00 East Time Corr- -0.18.00
KP-Seeond Ayanemea 23:45:09 Fortune tTaurue 15:28:16 Seed : 49Aac. : 7:32:59 Leo
Balance of Daea : Saturn 16 Years 3 Months 4 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna
Nirayana Bhava ChalK{Cuspal)
Juki7ioExam. 28 : A lady aged about 38 years wanted to get
remarried. Is Remarriage possible or not?
Horary No. 49
For more than one marriages following rules will help.

142 The Times Horary Astrology A Nova! Approach to Predictions
Rule 1 - The sub lord of 1st cusp either be Mercury or
Jupiter.
2 . The s ub lord of 7 th cusp be either Mercury or Jupiter or
any other planet but must have occupied dual sign in horary
chart.
3. The sub lord of 7th cusp must have connection with
2nd as well as the 7th house.
Analysis : On the basis of above rules it can be predicted
that she will not get remarried because the sub lord of 7th
cusp is neither Mercury nor Jupiter. Secondly that sub lord
of 7th cusp i.e. Saturn is not in dual sign.
Comments : Rules of Judge Polygamy, Polyandry and
illegal marital affairs.
1. There will be discord in married life if the sub lord of
7th cusp is Mercury and placed in 6th house.
2. If the sub lord of 7th cusp is Mercury and is also placed
in dual sign indicates more than one marriage or many pre
or post marital affairs.
3. Same rule can be appied to Jupiter also.
4. The question related with marriage will be negative if
the sub lord of 7th cusp is posited in the star of a retrograde
planet. There will be delay and hurdles in marriage if sub
lord of 7th cusp it self it retrograde.
5. The querent will have more than one affairs if a sub
lord of 7th cusp is having connection with 2nd house. There
is possibility of illegal affairs if Saturn or Mars being the sub
lord of 7th cusp is placed in 1 1th house.
6. There will be inordiate delay in marriage if at the time

of judgement of query moon is having any type of connection
with Saturn.
7. The activities of the native would be doubtful if 7th
lord or sub lord of 7th cusp is conjoined with Rahu and
placed in 8th house.
8. There is possibility of love marriage if the sub lord of
5th cusp is posited in the constellation the lord of which is
having connection with 7th as well as 8th houses,
9. The sub lord of 7th cusp and the star lord in which sub
lord is posited indicates about height, colour, nature,
behaviour, merits etc. of the future husband and wife.
10. There will.be harmony or discord between husband
and wife is to be decided by the sub lord of 1st cusp and
7th cusp. If both the sub lords are friendly to each other
there will be harmony between the couples. If both the
sub lords are enemy to each other there will be discord
beween them.
1 1 . If the lord of 7th house or sub lord of 7th cusp is posited
in 11th house native gains through wife.
Above cited rules have been found to be absolutely
correct by us after the long research. It is our humble
request to esteemed readers that they must not reachthe
conclusion in haste while dealing with the question
related with marriage, character, etc. Any wrong verdict
may spoil someones life.

Exam. 29. A girlaskecd the question when she will get
married?
Horary No. 217.
Analysis : 1 . The lord of 1st cusps Saturn is debilitated
and placed in 2nd house shows delay in fulfillment of disire.

When Marriage will take Place
2. Satrun is placed in the star of Venus which is a natural
significator of marriage. Venus is star and sub lord of 7th
cusp and also sub lord of 1 1th cusp placed in 1 1th house i.e.
desire will be fulfilled.
Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord Saturn
Ascendant star lord Rahu
Moon sign lord Sun
Moon star lord Venus
Day lord _ Sun
Mahadasa : Venus mahadasa Rahu antardasa from
20-2-2002 to 25-1-2003. The marriage took place in sep. 2002,
because Venus and Rahu both are ruling planet as well as
strong signficators of marriage.

Exam. 30 : When my wife will be appointed?
Horary No. 145
In job related questions houses 2, 6, and 10 are judged.
Since the question is related with the wife of the querent i.e.
2nd, 6th and 10th are to be reckoned with 7th house and 4th
house is 10 to 7th house. Thus houses 8th,' 12th and 4th will
be judged for this question.

Appointment of Wife
Analysis :
Ascendant lord
Ascendant star lord
Moon sign lord
Moon star lord
• Day lord
Ruling Planets
Venus
Jupiter
Moon
Mercury (r)
Venus
What will be the result of query? The desire of the
querent will be fulfilled due to following reasons.
1 . The sub lord of 1st cusp i.e. Moon is placed in the star
of Mercury. Mercury is placed in 11th house. Mercury is
retrograde. As has been said in previous chapters that if
star lord or sub lord of 1st cusp though retrograde is placed
in 11th house the desire is fulfilled after some delay and
obstacles (delay is due to retrogression).
2. The sub lord of 1st cusp Moon is one of the ruling
planets.
3. Mercury is also ruling planet.
Therefore on the basis of analysis the desire of the querent
will be fulfilled. Now the question is when she will be
appointed. Now for timing of event significators of 8 th, 12th
and 4th cusps are taken into consideration.
Eighth cusp : Rahu, Jupiter, Venus, Mars are the
significators of 8th cusp.
Twelfth cusp : Venus, Mars are signficators of 12th cusp.
Fourth cusp : Satrun is the lone significator of the IVth cusp.
Thus the common signficators are Rahu, Jupiter, Venus,
Mars, Saturn.
At the time of judgement of the query Mercury mahadasa
and Venus antardasa was opearting. Mercury is placed in the
star of Mars which is strong signficator of 2nd and 6th house.
The appointment letter will be given to her when Mercury
will attain direct motion. Mercury got direct motion on 2310-01 and the wife of querent was appointed on 12-1 1-2001 .

The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Foreign Journey
Example No.31 '
Date 07/09/1999 Tima 18:40:00 Place Agra Day Tuesday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zone 82:30:00 East Tima Corr -0:18:00
KP-Second Ayanamea 23:45:29 Fortune : Virgo 8:57:59 Seed : 131 Asc. : 24:36:53 Aqu
Balance of Daea : Mercury .11 Yaars 5 Months 14 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Exam. 31 : A gentle man posed the query if he will go to
abroad in near future?
Horary No. 131
- Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord Rahu
Moon sign lord Venus

Foreign Journey 149
Moon star lord Venus
Moon star lord Jupiter
Day lord Sun
In order to undertake foreign journey following rules are
important.
Rule -1 . If the lord of ascendant is either placed in
ascendant or in 9th house then one definetly goes to foreign
country.
2. If the lord of 9th house is placed in ascendant in horary
chart.
3 . If the sub lord of 1 1th cusp is in direct motion and having
connection with 9th and 11th houses.
Analysis : 1 . For foreign journey 9th, 12th and 1 1th houses
are studied.
2. In the above horary chart rule (1) and (2) are absent,
However rule (3) is partialy present.
3 . The sub lord of 1 1th cusp is Mercury which is placed in
the star of Saturn and Saturn is debilitated. Therefore there
is no possibility of going to foreign country in near future.
Foreign visit when? At the time of query Jupiter
mahadasa and Saturn antardasa was operations upto
9-5-01. Jupiter is related with 7th, 3rd cusp and aspect 12th
cusp. Therefore Jupiter mahadasa will take him to abroad.
But Saturn will not help because Saturn is debilitated as well
as is not ruling planet. Mercury and Ketu antardasa will also
not be helpful because both are not the ruling planets. The
Venus antardasa in Jupiter mahadasa which will start from
20-7-04 will take him to abroad because Venus one of the
strong ruling planets is placed in the star of Mercury the
ruler of 9th as well as 12th house.

150 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Transfer - 1
Example No.32
Data 22102/2002 Time 09:05:00 Place Agra Day Friday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zone 82:30:00 Eaet Time Corr - 0:18:00
KP-Second Ayanamsa 23:47:32 Fortune: Leo 1:01:39 Seed : 9Aac. : 25:07:07 Pie
Balance of Deea : Mars 3 Years It Months 160aya
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit(Cuspal)
Exam. 32 : An officer wanted to know about his transfer.
Horary No. 9
Houses 3, 10 and 12 are juded for transfer. Here 10th house
is important because 10th house shows place of work. If
significators of 3, 10 and 12 are operating one gets
transferred. If signficators of 3, 9 and 12 arc operating one

Transfer -1
proceeds on leave. Therefore house 9 and 10 have different
influence. 10th cusp shows transfer due to employment
while 9 shows shifting of place either due to enjoyment or
due to leave.
Ascendant lord
Ascendant star lord
Moon sign lord
Moon sign lord
Day lord
Significators 3rd cusp
10th cusp
12th cusp
Ruling Planet
Mars
Ketu
Venus
Mars
Venus
Jupiter, Mercury
Mercury, Saturn
Mars, Moon, Rahu
In this way signficators of 3, 10 and 1 2 are Jupiter, Mercury,
Saturn, Mars, Moon, Rahu.
. Mahadasa : Mars mahadasa and Moon antardasa is
operating from22-2-02 to 18-8-02.
Mars is placed in 1 2th house. Moon is posited in the star
of Mars showing 12th house. The transfer is likely to take
place in Mars mahadasa Moon antardara and Venus
pratyantar. Moon is very strong significator being in the star
of Mars the ruling planet. Venus is also one of the ruling
planets posited in 1 1th house showing fulfillment of desire.
This dasa will operate from 11-7-02 to 16-8-02. During this
period transfer is likely to take place.

The Times Horary Astrology A Nova! Approach to Predictions
Transfer When -2
Example No.33
Date 13^)4/2002 Time 19:23:00 Place Bhopal Day Saturday
Lat 23:1 7:00 North Long 77:28:00 East Zona 82:30:00 East Time Corr - 0:20:08
KP-Sacond Ayanemea 23:47:39 Fortuna : Scorpio 2:24:21 Seed : 141 Asc. : 10:07:41 Lib
Balance of Daaa : Ketu 2 Years 8 Months 14 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava ChaNt (Cuspai)
Exam - 33 : Is my transfer posited? Asked by a officer.
Horary No. 141
Analysis Ruling Planet
Ascendant lord Venus
Ascendant star lord Jupiter

Transfer When -2
Moon sign lord Mars
Moon star lord Ketu
Day lord Saturn
lOthhouse . - Moon, Saturn
12th house Mercury, Sun, Ketu
Mahadasa : Ketu mahadasa Jupiter antardasa, Venus
pratyantara from 16-5-02 to 12-7-02. Venus is placed in its
own star and in the sub of Jupiter. In the way Venus is
representing three ruling planets viz Venus. In this way
Venus is representing three ruling planets viz Venus, Mars
(due to occupation of sign) Jupiter (being in sub of Jupiter)
the native was transfered on 17-6-02.
Comment : It is to be noted whenever any.particular event
is to be materialize the role of ascendant lord is always very
important to precipitate the event. In the query Venus the
ascendant lord played the same role. Though Venus was not
significator of concerned houses.

154 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Transfer -3
Example No.34
Date 10/01/2003 Tima 09:50.00 Placa SNvpurl Day Friday
Lat 25:26:00 North Long 77:38:00 Eaat ZPna 82:30:00 East Tima Corr -0:19:24
KP-Sacond Ayanamea 23:48:17 Fortuna : Capricorn 1:31:02 Seed : 129 Aac. : 11:48:49 Aqu
Balance of Dasa : Mercury 10 Years 7 Months 22 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Pin -R Rasl Degree R-L N-L Sub S-S Cusp Reel Degree R-L N-L Sub S-S
Sun Sag 25:41:25 Jup Van Mar Sat 1 Ub 5:33:20 Van Mar Mon Mon
Mon Pis 21:39:07 Jup Mer Sun Mar 2 Sco 4:35:29 Mar Sat Sat Mon
Mar Sco 1:40:52 ' Mar Jup Rah Jup 3 Sag 5:03:29 Jup Kat Mar Sat
Mer -R Sag 29:32:00 Jup Sun Rah Jup 4 Cep 6:43:07 Sat Sun Mer Sat
Jup -R Can 22:11:29 Mon Mar Sun Ven 5 Aqu 6:39:02 Sat Rah Rah Mar
Van Sco 8:50:04 Mar Sat Van Mar 6 Pis 6:48:26 Jup Sat Van Mar
Sat -R Tau 29:57:40 Van Mar Sat Jup 7 Ari 5:33:20 Mar Ket Rah Rah
Ran -R Tau 14:00:10 Van Mon Jup Jup 6 Tau 4:35:29 Van Sun Sat Rah
Ket -R Sco 14:00:10 Mar Sat Rah Mer 9 Gem 5:03:29 Mer Mar Sun Rah
Ura Aqu 2:53:02 Set Mar Ven Ven to Can 6:43:07 Mon Sat Mer Rah
Nep Cap 16.04.54 Sat Mon Sat Mar 1 1 Leo 6:39:02 Sun Kat Jup Van
Plu Sco 24:47:46 Mar Mar Rah Sat 12 Vir 8:48:26 Mer Sun Van Rah
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt(Cuspal)
Exam. 34. Is my transfer possible ?
Horary No. 129
DOJ = 10-1-03, TOJ = 9:50 am , POJ = Shivpuri (MP.)
Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord Venus
Ascendant star lord Mars

Transfer - 3 155
Moon sign lord Jupiter (R)
Moon star lord Mercury (R)
Day lord Venus
Significator :
3rd house = Mercury, Sun, Moon, Jupiter
10th house = Jupiter, Mars, Moon, Rahu
12th house = Mercury, Moon, Jupiter
Thus the common signficator of houses 3, 10 and 12 are
Mercury, Sun, Moon, Jupiter, Mars, Rahu.
Mahadasa : Mercury mahadasa Sun antardasa upto
1 . Dasanath Mercury and one of the ruling planets and
significator of transfer is retrograde therefore Mercury will
give the results when it will attain direct motion.
2. Bhuktinath Sun being the lord of ,11th house is placed
in 3rd house signifies transfer. Sun is placed in the star of
Venus the ascendant lord so will act as the agent of Venus.
3. Mercury mahadasa Sun antardasa and Venus pratyantar
will operate from 6-8-03 to 27-9-03 will bring the transfer of
the native.
Comments : The native was transfered on 5-8-03 and
joined new place on 6-8-03.

156 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Pormotion -1
Example No.35
Date 31/01/2003 Time 09 55:00 Pl^ca Shivpuri Day Friday
Lat 25:26:00 North Long 77:39:00 East Zone 82:30:00 East Tima Con -0:19:24
KP-Seeond Ayanamaa 23:48:20 Fortuna : Ariaa 0:42:17 Seed : 12Aac. : 11:31:42 Pis
Balanca of Daaa : Sun 3 Years 9 Months 20 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna ' Nirayana Bhava Challt (Cuspfitp
Exam. 35 : When will 1 get promotion? Query posed by
an officer?
Horary No. 12
DOJ = 3 1-1-03, TOJ = 9:55 am,POJ = Shivpuri
For promotion houses 2, 6, 10, 11 are considered. 6 and 10
houses both are related with job and employed. 6th house
denotes subordinate position while 10th house shows

Promotion -1 157
commanding position. With each promotion there is an
increase in salary (2nd house) as well as authority (10th
house).
Analysis
Ascendant lord
Ascendant star lord
Moon sign lord
Moon star lord
Day lord
Other ruling planet
Significators :
2nd house : Saturn, Mars, Ketu
6th house : Mercury, Jupiter
10th house : Sun, Moon
1 1th house : Saturn, Mars , Ketu
Thus the common signficators of houses 2,6,10,11 are
Saturn, Ketu, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Sun, Moon.
Mahadasa : 1. Sun mahadasa Jupiter antardasa upto
2, Sun Mahadasa Saturn antardasa will run from 13-10-03
3. Sun Mahadasa Venus antardasa from 7-12-05 to
In Jupiter antardasa promotion is not possible because
Jupiter is not ruling planets. Saturn is retrograde. Venus
antardasa will give promotion because Venus is placed in
the star of Ketu which is the sub lord of 11th cusp and also
conjoined with ascendant lord Mars i.e. Ketu will act as an
agent of Mars and representative of 1st cusp.
Ruling Planets
Mars
Venus
Saturn (R)
Sun.
Venus
Rahu

158 The Times Horaiy Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Promotion - 2
Example No.36
Date 04/02/1999 Tim* 21:10:00 PtauAgra DayThureday
Lat 27:0900 North Long 76:00 00 East 2mm 82:30:00 Eaat Tima Con- - 0:16.00
KP-S*cond Ayanamsa 23:44:69 Fartuna : SagKtariua 25:24:03 8**d : 28 Aac. ; 5.00:55 Vir
Batanca of oasa : Sun 0 Yaara 4 MortTa 2 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
pm -R Rasl Dag re* R-L N-L 8ub 8-8 Cusp Rasl Dag re* R-4. N-L Sub 8-8
Sun Cap 21:37:13 Sat Mon Van Jtp 1 Tau 7:46:40 Van Sun Van Van
Mon Vir 9:14:36 Mar Sin Van Sat 2 Gam 3:25:56 Mar Mar Van Mar
Mar Lib 9:47:20 Van Rah Jtp Van 3 Gam 265403 Mar Jtp Van Van
Mar Cap 21:56:13 Sat Mon Van Sat 4 Can 22:09:57 Mon Mar Sun Van
Jtp Pia 4:27: JO Jtp Sat Sat Sun 6 Lao 22:36:63 Sun Van Sat Kat
Van Aqu 14:56:01 Sat Rah Kat Jtp 6 Vir 2928:36 Mar Mar Sat Rah
Sat Art 4:15:15 Mar Kat Mon Sat 7 Sco 7:46:40 Mar Sal Kat Jtp
Rah Can 28:19:07 Mon Mar Sat Mar 8 Sag 325:66 Jtp Kat Sun Mar
KM Cap 28:19:07 Sat Mar Sat Mar 9 Sag 26:54:03 Jip Sun Sun Jtp
Ura Cap 19:09:41 Sat Mon Mar Jtp 10 Cap 2209:57 Sat Mon Van Sat
Nap Cap 8:3628 Sat Sin Van Rah 11 Aqu 2236:53 Sat Jtp Sat Van
Ptu Sco 16:21:03 Mar Sat jtp Mar 12 Pis 29:26:30 Jtp Mar Sat Rah
Lagna Nlrayana Bhava ChaM(Cuspal)
Exam - 36. A man who is working in Indian railways
wanted to know about his promotion.
Horary No. 28
Analysis Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord Venus
Ascendant star lord Sun

Promotion -2 159
Moon sign lord Venus
Moon star lord Sun
Day lord Jupiter
Significators :
2nd house : Mercury, Rahu
6th house : Mars, Ketu, Mercury. Rahu
10th house : Ketu, Saturn, Venus, Saturn, Jupiter
1 1th house : Jupiter, Saturn, Jupiter
The common significator of houses 2, 6, 10 and 11 are
Mercury, Rahu, Mars , Ketu, Saturn, Venus, Jupiter
Mahadasa : Sun mahadasa, Venus antardasa and Satun
pratyantar upto may 1999.
1. Saturn is important significator of pormotion. Saturn is
also sub lord of 11th cusp as well as 6th cusp and also lord
of 10th house placed in 12th house. It denotes promotion
along with transfer (the placement of Saturn in 12th)
Comments : The querent was promoted in may 99 and
simultaneously transferred to near by place.

160 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Promotion -3
Example No. 37
Data 2206/2000 Tima 10:59:00 Place Agra Day Tuesday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zona 82:30:00 East TlmaCorr -0:18:00
KP-Second Ayanamaa 23:46: 17 Fortuna : Leo 16:12:55 Seed : 163 Aao. : 12:30:02 Lib
Balance of Daea : Sun S Years 1 Months 27 Days
Planets Nlrayana Bhava
Pin -R Rael -Degree R-L N-L Sub S-S Cuap Rael Degree R-L N-L Sub S-S
Sun Leo 5:39:07 Sun Ket Rah Rah 1 Sco 23:20:00 Mar Mar Mar Mar
'Mon Arl 28:32:03 Mar Sin Mar Rah 2 Sag 25:05:47 Van Mar Rah
Mar Can 19:50:59 Mon Mar Van Mon 3 Cap 29:58:45 Sat Mar Sat Jup
Mer Leo 5:50:15 Sun Kst Rah Rah 4 Pfa 4:32:13 Jup Sat Sat Sun
Jup Tau 15:08:31 Van Mon Jup Sun 5 Arl 4:47:56 Mar Ket Mar Mar
Van Lao 25:16:20 Sun' Van Mar Rah 6 Tau 0:20:45 Ven Sun Rah Mer
Sat Tau 6:48:15 Ven Sun Mar Sat 7 Tau 23:20:00 Ven Mar Mar Mar
Rah'-R Can 0:19:48 Man Jup Mon Van . 8 Gam 25:05:47 Mar Jip Mer Rah
Ket -R Cap 0:19:48 Sat Sun Rah Mer 9 Can 29:58:45 Mon Mer • Sat Jup
Ura -R Cap 24:36:22 Sat Mar Rah Jup 10 Vlr 4:32:13 Mer Sun Sat Rah
Nep -R Cap 10:44:53 Sat Man Mon Mer It Lib 4:47:56 Van Mar Van Kat
Plu -S Sco 16:22:49 Mar Sat' Jup Mar 12 Sco 0:20:45 Mar Jip Mon . Ven
Lagna Nlrayana Bhava Chain (Cuspal)
Exam. 37. An Officer desired to know about his promotion.
Horary No. 163
Analysis Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord Mars
Ascendant star lord Mercury

the ascendant lord, Moon sign lord and day lord is
debilitated.
2. Promotion will take place because sub lord of 1st cusp
Mars is one of the ruling planet. (An important ruling of
Author)
3. An important condition for the fulfillment of desire
Significators :
2nd house : Ketu, Sun, Mercury, Jupiter, Rahu
6th house : Jupiter, Rahu, Saturn, Venus
10th house : Mercury, Mars
1 1th house : Venus
Thus common significator are Ketu, Sun, Mercury, Jupiter,
Rahu, Saturn, Venus, Mars.
Mahadasa : 1 . Sun mahadasa andMars antardasa will run
2. Sun mahadasa and Mercury antardasa will run from
Since Mars is debilitated i.e. its antardasa will not bring
promotion to him. The promotion is likely to take place in
Sun mahadasa, Mercury antaradasa and Venus pratyantar
which will run from 9-10-03 to 30-11-03 because Venus is
the significator of 2nd 6th and 11th houses.

The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
When will be promoted to the post of Manager
Example No.38
Data 26/08/2003 Tima 08:13:00 Place Agra Day Tuesday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 76:00:00 East Zona 62:30:00 East Tima Coir -0:18:00
KP-Second Ayanamaa 23:48:48 Fortune: Virgo 15:06:17 Seed : 129 Aac. : 8:35:29 Vlf
Balance of Daea : Mercury 15 Years 0 Months 12 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chailt (Cuspai)
wim
9 X Ket 7
47. Marti 1
/ I2\ Rah
\6 /van
/ N^Mer
Mon 4 SuA
\ Jup /
X3 Sat
H
Exam. 38 : A senior officer in que to promotion wanted to
know when he would be promoted to the post of Manager.
Horary No. 129
The question is related with the post of manager. Since
the post enjoys power and authority as well as facilities.
Therefore, Mars, Jupiter and Venus must be considered along

When will be promoted to the Post of Manager 163
with ascendant, sixth, tenth and 11th houses. The relation
of Mars and Jupiter must be seen in order to gain power
and authority in any field of life. Whether it is political post
or service matter.
What will be the result of desire
1. The ascendant lord Venus is placed in eleventh house
showing fulfilment of desire.
2. The sub lord of first cusp is placed in tenth along with
Venus showing power and authority to the querent.
3. Ascendant is having connection with eleventh as well
as with tenth.
4. The placement of Ketu in ascendant is a negative sign
showing delay and hurdles in the fulfilment of desire.
5 . From above analysis it is clear that desire of the querent
is fulfilled but with some delay and obstacles.
When his desire will be fulfilled ?
Analysis Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord Venus
Ascendant star lord Mars (R)
Moon sign lord Moon
Moon star lord Mercury
Day lord Mars
Others Rahu, Ketu
Significators :
2nd house : Mars
6th house : Jupiter, Ketu
10th house : Moon, Sun. Jupiter, Mercury , Rahu, Ketu
11th house : Venus, Mercury, Sun, Moon, Mercury , Rahu.
Thus the common significators of houses 2, 6, 10 and 1 1
are : Mars, Jupiter, Ketu, Moon, Sun, Mercury, Rahu, Venus.

164 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Mahadasa : 1. Mercury mahadasa - Mercury antardasa
runs upto 3.02.04.
Mercury is the singificator of 10th and 1 1th cusp. Ketu is
the significator of sixth, tenth aind eleventh (star lord of
eleventh cusp) and also posited in the sign of Mars and in
the star of Jupiter. Thus the connection of Mars and Jupiter
is established. In this way Ketu antardasa will promote
querent to the post of manager between 3-02-05.
Comments : The querent pormoted to the post on 16-07-04.

When will be promoted to the post of Senior Manager
Example No.39
Date 27/08/2003 Time 09:25:00 Place Mcrena Day Wednesday
Lat 26:24:00 North Long 78:04:00 East Zone 82 30:00 East Tima Corr -0:17:44
KP-Second Ayanamea 23:48.48 Fortuna : Virgo 25:25:02 Seed ; 127 Asc. : 25:40:29 Vlr
Balance of Deaa : Ketu 5 Years 8 Months 22 Days
Planets Nlrayana Bhava
Lagna Nlrayana Bhava Chalit(Cuspaf)
Exam. 39 : A branch manager rank officerof State Bank of
India wanted to be senior manager. He asked when he
would be promoted.
Horary No. 127
Analysis Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord Venus

1 66 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Ascendant star lord
Moon sign lord
Moon star lord
Day lord
Significators
2nd house : Mars
6th house : Jupiter, Ketu
10th house : Moon
11th house : Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Ketu, Mercury,
Rahu
Thus the common significators are - Mars, Jupiter, Ketu,
Moon, Mercury, Sun, Venus, Rahu.
Mahadasa : Ketu mahadasa - Venus antardasa runs upto
24-12-03. Ketu is the significator of sixth and eleventh cusp
while Venus being signficator of first cusp is also the
significator of eleventh cusp. Therefore thisDasa may bring
pronation to him.
Comments : There may be a doubt in the mind of readers
that why Venus antardasa and why not the Sun antardasa
will bring promotion to him. The reason is that the sub lord
of the Sun is Saturn which is slow and delaying planet, while
the Venus is not only ascendant lord but also in the sub of
Mercury a fast moving planet in the eleventh house. The
promotion does not involve enhanced power and authority
because branch manager and senior manager both posts
almost have same power and authority therefore Mars and
Jupiter are not assoicated with promotion giving planets.
Mars (R)
Sun
Ketu
Mercury

Will I become District Magistrate or not
Example No.40
Dale 2 iro4/2D06 Time 19:45:00 Place Agra DayFriday
Let 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zone 82:30:00 East TlmeCorr -0:18:00
KP-Second Ay a names 23:51:01 Fortuna : Gemini 29:56:21 Seed : 122 Aec. : 21:13:13 Lib
Balance of Daea : Moon 7 Years 6 Mortfha 6 Days
Planets
Lagna
Nirayana Bhava
Exam • 40 A young and dynamic IA'.S. officer wanted
to be DM. She asked when she would be made DM.
Horary No -122
Analysis 1- The sub lord of eleventh cusp Jupiter is retrograde
and placed in ascendant. Jupiter is posited in its own star i.e. star
lord is also retrograde showing failure of the desire.

168 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
2- Tenth house is occupied by Saturn. Saturn shows sub
ordination therefore, she will have to work in sub ordinate
position.
3- In order to desire power and authorities mars and
Jupiter must have connection with tenth house. Mars is
posited in the star of Rahu and in the sub of Jupiter. Jupiter
is retrograde therefore she is not likely to become D.M. at
least 30 June 06 till Jupiter is retrograde.
4- The sub lord andlord of tenth cusp is mercury . Mercury
also shows assistant position not commanding position.
There fore up to 30-06-06 she will work as deputy or
additional officer under some one.

Lost Golden chain will it be recovered or not
Example No.41
Date 13/07/2000 Time 08:50:00 Place Agra Day Thursday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zone 82:30:00 East Time Corr - 0:18:00
KP-Second Ayanamea 23.46:11 Fortuna : Virgo 29:33:41 Seed : 27 Asc. : 9:02:07 Leo
Balance of Daea : Marcury 12 Years 11 Months 17 Days
Planels Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt(CuspaJ)
wanted to know if it would be recovered or not?
Horary No -27
This gentle woman her self was not clear if she forgot to
keep the chain at some place or some one had stolen chain.
The confusing state of mind is due to following factors.

170 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
1 - The significator of mind moon is debilitated hence
showing uncertainty of thoughts. Mercury the planet of
wisdom is also afflicted due to association with Mars shows
blunt and agitating state of mind.
2- The sub lord of seventh cusp is mercury, which is
posited in the star of Rahu in association of mars in second
house. Placement of mercury in the star of Rahu shows a
case of lost memory. Mercury is posited in second house
denotes the chain is in house.
3- The lord of seventh house mars is placed in second
house and seventh house is occupied by moon. Mars denotes
young man and moon denotes young and beautiful lady.
Both have kept the chain somewhere in order to play
mischief with old lady with the object of harassment.
Will the chain be recovered It is shown by ascendant as
well as eleventh cusp.
1- The lord and star lord both are placed in third house
showing she has to make efforts to get back her chain.
2- The sub lord of eleventh cusp Saturn is placed in twelfth
house, which is second to eleventh. The second house
automatically involves if the question pertaining to recovery
of money or recovery of lost article is concerned.
3- However Saturn due to its nature will delay, torment
and torture and when hope is given up the same Saturn fulfill
the desire.
Ruling Planets
Ascendant Star Lord - Venus
Ascendant lord - Sun
Moon sign lord - Mars
Moon star lord - Mercury
Day lord - Jupiter
At the time of judgement of query mercury's Mahadasha

Lo6t Golden chain will it be recovered or Not 171
Venus antardasa and sun pratyantara was operating. Since
dasanath, bhuktinath and pratyantara lord are ruling planets
therefore the lost chain will be found.
The lady informed after seven or eighth days that she got
her lost chain.
Comments The house eleventh is considered for the
recovery of lost articles or lost money or stolen articles. The
description of thief or the persons involved in mischievous
activities is made from seventh house.
In such type of cases houses seventh and eleventh are
consider of with a serious consideration of ascendant.

1 72 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Lost file - will it be found
Example No. 42
Date 13/04^002 Time 12:50:00 Place Bhopal Day Saturday
Lat 23:17:00 North Long 77:28:00 Ea at Zone 82:30:00 East Time Corr -0:20:08
KP-Secontf Aysnamsa 23:47:39 Fortuna : Gemini 1:38:20 Seed : 40A«c. : 1l:l0:09Can
Balance of Dasa : Katu 4 Years 5 Months 8 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chaltt (Cuspal)
Exam - 42 An important file of an officer who was posted
in Sagar district was missing. Officer now wanted to find
out this file. Will it be found?
Horary No - 40
Analysis-: Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Venus

Lost File - Will it be found
Ascendant star lord - Mars
Moon sign lord - Mars
Moon star lord - Ketu
Day lord - Sat
Sub lord of 7th cusp is Jupiter, which is placed in the star
of Rahu. Rahu denotes peons of the office. Therefore file is
stolen by the peon. Rahu is associated with Saturn and Mars
in 12th house so other peons of the office are also involved
in this activity. File cannot be recovered because the sub lord
of 11th cusp is Jupiter having connection with Rahu in 12th
house and 12th is the negation of the ascendant.
y

174 The Times Horaiy Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Political success -1
Example No.43
Date 27/03/2003 Tim# 18:13:00 Placa SNvpurl Day Tburaday
Lat 25:26 00 North Long 77:39:00 East Zone 82:30:00 East Time Corr -0:19:24
KP-Sacond Ayanamaa 23.48:27 Fortuna : Vligo 1:16:52 S##d : 148 Aac. : 8:50:53 Vir
Balanca of Dana : Moon 8 Yaars 0 Months 25 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Pin -R Rael Degre# R-L N-L Sub S-S Cuap Raal Degree R»L N-L Sub S>S
Sun Pis 12:37:28 Jup Sat Mar Kat 1 Sco 1:20:00 Mar Jup Rah Rah
Mon Cap 12:34:20 Sat Mon Rah Sat 2 Sag 1:00:30 Jup Ket Van Van
Mar • Sag 20:3055 Jup Ven Jup Sat 3 Cap 2 56:05 Sat Siai Jup Rah
Mar Pis 18:18:51 Jup Mar Mar Sat 4 Aqu 6:21:23 Sat Mar Mon Mar
Jup -R Can 14:20:44 Mon Sat Rah Ven 5 Pta 8:29:00 Jup Sat Van Sun
Van Aqu 5:54:54 Sat Mar Mon Jup 6 Ar) 6:47:33 Mar Ket Rah Ket
Sat Tau 29:20:24 Ven Mar Sat Mar 7 Tau 1:20:00 Ven Sun Jup Jup
Rah -R Tau 7:20:08 Ven Sun Ket Rah 8 Gem 1:00:30 Mer Mar Mer Mar
Kat -R Sco 7:20:08 Mar Sat Ket Kat 9 Can 2:56:05 Mon Jup Rah Van
Ura ' Aqu 7:04:03 Sat Rah Rah Jup 10 Lao 6:21:23 Sun Ket Rah Sat
Nep Cap 18:43:37 Sat Mon Mer Mar 11 Vir 8:29:00 Mar Sun Ven Mar
Plu -R Sco 26:08:15 Mar Mar Jup Jup 12 Lib 6:47:33 Ven Rah' Rah Rah
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chaiit(Cuspal) •
Exam 43 - One political leader wanted to be the chairman
of a public sector unit. He asked when he would be
nominated chairman of this institution?
Horary No - 148
D O J = 27-03-03, T O J - 6:13pm, P OJ = Shivpuri (M.P.)
There are certain facts related with this query, which we would
like to bring to the knowledge of the readers. This institution

Political Success - 1
had already a chairman. The querent wanted to be the chairman
of this institution after disposing present chairman.
Analysis of the query Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord -
Ascendant star lord -
Moon sign lord -
Moon star lord -
Mars
Jupiter (R)
Saturn
Moon
Day lord - Jupiter (R)
What will be the result of query -?
1- The ascendant is occupied by Ketu and aspected by
Saturn. Thus ascendant is badly damaged. Retrograde
Jupiter aspects ascendant hence it will keep alive hope.
2- For political post or to get any big post there should be
a relation between eleventh and fifth cusp through a benefic
planet.
3- The sub lord of fifth and eleventh cusp is Venus. Venus
is in the star of Mars and in the sub of the Sun. Mars aspects
sixth house i.e. house of opponents. Mars will sub due
opponents. The sun is in fifth house having aspect over
eleventh cusp. Venus itself is placed in third house indicates
that effort would be required to get the post.
4- As has been said earlier that in order to drive power
and authority Mars and Jupiter must have connection.
5- As ascendant is badly damaged and mars and Jupiter
are not related with either tenth cusp or eleventh cusp
therefore there is a doubt in fulfillment of desire.
Timing of event At the time of judgement of the query
Jupiter was retrograde. Nothing will happen till Jupiter is
retrograde. Jupiter will be in direct motion after 31-07-03.
Therefore change will take place after this date.
Comments -: Due to week ascendant the querent could
not reach to the post of chairman but was nominated as
director of this institution in the first week of Aug. 2003.

The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Political Success -2
Example No.44
Date 06(05/2003 Time 17:50:00 Place SNvpurt DayTueeday
Lat 25:26:00 North Long 77:39:00 East tone 82:30:00 East Time Corr -0:19:24
KP-Second Ayanamaa 23:48 33 Fortune : Capricorn 5: 14:1 6 Seed : 153 Aac. : 8:58:27 Lib
Balance of baaa : Rahu 4 Yean 6 Months 0 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava ChalltfCuspal}
Exam - 44 This question is related with previous
question. The present chairman wanted to know how long
he would continue as chairman of the institution.
Horary No - 153
D O J = 06-05-03, T OJ = 5:50pm, P O J = Shivpuri (M.P.)
Analysis-: Ruling Planets
Asd lord - Mars

Political Success -2
Asd star lord -
Moon sign lord -
Moon star lord -
Saturn
Mercury (R)
Rahu
Day lord- Mars
What will b e the result of query ?
1- It has been written earlier that the result of query will
be negative if the sub lord or lord of eleventh cusp is
retrograde . The lord and sub lord of eleventh cusp is mercury ,
which is retrograde. **
2- The ascendant is aspectedby malefic Saturn. Saturn
aspects Jupiter therefore Jupiter too has become weak.
Therefore he will not continue fora longer time.
When he will be removed from the post I told him that
he would continue for some time because divine Jupiter
would protect him. However he would be removed either
Aug. 03 or first weak of sep.03. Because at the time mercury
the lord and sub lord of eleventh cusp will be retrograde.
The querent was removed from the post on 31 Aug. 03.

178 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Popularity through Astrology
Example No.45
Date 13A)2/20C2 Time 15:21:00 Place Bhopal Day Wedneeday
Lat 23:17:00 North Long 77:28:00 East Zone 82:30:00 East Time Corr -0:20:08
KP-Second Ayanamaa 23:47:31 Fortune : Pisces 15:15:24 Seed : 232 Aac. : 23:25:25 Gem
Balance of Daaa : Rahu 9 Years 1 1 Months 5 Days
Planets Nlrayana Bhava
Lagna Nlrayana Bhava ChaNt (Cuspal)
Exam - 45 Will I get popularity through astrology ? This
query is posed by an astrologer friend.
Horary No - 232
A fellow astrologer friend who was posted with me in
Bhopal and used to do astrology asked the question. For
astrological proficiency Mercury, Jupiter and Sun must be

Popularity through Astrology 179
well placed in horoscope. Apart that 4,5,and 8 houses must
be occupied by benefic planets. In this horary chart mercury
is placed in 1 1th House while Jupiter is placed in 4th house.
Fifth cusp is influenced by Saturn and mercury therefore
the querent will take interest in divine knowledge. As far as
popularity is concerned the sub lord of 5th cusp Jupiter is
placed in 4th house/ whi^i^shows negation to 5th house.
The sub lord of 1 1th cusp mars is placed in ascendant, which
again shows negation. The ascendant and.4th house denotes
that this knowledge will be used to material gains rather
than pursuing spiritual achievements. However the
connection of 1 1th house with 5th through mercury will
provide astrological knowledge.
Comments In order to gain mass popularity the house
5th ,11th and ascendant must be considered. These three
houses either be aspected by benefic planet or be occupied
by benefic planets. Simultaneously the significator of
popularity i.e. the sun must be placed either in 10th or 1 1th
or 5th house. In that horary chart Sunis placed in 12th house.
So will not bring any distinction in this field.

The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Will I be punished in departmental enquiry?
Example No.46
Dote 2002/2000 Time 18:10:00 Place Agra Day Sunday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 East Zone 82:30:00 East Time Corr -0:18:00
KP-Second Ayanamea 23:45:52 Fortune : Scorpio 9:31:50 Seed : 21 Aac. : 7:40:59 Leo
Balance of Data: Venue 12 Years 2 Monttis 30 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt(Cuapal)
Exam - 46 An officer who was facing a departmental
inquiry wanted to know if he was likely to be punished in
departmental enquiry?
Horary No - 21
In order to be punished or imprisonment house 12th is
mainly judged. If there is a case of imprisonment than the

Will I be Punished in Departmental Enquiry? 1 8 1
connection of 12th house with that of 4th house is studied
because 4th house is permanent residence and 12th house
shows isolation. In case of service matter 10th house must
have connection with 12th house.
Analysis The desire of querent is that he must not be
terminated from the service. His desire will be fulfilled or
not is judged as follows. -
1 - The sub lord of 1 st cusp mars is one of the ruling planets .
When sub lord of the 1st cusp becomes one of the ruling
planets then desire of the querent is fulfilled. Therefore it is
sure that he will not be given severe punishment.
2- The sub lord and lord of 1st cusp mars is placed in 1 1th
house, which again shows the fulfillment of desire of the
querent.
Whether he will be punished or not?
He will be given minor punishment due to following
reasons: -
1- The sub lord of 10th cusp Rahu is posited in the star of
Saturn, which is placed in 12th house. 10th house is having
connection with 12th house through malefic planet.
2- He will not loose his job because the sub lord of 6th
cusp (service) is placed in 1 1th house. Mercury will save his
service.
Comments The officer was given punishment of
withholding of two increments for one year which was
further minimized to the punishment of warning only.

The Times Horary Astrology A Nova] Approach to Predictions
Selling of house to pay off market debts
Example No.47
Date 09)02/2003 Time 20:28:00 Place Agra Day Sunday
Let 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 Eaat Zone B2:30:00 Eaet Time, Corr >0:18:00
KP'Second Ayanamea 23:48:21 Fortune : Gemlrt 18:21:40 Seed : 241 Aeo. : 28:62:42 Leo
Balance of Data : Sun S Years 3 Motto 0 Day*
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Exam - 47 A gentle man wanted to sell his house to pay
off his market liabilities .
Horary No - 241
If the sub lord of fourth cusp is placed in the constellation
of a planet the lord of which is either significator of 3rd &
11th houses or 12th house.

Selling of House to pay ofTMarket debts
The fourth house denotes possession, which includes
land, building but other articles also on which one has
ownership right. Third house is twelfth to fourth house
which always shows separation from possessions Eleventh
house always shows gains. Twelfth house is natural
significator of disposal of possessions as well as payment of
market liabilities.
Analysis 1- Retrograde Jupiter aspects ascendant
therefore the desire of the querent shall be fulfilled but with
some delay because ascendant lord Jupiter is retrograde.
2- The sub lord of 1st cusp mercury is one of the ruling
planet therefore the fulfillment of desire is very sure.
3- The sub lord of third and fourth cusps mercury is
posited in the star of the sun that is placed in eleventh house
showing profit through the disposal of property.
4- The sub lord of 12th cusp is Rahu which is placed in
2nd house, 3rd cusp falls in the star of moon therefore
payment of market liabilities will be quick (moon is fast
moving planet)
5- Since mercury is the major planet denoting selling of
house therefore payment will be received in installments
(mercury gives in installments)
6- Rahu is the sub lord of 12th cusp shows payment of
market debts but even then it will create problems to the
querent.
7- Since mercury is having connection with 7th house due
to its lordship therefore the property willbe sold off through
the mediation of property dealer.

The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Payment of debts
Example No. 48
Data 10X17/2000 Ttma 09:11:00 Place Agra Day Monday
Lat 27:09:00 North Long 78:00:00 Ea at Zona 82.30:00 East Tima Corr -0:18:00
KP-Seeond Ayanamae 23:46:11 Fortuna : Aquarius 26:23:96 3«ad : 161 Aac. : 11:03:39 Loo
Balance of Daoa : Rahu 8 Years 9 Months 13 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Chaltt(Cuspal)
Exam - 48 A businessman wanted to pay off the liabilities
of markets. He put the query if he would be able to repay
the debts of market.
Horary No - 151
If the sub lord of 12th cusp is posited in the constellation
the lord of which is not retrograde then one is able to pay
off debts.

Pay ment of Debts
Analysis 1- Ascendant is aspected by the Jupiter which
shows fulfillment of desire but the sub lord of 12th cusp
mercury is retrograde and placed in the star of Rahu.
2- In horary astrology Rahu is not considered as a
retrograde planet because retrograde motion is its natural
motion so in the above analysis. It will not be assumed as
retrograde mercury is posited in the star of retrograde Rahu.
3- Rahu is very slow moving planet it denotes two
important facts -
a- Rahu shows increased burden of interest, which
accrues, in principal amount.
b- It creates unnecessary problems in the repayment of
debts. Therefore it may be assumed that there will be
inordinate delay in the repayment of market debts.
Comments What is the relation of sub lord of 12th cusp
with repayment of loan is described below

186 The Times Horaiy Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
Appointments in Institution
Example No.49
Del* 16/09/2 003 Time 12:35:00 Place Agra Day Tuesday
Lat 27:09:00 Norm Long 78:00:00 East Zona 82:30:00 East Time Con -0:18:00
KP-Second Ayanamaa 23:48:51 Fortune : Capricorn 1:18:02 Seed ; 21 Aac. ; 23:50:32 See
Balance of Daaa : Sir 3 Years 7 Months 2 Days
Planets Nirayana BhaVa
Pin -R Real Degree R-L N-L Sub 9-S Cusp Real Degree R-L N-L Sub S-S
Sun Leo 29:11:46 Sir Sir Mar Mon 1 Art 28:28:40 Mar Sir Mar Mar
Mon Tau 2:01:08 Van Sir Ji*> Ket 2 Tau 25:33:57 Van Mar Rah Van
Mar -R Aqu 7:06:11 Sat Rah Rah Ji*> 3 Oem 19:15:09 Mar Rah Mar Mar
Mer -R Leo 19:40:39 Sir Van Rah Van 4 Can 13:50:13 Mon Sat Rah Mar
Jup Lao 10:28:33 Sun Ket Sat Sir 5 Leo 12:57:12 Sun Ket Mar Jup
Van Vir 8:57:59 Mar Sun Mar Sat 6 Vlr 19:00:48 Mar Mon Mar Rah
Sat Gem 18:00:39 Mar Rah Sun Van 7 Lib 28:26:40 Van Jup Van Mar
Rah Ari 28:15:42 Mar Sir Mon Van a Sco 25:33:57 Mar Mar Rah Van
Ket Lib 28:15:42 Van Jup Van Sat 9 Sag 19:15:59 Jup Van Rah Mar
Ura -R Aqu 6:08:42 Sat Mar Mon Sat 10 Cap 13:50:13 Sal Mon Rah Mar
Nap -R Cap 16:56:25 Sat Mon Sat Mon 11 Aqu 12:57:12 Sat Rah Mar Van
Piu Sco 23:30:37 Mar Mar Mar Jip 12 Pie 19:00:48 Jip Mer KM JUp
Lagna Nirayana Bhava Challt(Cuspai)
Exam - 49 An otticer ot an institution put the query
whether vacancies in the institution will be filled up in near
future or not?
Horary No - 21
The query is related with the institution where many post

Appointments in Institution ] 87
of various cadres were lying vacant. The daughter of the
querent applied for a post in this institution.
Due to certain political as well as official reasons the whole
appointment process came under dispute.
Due to these reasons, the querent wanted to know if
appointment would take place or not?
This is a general type of question therefore no particular
house is related with such type of query.
The example has been taken to make the readers
understand and also to make them familiar with such type
of query in which a particular house is not studied or
considered.
Such types of question are only related with ascendant
because these questions are related with desire of the
querent. In such type of questions an astrologer has to
read the chart to see whether the desire of the querent
will be fulfilled or not?
Analysis-:
1- The sub lord and lord of the ascendant is retrograde
showing failure of the query.
2- The sub lord of list cusp mercury is retrograde again
showing the negation of the desire.
3- Ascendant is flanked by Rahu and Saturn again show
failure of the desire.
4- Therefore the appointment will not take place in this
institution. i
Comments
The government later on itself banned the appointments.
Since then no single appointment have taken place in this
institution.

1 88 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
What will be the future of the institution?
Example No.50
Date 10*04/2002 Time 20:26:00 Place Bhopal Day Wednesday
Let 23:17:00 North Long 77:28:00 East Zone 82:30:00 East TlmeCorr -0:20:08
KP-Second Ayanamea 23:47:39 Fortuna : Libra 18:12;138aed : 155 Aac. : 21:31:01 Lib
Balance of Dana : Jupiter 0 Years 6 Months 27 Days
Planets Nirayana Bhava
Lagna
Nirayana Btiava Chant {Cus pal)
KatJe*
Ascir
^Monll Y 6
Mer12VSat 2 Reh V4
/ Mar \ / Jus
Exam 50 : One managing director of an institution in a
pensive mood asked about the future prospects of the
institution where he himself was the managing director.
Horary No - 155
1- Ketu is posited in ascendant. Ascendant is aspected by

What will be the Future of the Institution? 189
Saturn and Mars. Ascendantis under heavy affliction of
worst malefic which shows adverse and uncertain future of
this organization.
2- 9th house that denotes principles and morals of this
institution will be at stake due to aspect of Saturn and Mars
over ninth house.
3- As per horary position of Moon, Saturn Mahadasha
and Saturn antardasa will operate from 8-12-02 to 11-12-05.
Following changes will take place in this organization
a- Due to aspect of Saturn over ascendant and 9th house
radical changes pertaining to administration will take place.
There will be uncertainty and chaos like situation will
generate.
b- During Saturn Mahadasha, Saturn antardasa and Ketu
pratyantara, which will run from 10-11-2003 to 13-1-04 largescale administrative changes, will take place.
c- Saturn Mahadasha, Saturn antardasa and sun
pratyantara that will operate from 7-7-04 to 3 1-8-04 .major
changes will take place.
Comments It has been found by us that either Saturn -
Ketu or Ketu, Saturn period brings many undesirable results
Whether it is any organization or any country or personal
life of the querent is concerned. This rule is applicable to
natal horoscope also. The predictions made~afcotrt this
organization have come absolutely correct.

190 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
KP. Table of Horary Nos. from 1 to 249
ARIES

Decision delivered by Lower Court would be stayed or not?

192 The Times Horary Astrology A Noval Approach to Predictions
