READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_k_p_dynamics_s_naik.json
Dataset number: 230 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 110,178 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_K.P. dynamics_S. NAIK
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_K.P. dynamics_S. NAIK
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 125
  • total_words: 17977
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.967
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
K.P. DYNAMICS
SteMa* 'Zfowtcf At&iotoqtfedefiHecl
Jyotisha Siromani
SRI SATYANARAYANA NAIK

THE STELLAR HORARY ASTROLOGY
There are several books on horary astrology and there are
classic works on this subject by great sages. Despite volumes
of work, there was a need for a straight forward method to answer
a question through horary astrology, in line with modern
socioeconomic evolution. This was done by a great scholar
Prof. K.S. Krishnamurti. His logic of Division of Static Zodiac
houses by a Dynamic Dasha Bhukti stellar sequence is a novel
attempt. The Zodiac with stellar division was available ready on
hand. Historical approach based on division of signs though in
vogue, had difference of opinion in the methodology and use of
such divisional charts. Confusion confounded as a result of
different approaches introduced by recent authors of traditional
astrology. At this point of time, Prof. Krishnamurti introduced the
further division to stellar Division of Zodiac in the same order that
existed, to arrive at 249 divisions.
The purpose of this division:
The Division of Houses in Zodiac as prescribed by a system
called “Sripathi" was modified and western cusp system was
adopted. In this method a cusp that rises at any point of sign
not necessarily end in that sign. Similarly, two houses may
occupy a single sign. This unequal distribution of house in zodiac
leads drifting of sign lords. The Sign lord may or may not have
control on full house. At times he even may not have a house
to rule. Therefore a reference point was needed to a cusp that
commences and ends in the same sign to attribute the
responsibility of a house. A sub lord commences and ends in the
same sign. Thus the point of rising of this cusp lord attributed
with utmost power to decide the matter of the cusp for which he

is a sub lord. Since this sub lord is a divisional lord of a star
in that zodiac, the star lord is attributed the power to indicate the
nature of the cusp for which he is a Star lord.
Cusp Linking originated in K.P.
Activation of sub lord or a star lord of a cusp is done by
a planet which is in the stars of above Sub lord or Star lord. In
the event of no planet situated in their stars, the Sub and Star
lord themselves entitled to decide the cusp results. Prof.
Krishnamurti advocates this convincing logic in his reader III in
page 148 while discussing an example chart on "Overseas".
This cusp linking originated in the KP itself. This is a vital
point, which if applied in total will enhance the predictive
perfection. Magnifying this beyond its simple application and
claiming research credits is fashion for selfish projection.
Planets signification is subject to modification by its Sub
Lord indications.
In most of the examples discussed in the works of Prof.
KSK, he points out importance of the sub lord's indication for a
Significator. It was evident as he proclaimed repeatedly, that if
the sub lord of a planet is not favourable the results will not
fructify. The indication of sub lord is of utmost importance in
deciding the matter of a significator. Indication means the
positional and lordship dignities of either the sub or the star where
the sub lord is posited.
m
Sub negates a significator means, the negative results of
the sub is effective. If that sub is positive, the positive results
will be effective. It ultimately means that the sub lord is most
important in giving positive or negative results. Therefore it is

a powerful significator to modify the results. There is no
question on inventing this theory or claim any credit to this. But
any methodology of application of the available provision is worth
appreciation.
This book advocates fundamentals and does not deviate
the original concept of the inventor.
This work does not introduce any new concept or claim any
research points. It is a humble modified presentation of a perfect
system existing already. It is an effort to make it a useful guide
and tool to derive the benefit of Horary Astrology in K.P.
The desk board introduced here will help easy identification
of required Significators covering all the rules.
We hope the K.P. fraternity will welcome this effort and use
this work for their further research.
Thanking you
SATYANARAYANA NAIK

Shree Lakshminarasimha parabramhane namaba
ABOUT THE BOOK AND AUTHOR
We are asked to write introduction to this book titled “K.P.-
DYNAMICS" written by Sri Satyanarayana Naik. He is one of our
close family friends. It is really a matter of pride to write
introduction to his book. But to comment on any work we must
be fair and frank and should have sufficient knowledge about the
subject matter. Sri Naik had given us his material for proof
reading and correction. Having basic working knowledge in
astrology and with the explanations given by Sri Naik during the
proof reading sessions we could grasp the central idea of his
book. We find that this book is neither a beginners' guide nor an
experts' hand book in K.P.-Astrology but an essential tool to all
students of astrology. It is based on core fundamentals on which
the K.P. astrology is developed, and is essential to astrological
fraternity who practice the Krishnamurti Paddathi.
His logical explanations are convincing in attributing the
importance to Sub lord and Star Lord both at Cusp and Planet
level. He has dealt with clarity about the role of retrograde
planets. He had precisely talked about the horary in K.P. In order
to maintain continuity of the subject, he has not split the book
in chapters but discussed the several subjects under different
headings. True to the proverb "a picture is worth a million words",
he has freely used visual media to express his views with great
clarity and avoided running texts. He has avoided most of the
general topics which are available in most of the books on K.P.
astrology. But he has not ignored the tables which are essential
to be a part of the K.P. book. As usual he has made his unique

Desk Board for K.P. This will enable the K.P. followers to arrive
at Significations just by filling up the blanks in the Board.
Apart from K.P, Shri naik introduces the Naadi astrology also in
this book. He restricts this to the signification of planets and
recommends for cross verification and confirmation of the results
arrived through K.P.
We are sure the readers will not only get benefited by the content
of his book but also enjoy the subject matter while reading.
We wish him all success throughout his life and expect more such
works to come from his desk.
Smt. Indirani and Sri N.S.Charya, B.Sc Agri,
Jyothisha Visharada, Dip. in Yoga edn.

INTRODUCTION TO K.P. DYNAMICS
SteMevi 'Zfowicf, Aafadkyy ^edefotted
Astrology in India is not just a subject to study but a religious
accomplishment which has influence on every one of us
irrespective of caste, creed and religion. There are volumes of
classical texts written by sages each producing unique methods
of analysing horoscopes for delineation. But the texts were
written in Sanskrit language and over a period of time several
such works were lost for many historical reasons. However with
the available monumental works, many scholars of later dates
have contributed their knowledge to this subject and made praise
worthy efforts to bridge the gap. But the subject of astrology was
originally in the hands of traditional priests and was being handed
over to the next generation religiously. Subsequently several
scholars had made efforts not only to preserve this treasure but
to bring out this subject to the benefit of society. With their efforts
today we have volumes of works in treasure. But still there exist
certain missing links to establish a sequential analysis method.
However the modern authors have shouldered this responsibility
and brought out their different methods of analysis. The new
avenue was opened up by introducing this subject to the English
speaking community across the world. The classic texts were
translated into English. The doors were opened forthe intellectual
from different walks of life to take up research work on Astrology.
During that period, Prof. K.S.Krishnamurtifrom Madras introduced
a new system for predictive astrology. This has created a history
in the field of astrology and his system was known as "K.P." which
was simple in application and accurate in getting results. He has
made his principle known across the world through his magazine

"Astrology and Athrista". He has authored several books on his
new method. Gradually many traditional followers shifted to this
system. The most attractive element in K.P. was its simple
application process and the universal applicability of rules.
During his lectures Prof. KSK made astonishing predictions by
simple method of horary astrology which he had introduced. He
preferred horary astrology which was based on his 249 divisions
of Zodiac. He advocated the new comers to further research on
the subject. The marvel of his theory was, 1) Introduction of 249
subs in horary astrology, 2) Grouping of houses for a particular
matter, 3) Method of arriving significator and confirmation of
matter.
Subsequently his theory has become world famous and today
it is considered as one of the best system of prediction. It is so
famous that just hit any website naming 'K.P. astrology" you get
100’s of sites across the world catering information and services
on this subject. There are many groups that have started
discussion on this subject. Research on this subject is still going
on with the present generation for fine tuning K.P. principles.
But to conduct any research work, the fundamentals must be
very strong. It is not the principle on which the research to be
conducted. The research must be on the source on which the
principle is built upon. One such effort is made by Sri
Satyanarayana Naik, a research oriented non commercial
astrologer, who has studied the traditional astrology, Naadi
Astrology and K.P. He has to his credit two books on Naadi
Astrology 1) PREDICTION SECRETS- NAADI ASTROLOGY 2)
CELESTIAL MATRIX. He has also written a book on K.P. in
Telugu. One of His Naadi book is translated intoTelugu language.
He is a visiting faculty to Potti Sreeramulu University to teach

astrology. He also regularly teaches Naadi astrology in the
classes conducted by "Jyotirvaastu Vignana Samstha".
His books are well received by the readers. He does not believe
in writing volumes of texts. He presents only those rules and
principles which stand for repeated applications and supports his
presentation with reasoning. He is also involved in research work
on traditional dictums. In this present work, he is highlighting the
logic behind certain rules introduced by Prof. KSK. He has dealt
with the subject at its core fundamentals and has proved that KP.
rules are complete in its original form and find place in the books
written by Prof. KSK. He does not claim any invention or research
credit to his writing.
He has presented this book in a horoscope analysis method.
Identify the components analyse them and advocate remedies
ultimately. Therefore we do not find any chapter wise divisions
in this book. The subject begins with Static and Dynamic
divisions of Zodiac and ends with Remedial measures at the end.
He explains each component under different heads like:
a) House division and Authentication for stellar division.
Under this head he addresses the logic of Static and Dynamic
divisions of Sage "Parasara".
b) Concept of House system
In this he deals with the Cusps' credentials.
c) Birth of 249 subs
He endorses the purpose for which these divisions were
made by Prof: KSK.
d) Static Cusp Dignities:
He differentiates the cusp dignities as Static and Dynamic and
gives logical explanations of their linking factor.

With the visual aid he clearly illustrates the connecting factors
of Cusps and Planetary dignities.
e) Under Astronomical phenomenal factor he elaborate the
inbuilt theory of "Aspects", "Dispositer", "Retrograde" and
"Significators".
f) Further he talks of horary system in KP. and the importance
of Sub lord.
g) He introduces and links the Naadi system and the signification
of planet on which the prediction is based.
h) He deals with a practical horary chart and demonstrates the
involvement of Lagna and Moon relations to the matter
representing the question.
i) He then introduces the remedial measures.
j) The entire work has several visuals which makes readers to
understand the concept at a glance.
k) He provides many details in the form of tables which are
interlinked to the subject under different headings.
l) It is his style to introduce a Desk Board for the readers to
use it as a tool by which they can get the Astrological results,
just by filling up the blanks.
I have given a few hints about this book and its presentation style.
It is a book consisting of rich material with convincing logic.
Therefore this book, not only serves as an informative tool but
also a practical guide to KP. astrological fraternity:
I wish him all success in his future endeavors.
- B.Amaranatha Sastry
FCA..ACS., MA(Astrology)
xin

1. House Division 1
2. Dynamic Division 2
3. Concept of House system 4
4. Birth of 249 subs 6
5. Static Cusp Dignities 20
6. Dynamic Dignities 21
7. The Dictum of Stellar Astrology 25
8. Rahu & Ketu 33
9. Fine Tuning of Significators 34
10. The Role of Retrograde Planet 35
1 1 . Why Dispositer to be considered in Stellar Astrology 37
12. Strength of Planets in Stellar System 38
13. How Horary Works 40
14. Ruling Planets 42
15. Interlinking Houses, Sub & Event 43
16. Promise of an Event 55
17. Bhukti Lord (Sub) - Most important 57
18. House Matter 58
19. Introduction to Naadi 61
20. Role of Planetary Significations and House matters 70
21. Sign Significations 84
22. K.P. Horary Chart on Number Basis 96
23. Remedial Measures 109

K.P. DYNAMICS
1. HOUSE DIVISION
A house, in stellar astrology, according to Krishnamurti
padhati, is not restricted to signs. Depending upon the beginning
of cusp the house drifts. Due to this there is possibility of a sign
skipping the house leaving its lord deprive of a particular house
signification. Due to this phenomenon, the star level and further
division of its sub level are considered as major signifying factor
to a particular house under consideration.
Authentication for Stellar division
Fundamentals of division of house in stellar astrology, is
based on the ancient works. For this purpose we need to know
a few fundamentals from Sage Parasara's "Brihat Parasara Hora
Sastra". Here the great maharshi has presented two sets of
division. One is a Static Division based on the Signs and the other
is stellar division which is Dynamic division based on the Stars.
The Static Divisions are represented by sign lords. This will
facilitate to assess the strengths of the planet. However in order
to identify divisional lords several charts are cast. The purpose
of these charts though, fundamentally to assess the strength of
planets, the great author also recommend to study of such
divisional charts for specific areas of life. However, it does not
deal with the methodology of studying these charts. Subsequently
scholars in this field have dealt with this subject with diverse
opinion. But the common utility to assess the strength of the
planet is well accepted universally in traditional astrology. This
static analysis of chart with various divisional dignities will
describe the quality of significations of the house and planets.

2. DYNAMIC DIVISION
Having arrived at the qualitative significations of houses and
planets, it is essential to time the events (fructification of
signified results.) For timing the events there should be a
progressive component which should not only be dynamic but
also sequential with appropriate changes in life. For this purpose,
the stellar division is used. Every star which is sequentially
distributed in each sign is taken into consideration. 27 stars were
grouped in to 3 sets of 9 in a zone of 120 degrees in zodiac.
Three stars from zone were assigned a planet as ruler. For
example, the Star Ashwini, Makha and Moola are ruled by Ketu
and Bharani, Pubba, and Uttaraashada were ruled by Venus.
Similarly all the nine planets were allotted in the order of stellar
sequence. Then each planet was allotted a number of years as
ruling period.
Note: The number of years allotted to each planet as per
Parasara is as follows:
a. Sun-6 years, Moon-10 Years, Mars-7 Years, Rahu-18 years,
Jupiter-16 years, Saturn-17 years, Mercury-1 7 years, Ketu-7
years and Venus-20 years. Total 120 years allotted to all the
9 planets. These periods of each planet is called as Dasha.
b. Further division based on the same number of years were
repeated to each planet which would give the sub division
period. This is called Bhukti (some calls it Antardasha).
c. To time the event still closer, divisions like Antra, Sookshma,
etc., were also introduced.
But none of the classical texts reveal the basis of allotment of
number of years allotted to the planet.

But many scholars off late have presented this by several
metaphysical and/or life cycle theories.
Our sages had understood the creation and were experts in
astronomy. They wrote astrological texts based on astronomical
facts. Therefore, none of their dictums were a myth.
With this firm belief, we at Hyderabad, have started research in
this field and have been successful in deriving at the astronomical
phenomena to support many of the astrological dictums
propounded by sage Parasara and Jaimini. The distribution of
Zodiac signs, the Lordship allotted to them, the term Exaltation,
Debilitation, Retrogression, and their impact were all based on
the most advanced scientific temper. These led us to further
m
probe into the orbital theory and derive the astronomical solution
to the allotment of Dasha period to planets.
Our research team will come out with their Magnum opus on this
subject with astronomical details supporting the astrological
theory.
This note is to establish the fact that, the great astrological works
of our sages were highly technical and based on the scientific
facts. The sages were high intellectuals. Nothing was hypothesis
or myth. They presented their works for high intellectuals who
mastered the technicalities of the universe and understood
creation.
To time an event, the stellar Dynamic divisions were
adopted. Further, to arrive at closer timing of an event fine tuning
of planetary transits were introduced.

There were great astrologers who had adopted this system
perfectly to give detailed predictions of charts. However down the
line somewhere the thread was de-linked. Many corrupted
versions crept in and the dictums were way led to confusion
confounded.
In late 60's when the astrologers were struggling to find a
linking factor to the missing links in astrological works, Some
selfless astrological stalwarts like Sri C.G. Rajan, Meena I,
Meena II, and Sri K.S. Krishnamurti have contributed their
yeomen services in this field. Prof. K.S. Krishnamurti found that
the stellar divisions closely related to the events in human life.
With his experiments, he considered only the Dynamic analysis
of Dasha Bhukti and extended it to the Static Analysis of chart.
3. CONCEPT OF HOUSE SYSTEM
Though there was a system of unequal house and Bhavaarambha, Bhava-Madhya and Bhava-Sandhi, this concept was
further fine tuned with western concept of division of houses, by
Prof. KSK. Here the houses were computed by Placidus method.
Due to different time span of each sign, a house computed by
this system need not necessarily be confined to a sign. It may
extend to other sign. Even two houses may fall in one sign
leading to its opposite sign to contain two more houses. This will
deprive Lordship to certain planets of their house lordship. The
lordships drifting and extending to other signs and some signs
loosing ruler ship lead to uncertainty of ruler ship of houses by
sign lords. It was essential to have a strong ruler to lead the
matter of the house. The beginning point of a house is considered
as Cusp of the House. Therefore a cusp should be assigned to

a static stellar body. For this purpose the only way is to seek
the help of Stars assigned in each sign. But the distribution of
stars was based on 4 quarters of 3 degrees 20 minutes span.
With this, certain stars repeat in the subsequent sign. It is here
Prof. KSK, brought out his wonderful concept which did not
deviate from the fundamentals of ancients. The Star distribution
is the basis for sequence of Dasha system. Further division will
make it a Bhukti division. He has therefore divided each stars
in a particular sign into 9 sub divisions and maintained the same
Dasha sequence. A sub begins in a sign and ends in the same
sign. But a nakshatra begins in a sign and may or may not end
in the same sign. It is appropriate and also convincing to
empower a sub with the matter of the house. For all practical
purpose this Sub lord is considered as the chief of this house.
In other words this sub lord is the powerful lord of the house.

The Chart Below for Kp no: 2 is drawn to explain the above
concept
4. BIRTH OF 249 SUBS
To identify a Cusp, it's Star Lord and Sub Lord, each sign in the
zodiac was further divided according to the span of stars allotted
to each sign arriving at 249 subs. These subs (being dynamic
Bhukti lord) are entitled to bestow the result favourably or
unfavourably according to their disposition & the matters denoted
by the stars. We give below the 249 sub table indicating the
beginning points of each sub

ARIES - MARS
Krittika
Sun

GEMINI —MERCURY
0:00:00 Mrigasira Mars 6:40:00

CANCER - MOON
Punarvasu
Jupiter
MOO
ft
ft

r

VIRGO - MERCURY

LIBRA - VENUS

SCORPIO - MARS
0:00:00 Visakha Jupiter 3:20:00

CAPRICORN - SATURN
0:00:00 Uttarashada Sun 10:00:00

Universal applicability of sub - table
Any chart either birth or horary if cast, all the twelve cusps will
fall within this 249 subs who will decide the matter of the house.
This 249 sub areas are universally applicable in this stellar
system.
• A chief is worshipped in his town.
A fool is worshipped at his home.
A king is worshipped in his kingdom.
A knowledge person is worshipped everywhere.
• A novice can get recognition in the company of noble people.
• A river flowing with sweet water , becomes salty on reaching
ocean.
• Anyone who has never made a mistake has never tried anything
new.
• Attempt the impossible in order to impfove your work.
• Experts Dont Advertise themselves. r
• Facts don't require proof to stand correct.
• Family matters should be kept secret; a disease should be
brought to the open.
• Given an inch , one takes a mile.
• Good things in life cannot be appreciated by someone who has
never experienced the good things.
• Great things can be achieved only with great effort.
• Haid work reaps sweet success.

5. STATIC CUSP DIGNITIES
The Division of the houses is based on the Dynamic Dasha
sequence. Each house now has 3 components to decide the
matter of the house. Most important is Sub Lord who for all
practical purpose act like the Lord of the house, next is Star Lord
who is indicating the nature of the results, and Lastly the Lord
of the sign whose participation is considered based on his
portions covered by this sign lord to a house in the sign.
FROM EXAMPLE CHART K.P. NO.2 - II & III HOUSE
We have given above the zoomed view of house 2nd and 3rd from
the example Kp 2. Both are falling in Taurus sign. To decide
the Lord of 2nd house we have to depend on the Sub lord of 2nd
Cusp i.e. Jupiter. For 3rd house it is Saturn who is the sub lord
of 3rd house. This logic is absolutely convincing to have different
lordships in the same sign. If we consider Venus as lord of 2nd

and 3rd simultaneously, it is not convincing to give Lordship
responsibilities to Venus for 3rd house having a very little span
in his Sign. Though he has maximum span in 2nd house, the
sub lord assigned with full span of his sub area is most
acceptable theory.
In the static allocation of cusp responsibilities we have the
following representing factors in the order of preference.
1 Sub Lord of a Cusp
2 Star Lord of a Cusp
3 Lord of the sign representing fractional cusp areas.
The methodology of accrediting result orientation is superb
innovation of professor Krishnamurthy. However we will dive into
this deeper as we proceed.
Now we have 3 static cusp representations, we need to activate
this, but before that we should know the external forces if any
that would contribute to represent the above mentioned cusps.
6. DYNAMIC DIGNITIES
In a chart, apart from static dignities of zodiac divisions, the
dynamic planets will also occupy certain areas. A planet in
Sanskrit is called "Graha". It means "Capture" in English. These
dynamic planets when occupy certain place they capture the
effects of that area. The also capture the effects of other celestial
bodies in that area.
This . “Grahana Shakti” the inherent quality of a planet is given
utmost importance in the Indian culture. Considering this factor,
if a planet were to occupy the place designated as house, it is
obvious, that it would grasp the essence of that house. In other

words it would become the absolute representative of that house.
With this we have the 4th representing factor to a house which
overpowers every other factor.
Now there are 12 cusps represented by static bodies of the
dynamic zodiac divisions and there are 7 planets and 2 nodes
as dynamic representatives energising certain areas of the given
dynamic zodiac divisions.
The powerful dynamic bodies which shall activate the static
zones of dynamic divisions are the beauty of the wonderful
concept of Professor Krishnamurti. With this concept we derive
two sets as follows:
1) Static bodies representing Dynamic zones of Chart
2) Dynamic bodies representing Dynamic zones of Chart
The first one is grouped "House details"
The Second is termed as Planet's details"
The chart below is given to derive the above two components.

K.P. No. 2, Thursday, 31st May 2007, at 10:34 am
With the planetary position the chart will now give the following
table:
1 Cusp position of all the 12 houses with Sign, Star, Sub
2 Planetary position with Sign, Star, Sub

The art of linking the above Cusps to the dynamic planets through their stars and subs
is the ultimate Dictum of Stellar Astrology

7. THE DICTUM OF STELLAR ASTROLOGY
FIRST BLOCK
\ i Qualifying
""^Signification &
/ Significator
SECOND BLOCK
Prof: KSK used here most convincing logic and is well within the
frame work of acceptable norms.. We have depicted the whole
concept of Prof: KSK in the above diagram. All these have been
propounded by Prof: KSK with authenticated scientific approach
not deviating from the classic texts. As far as aspect is concerned
we have just used the inbuilt logic of sensitive point which in our
applications has proved to be effective.

The First Block
Contain the triggers which are Static dignities of Cusp. The Sub
Lord or Star Lord, The Sign Lord and the planet posited there
in. These dignitaries are empowered to offer results by them
selves if there is no dynamic planet posited in any of their stars.
Second Block
Dynamic planets posited in a cusp. These planets while they
occupy a sign will occupy certain Star and trigger its significations.
These Star lords where a planet is occupied will now signify the
houses in the order of preference by their occupation, being sub
lord or star lord of cusp and being lord of house.
Third is a Computable Interlink
This is used for Qualifying the Significations and Significators
a) Qualifying the Signification
The universal rule that a sub lord is deciding factor is applied
here.
A house matter will be favourable if that Cusp Lord is linked
through his star or sub lords to houses which are supporting
the matter and if it is indicating negating houses the negative
results indicated will be experienced by the native.
b) Qualifying the Significator
Similarly, if a planet is in the sub and if that sub or the star
lord where this sub is posited, indicates negative houses, the
results will be negative.
These two important factors are the diamond keys of K.P.
When a qualifying factor itself is desired for a matter, then
considering those planets as significator is most convincing
factor.

With this we get
1) Planet signifying houses
2) Star level significations
3) Sub level significations
(Signified houses favourably supported by sub are most effective.)
It is here the importance of Sub is highlighted and this Sub Lord
of a Cusp by its star position or by himself if indicates cusps that
are favourable to the house for which he is sub lord the matter
of the house under study will be fruitful.
Similarly, if a sub lord of a planet either by itself or through its
star is favourable to the signification of the planet, then the planet
is empowered fully to execute the event.
But in both the cases, unless totally the houses are negating an
event and the significator, certain houses which appear to be
negative but unavoidable in executing the end results are to be
considered.
Prof: Krishnamurti has not left any stone unturned in giving the
scope of application of his principles. Be it linking of cusp, or
extending sub star level which already exist in the K.P. cannot
accredit any body with research titles.
Fourth is Astrological Phonomenal Factor
A Planet posited in a Sign, Star and Sub will throw its aspect
at certain places. If those places happen to be sensitive zones
of either cusp or planet, it will influence those matter signified
by the representing factors of that sensitive zones. The three
zone divisions of 120 degrees having similar star lords and a
planet posited in any one star influencing its other stars in the

remaining two zones is the unique principle advocated, well
authenticated by the trine aspects in traditional astrology. This
trine aspect is an inbuilt algorithm in stellar astrology.
Any planet in Ashwini star in Aries will automatically influence
Makha in Leo and Moola in Sagittarius. Similarly at the sub level
the other subs in trine are influenced. In other words the sensitive
points at star span and sub span are influenced.
This inbuilt aspect theory drives us to decide the impact of aspect
considering the point of influence on Star span and precisely
effective in influencing the Sub area.
Taking this concept into consideration we shall proceed with the
influence of aspect.
All planets from its star position & sub position, aspects a star
and sub situated at 180 degrees

If that zone does not represent a cusp or planet, no effect is
considered.
Similarly we have special aspects for outer planets, Mars, Jupiter
and Saturn.
Mars aspect the zone situated at 90 degrees and 210 degrees
Jupiter 120 degrees and 240 degrees
Saturn aspect 60 degrees 270 degrees
It is the fundamental theory of 120 degrees zone effects which
is the base for stellar astrology. A planet is influenced by another
planet which is situated in any of its Stars in the 3 zones. This
is the trine effect which is in built in the stellar system. Basing
on this the aspects is considered as described below:
A Planet will be posited in Star and a Sub in a Sign. It may be
in a particular portion of a Star and in either beginning middle
or end of a Sub. It is influencing the Star and the Sub. The Sub
is the powerful representative as earlier discussed. From this
span i.e. from the beginning of Star Position till the end of the
Sub this planet has influence. Therefore his aspect must cover
the area of this span on the sign where this planet throws its
influence.

AN EXAMPLE CHART TO SHOW ASPECTS

We are giving below the range of aspect each planet is covering
by its aspect on other signs.

1. The Sun posited in Taurus at 20:39:58 i.e. 50:39:58 In the
Star of Moo. Moon Star commences from 40:00:00 degrees
in Taurus. The Effect of Sun commences from this point.
Sun is in the Sub of Ven. Ven commences from 50:26:40
and ends at 53:40:00 in Taurus. Here the influence of Sun
ends. Sun has 7th aspect i.e. 180 Degrees. Adding 180
degrees to commencement of Star degrees at Taurus we get
(40+180) 220 which mean it is Scorpio 220. Adding 180
degrees to end of Ven Sub (53:40:00+180 ) it ends at
2 Any Planet or Cusp falling in the range of 220:00: to
233:40:00 the Sun will be influencing by his aspect.
3 In the horoscope Jup is at 231 :05 therefore covered by Sun
aspect.
4 The 7th cusp begins at 227:46 which falls within this range
hence 7th cusp is also under Sun's aspect.
In this chart only Jup has aspect of 7th which covers Cusp and
Planet posited in Taurus. Rest of the planets do not cover any
cusp or Planets.
The aspect theory is logically convincing and within the frame
work of stellar system and the question of orbs are eliminated
as it is based on the stellar influence which is an inbuilt logarithm
of this system.

8. RAHU & KETU
These are highly energised points astronomically having no
physical identity. But their influence in astrology is mysteriously
exploded and still remains unresolved. Logically, in the absence
of any physical identity considering their casting of influence
sounds not convincing. Nonetheless, they are appearing in the
star and sub zones by which they were given utmost importance.
They are empowered with lordship of the house where they are
posited. They are empowered with the planets entire signification
by conjunction. If by conjunction they are so much powerful why
not they cast their influence on other zones, by default in the
system trine influence is already given to them. Remaining is only
7th aspect. Rahu and Ketu are positioned in an axis of 180
degrees apart. They are opposite in nature hence casting
influence on each other is not logical. But there is a tricky issue
here. These Nodes are of ecliptic in nature and hence whoever
contacts them either by conjunction or by aspect, they will eclipse
that body and take over its effect. By this, if a planet is conjunct
with Rahu, Rahu takes over the planets signification. But this
planet has its opposition influence over the area covered by Ketu.
The question is whether would have secondary influence over
this planet? Let us look at this in a different angle; Rahu has
already taken over the signification of this planet. This planet is
linking Ketu. Therefore, it is logical to attribute Rahu with the
significations of Ketu. In the same way Ketu is to be considered.
If there is no planet, then the influence on each other need not
be considered.

Whether true or mean nodes
The movement of nodes are erratic and will be changing in quick
succession either retro or direct. However their mean motion is
always retrograde. But the few degrees of difference between
true and mean nodes at times will upset the whole analysis. If
this is ignored, it will lead to serious mistakes in computation,
■m
particularly, when the nodes shoulder the responsibility of
offering results. It is absolutely a matter of spot decision, when
the nodes appear as Dasha or Bhukti lords. This point needs to
be experimented particularly in horary system. Till further
research we shall stick to mean nodes for this purpose and ignore
the swift direct motions.
' 9. FINE TUNING OF SIGNIFICATORS
In our experience we find it useful to consider following riders,
to know the intensity of the Significators. This is done by
assessing the following two dispositions.
1. Exalted, Debilitated, Retrograde, posited in favourable or
unfavourable house.
2. The position of Dispositer to a planet, in the above houses.
These have been detailed in subsequent pages.
What is meant by a Fruitful Significator?
Now from the above format, a planet which is indicating certain
houses and the sub lord from the 2nd block in the diagram also '
supports it then such planets are called Fruitful significator. The
whole process is to arrive at the Dynamic Planets who have
positive power to bestow the desired results.

10. THE ROLE OF RETROGRADE PLANET
The role of retrograde planet is still a matter of debate and there
are diverse opinion heralded by many stalwarts. However,
Prof. KSK attaches an important factor saying that a planet in
retrogression will not give the result of its signification. There is
volume of information hidden behind this statement.
Astronomically, a planet gets retrograde while it is nearer to the
earth. (Please refer to the research note mentioned earlier) It is
beyond doubt that there is a motion of reversal. This fact made
Prof: KSK to attach reversal result to the planet. If you read
between the lines, there is a secret lying here. "A retrograde
planet does not give result" it means:
1 This planet will not give its signified results.
2 This planet will give results which are opposite to its
signification.
These 2 points have different meaning attached to it.
In the 1st case it will not give any results. In the 2nd case it will
give results which will hamper its original signification.
If you consider I81 point, a planet when operative cannot be silent
without participating in any results. Since it is active in its period
it must give some results.
Then we need to consider the 2nd point. If so, why should it
oppose the results. Is it because of reverse movement? Why
should it matter as long as it is moving in the heavens? This
forces us to accept the view that the planet is influencing some '
other houses due to its reverse motion. One such thought
provoking theory is promoted by Late Sri M.P Shanmugam in his
Astro Secrets.

Quote Extract: “A planet may be owner of one or two houses.
For example a Kumbha Lagna, Jupiter is the rightful owner of
houses 2 & 11 as such he is a vyayadhipathi to houses 3 and
12... .In the normal course he will give opposite results of 3 and
12 and when this Jupiter when it is retrograde will not be able
to give the opposite results and will give results of 3 and 12.
If this is analysed the retrograde planet Jupiter instead of giving
2 & 11 houses results has given the results of 3, 12. Ironically
there is a shift in lordship itself. The Lordships are Static chart
based, the planetary positions are dynamic. This logic would
have been convincing if Jupiter were to be in say 1 0,h house since
retrograde he would give results of 9m house instead of I0m.
But surprisingly, there are several reports, by few astrologers who
have adopted the vyadhipathi theory and proved that it works.
However, since we do not attach much importance to lordship
directly, this rule is of no significance to us.
We do attach very importance to position of a planet in a house.
Now if a planet is in a house and it is retrograde, being nearer
to the earth it has strong influence on the earth. This planet
cannot be ignored. This must give some results either positive
or negative. Here we refer to the Naadi system of Astrology,
where the retrograde planets are empowered with the qualities
of previous sign. This is something convincing logic and in Naadi
such previous house results are being experienced.
How to consider this retrograde in stellar system?
In our example chart Jupiter is Retrograde it is in the 8th house.
Now any planet in its star should give 8th house results. But since

Jupiter is retro and not concerned with 8th house this planet in
Jupiter's star will not give 8th house results. If this Jupiter by his
retro motion reaches 7lh house at any given point of time then
we can say that this planet in his star will g;ve 7th house results
instead of 8th house results. If the planet is retrograde in the same
8,h house and does not cross the limit of 8th house in reverse,
then this planet neither gives 7th house result nor supports 8th
house results. This is as far as planetary position of Jupiter. But
the same planet in Jupiter star will be able to activate the Cusp
Sub Lord ship of Jupiter who has attained this position by static
nature. For instance in our example horoscope Jupiter is Sub
lord of 2 and Star Lord of 4,8,12, therefore, the Planet in Jupiter
star has no objection in giving these results and the retrograde
effect is not attributed to the static sub lordship of Jupiter. This
Jupiter at the time of epoch must be in a star and sub, irrespective
of his motional direction. He is there at that moment influencing
certain zones. Therefore, there is no question of not attributing
the zonal significations to Jupiter.
11. WHY DISPOSITERTO BE CONSIDERED IN
STELLAR ASTROLOGY:
Earlier we have seen that aspects theory is an inbuilt process.
In the same way, the Dispositer theory is also inbuilt in stellar
astrology. For example if a planet is in the star of a planet who
is posited in a house which is detrimental to the desired matter,
then the planet gives the undesired results. I.e. here the Star
Lord is the Dispositer for the planet who is sitting in his area. In
the same way if a planet is sitting in a sign and that sign lord
is situated or signifies negative results, then the planet gets that
signification. Logically there is no question of ignoring this factor.

Perhaps, ignoring the lordship of the Dispositer, his position in
a house will be apt to consider. This theory is working well in
our experience. We are not deviating from the origin. We are •
simply extending its application.
A tenanted planet is signifying the matter of the house, by itoelf
or through its star planet, and then the Lord of this tenanted
planet is under the sway of posited planet. The signification of
the house where this Lord is posited will also get attached to the
tenanted planet. If this lord is posited in a house which is
detrimental to the sign where the planet is posited, that house
matter will be spoiled, and if it is favourable the matter will flourish.
In our example horoscope
Sun is in the Star of Moon. This Moon is not a sub lord to any
of the cusp.
But the moon is Star Lord of 11th Cusp
This moon is posited in the 8th House
Moon is in Scorpio the lord of this Sign Mars is in 12m House.
Therefore, sun also gets I2m signification.
12 . STRENGTH OF PLANETS IN STELLAR SYSTEM
f
Even after considering the power of significator there would be
a number of planets signifying the required houses, a matter
under consideration is not just to give the fructification of event
and timing factor but it should also denote the quality and impact
of such events. This is possible only through the natural
signification of planets and signs and their respective dignities.
Two or more planet may simultaneously participate in the event
fructification. But the impact of such results may vary according
to their natural quality and their essential disposition in a

particular sign. In order to select a right planet with qualitative
favourable result, it is necessary to make selection by their
essential dignities.
The essential dignities are:
1. Exalted or Debilitated
Exalted Planets are powerful because their influence on the
earth will be more, while the influence of debilitated planets
will be less. These are based on astronomical phenomena,
and cannot be fit into this size of the book to explain.
2. Retrograde planet
Astronomically there is a similarity in retrograde and
exaltation of planet. Therefore it also exerts power to
influence. The only difference is due to cosmic plan forcing
the planet to regain its path and motion, this change in the
speed and direction of the planet is termed as Retrograde.
This phenomenon is purely astronomical strategy which
needs another volume of writing.
In this work, we follow the dictum of Prof. KSK and
accordingly we do not attribute fructification of results to a
Planet until it becomes direct, nor have we attributed any
negative results to it.
3 Planet posited in favourable or unfavourable house
This factor is decided upon whether a cusp where the planet
is posited is favourable to the signification of planet or
unfavourable to the matter.
4 Planet's Dispositer is favourably disposed or unfavourably
disposed

A Dispositer is the sign lord in whose sign a significator is
posited. The Sign Lord of a tenant if not posited in a good
house, the tenant will be at discomfort to in sign which is not
well disposed.
In horary astrology the sub lord theory is most effective.
We have seen that the 249 subs are static bodies of dynamic
divisions of Zodiac. The cusp chart is the energised zones of
this static chart for a particular moment. This chart will have
dynamic bodies which were influencing this chart at that
particular moment. The Dasha and Bhukti are active at that
moment. But it is cast for post event. But in horary it is the birth
of the question for which the chart is cast. The chart is dynamic,
the planets are dynamic and the Dasha Bhukti is dynamic. There
is no confusion of time factor. All this leads to perfect set up for
a question analysis.
13. HOW HORARY WORKS
By following the some of the important points mentioned below
the question and answers can be precisely addressed.
1 The personal visit of consultant is most effective.
2 Over phone (not recommended) - if question is to be asked,
the consultant must know the astrologers name and his place
of residence. He should face the direction in which the
astrologer is located, and ask his question first mentioning
the name of the Astrologer.
3 A detailed back ground of the matter has to be discussed
before framing a question. The consultants are eager to
know the answers, without fully explaining what exactly they
want. Therefore, it is for the astrologer who is conversant with

the houses and planets, to get the proper details and make
simple questions. A question must contain a single matter
related to a house. If the consultant’ has complex matter, it
is to be broken into several questions and then addressed
separately.
4 Before asking him to state the number, it is advised that the
consultant repeat the question framed precisely for which he
needs the answer.
5 Once the consultant tells the number the astrologer should
note the time and date and immediately work out the chart
and finish the analysis.
6 A matter which is current during the conversation between the
consultant and astrologer is supported by planets which are
operative at that moment for that particular matter. Therefore,
noting the time and then later on sitting for analysis will dilute
the influence of planet and shift to other planets.
7 Horary chart is erected for a question of consultant.
Therefore the ascendant must indicate the activity, the nature
and the self efforts involved in the matter.
8 No doubt the moon is mind of the consultant, and it will
denote precisely the question and its related implications
there of.
9 Therefore, it is important to assess the Ascendant first to
know the condition of the matter involved in question. Careful
analysis of Ascendant will reveal many secrets of the matter
in question.
1 0 Most important is to caution the consultant about the number
that he would be giving for the question.

The number should not be a pre-decided one.
He should not give any lucky numbers, favourite date
numbers or any such numbers which he considers good for
him.
He should be asked to give a number in random, also allow
to think over numbers and accept ultimately which he feels
more appropriate to mention.
We have said earlier the planets will be active over the matter
and follows with the consultant. Then the same planets will shift
over to Astrologers workings and influence him to arrive at the
answer. Therefore, there is no question of postponing an analysis
for a question that has influence on both the consultant and
astrologer.
14. RULING PLANETS
Horary astrology itself is for the moment of birth of a question.
Planetary position, the chart and the Dasha and Bhukti are all
dynamic in nature and have direct influence on the question,
consultant and astrologer to disclose the fate of the question.
Since Dasha Bhukti lords are effective at that moment, it is only
to justify their involvement particularly the next level that is Antra
lord is more important. For this purpose, it is optional for the
astrologer to get the confirmation by the ruling planets generally
the day lord or Lagna computed for that time its Star or sub lord
will confirm this. Eventually, if the analysis is forced to take place
at a later date perhaps the ruling planet may have to be
consulted. However we do not recommend postponing analysis
for horary chart.

15. INTERLINKING HOUSES, SUB & EVENT
For constructing an apt question, we need to know, the each cusp
sub lord and its relative influencing houses for a matter to fructify.
We give below table showing the sub lord and the houses to be
signified for certain matters.

LONGEVITY - HEALTH & DISEASES

EDUCATION
Scholar
Occult
High School
Higher Study
Scholarship
Financial Help
Higher Study abroad
Scientist/Reasearch
Astrology Expertise
Astrology
9 Mer Moo
INTERVIEWS & MEETINGS
11 Stira
DOCUMENT LOST
Lost Document

PROFESSION
to Signify Houses
12 Ven Ma®
12 Jup

Case Close-Payment
Case compromise
Case Lost
Case win
False allegations
Financial litigations
Mutual withdrawal
Others Defeat
Property Litigations
Raids
Relational Litigations
Revenue Demands
Settlement Loss
Troubles by Fraud
Arrest
LITIGATIONS
Rah
HAISSING PERSOIN
Missing Person Dead
Person Returns

Earn by Brokerage
Earn by Services
Fin-Instrument gain
Gain by (Life)/Partner
Gain by Property Sale
Gain by Self Efforts
Gambling Gain
Good Finance
Profit - Sudden
Richness
Stocks, Contract Gain
Sudden gain
Sudden Money
Unearned gain
Unethical earnings
House Loan
Loan Giving
Loan Received
Loan to Receive
Money Payment
Money Receipt
Ready to Give
Funding
Profit Funding
To Invest
Expenses
Financial crises
Loosing everything
Loss Funding
Runaway from debts
Sudden Loss
FINANCE

RELATIONSHIPS & MARRIAGE
MATTER
Love-Elope
Failure in Love
From Other Person
Love from Native
Loss in Love affair ,
Love Disputes Unrest
LcwaMamage-Separate
Love only affairs
Success in Love
Marriage Normal
Married life disturbed
Temp Separation
Divorce-Compromise
Divorce
Illicit relation
Illicit relation
2nd Marriage
Dual spouse
Reunion
Enemies
SUB
to Signify Houses

PROPERTIES
Property - Spouse 7 6 11
Profit Sale - Property 4 3 6 12
Loss - Sale Property 4 3 5 12
Loss of Properties 1 1
No House property 4 3

Valuable Theft-Loss
Recover Valuables
Theft Lost
Theft Found
THEFT
MISCELLANEOUS

16. PROMISE OF AN EVENT
Unless there is indication of fructification of certain events, there
is no use in identifying the significators for relevant houses. A
requisite event must be promised in the static chart. With an
established fact that Sub is deciding agent to dispose a matter
of house favourably or unfavourably, we need to assess this sub
lord. The sub lord of a Cusp is activated by a planet that is
situated in its star for signifying the house for which it is Cusp
Sub lord. Similarly, a star lord of the Cusp Sub Lord or the Sub
Lord itself must be linked to houses which are favourable to the
house for which the Sub lord is responsible.
Let us take from the example horoscope and assess whether the
native is destined for foreign travel.

For this purpose, we shall consider 9th cusp which is for distant
travel. This Cusp sub lord must link himself to 3,7,12 houses to
promise the foreign travel.
The 9th cusp sub lord is: Sat.
1 st step:
Sat is in the Star of: Mer.
Mer is the sub lord of cusp: 7 & 12.
Mer is star Lord of 5 and 9.
2nd step:
Mer is posited in 3.
3rd step:
Mer is .Lord of Partial 4th house.
The sub Lord Sat through his Star level Mer has indicated
houses, 3,7,12 and he is also indicating 5th house which is a
pleasure house.
Since the matter is confirmed by Star level, we need not study
the Saturn. However study of saturn will give following
modifications.
4th step
Saturn is sub lord of Cusps 3,6,9
5th step
Saturn is in 5th house.
6th step
Saturn is Lord of Partial 11 and 12 houses.
Saturn as sub lord is himself supporting it.
Now we should go for significator analysis for 3, 6, 7,9,12 houses
to arrive at the timing of event of such a travel.
If this sub lord indicate two or more of houses 2, 5, 6,8,11, then
we need not go in for computation of Significators.

We will come back to the computation of Significators, with help
of a template where in we need only to fill in the blanks and arrive
at all the significations of planets.
We have designed a work board to arrive at significator
conforming to the rules set above. This board facilitate the
readers to arrive at Significators by simply filling up blanks from
the chart details. We shall complete the discussions on few other
matters on horary astrology and then take up an example chart
and use the work boards to arrive at the results at the end of
these lessons.
17. BHUKTI LORD (SUB) - MOST IMPORTANT
For instance the period of Dasha for Venus is 20 years. In the
total span of 20 years of this star Lord, it indicates several results
of houses. But what result will have an impact on the native's
life is to decided by the sub period Lord i.e. sub Lord who will
have considerably shorter span of period. All the 9 Bhukti i.e.
sub lords will have different colours to the indicated results.
These changed results will be experienced during the period of
20 years.
Further divisions of Sub like Sub-sub (Anthra)
A Bhukti Lord has already decided the quality of results and the
closer timing of fructification of results has to be done by the other
9 sub sub divisions. All the 9 subs will be covered by Bhukti Lord
during his period. The results covered by this Bhukti Lord will
have to be given by a sub sub Lord who is favourable to him.
During the unfavourable period these results may not come or
may have some adverse effect. But ultimately, one or many of
sub lords must support the Bhukti lord to bestow the results.
Therefore, further sub division needs no consideration for
analysis but essential to time and event.

18. HOUSE MATTER
There is general theory, that houses 6,8,12 to any house is
detrimental to the matter of that house. This is also in tradition.
But this theory cannot be applied blindly.
For 1st house 6th 8th 12th are of-course detrimental. 6th denotes
diseases, 8th house chronic diseases and accidents, 12,h is
t
hospitalisation. This also leads' to litigation and tensions etc.
If we consider 2nd house, the 6th from it is 7th House - This is
house of spouse and marriage. While 2nd is addition to family.
8th house is 9th house indicating agreement from other party
which is not detrimental to marriage. 12th house is 1st house this
of-course indicates individual self, does not indicate the partner
in question. Thus 6th and 8,h from 2nd is not detrimental to
marriage. But as far as partner ship is concern it shows a dormant
partner and expenses from earnings.
Therefore, we should not jump into this theory or any other theory
blindly, without assessing the matters covered by each house by
a significator and analyse it as to whether it is favourable or
unfavourable to the concern matter. Some time getting rid of a
portion of profit or happiness may cause future gains or relief
from mental tensions. Therefore the matters indicated by each
house is to be studied and the favourable or unfavourable house
to be related in accordance with the result required by the
consultant.
Though not exhaustive a set of house significations are redefined maintaining sequence as far as possible, to each matter
in all the twelve houses.

Important house matter for all the 12 houses.
Learning Speculate Job & Service
Education Wisdom Win over
Mother Children Mtrnl. Uncles

19. INTRODUCTION TO NAADI
Each house will have several Significators. The nature of results
will' have telling effect on detailed analysis if the natural
significations of these planets are combined to the house
matters. Here we shall use the Naadi significations which by
experience are found to be more accurate.
To make it simpler and easy to refer, planetary significations are
tabled below.
Planetary significations to be used for combination of planets in
a chart in trine position and 7th positions from a particular planet
The each signification of planets are given in the table. Take the
desired matter for analysis and note representing planet.
Combine significations of planets posited with it, 5m sign from it,
9th sign from it and 7th sign and 2nd sign from it. Judicially combine
the signification. It will give the indications of the desired matter.
For Character Analysis for Male take Jupiter. For Female Take
Venus
For Wife's nature and details take Venus in Male chart.
For Husband's details take Mars in Female Chart.
For Marriage in male chart Select Venus and for Female Mars.
Jupiter or Saturn relation to selected planet will ensure marriage
The married life will be denoted by the planets associated with
Venus and Mars in both the horoscopes.
For Education consider Mercury
For House, Property and Luxuries consider Venus
For Mother, Moon, Father Sun
For younger sibling consider Mercury
For Profession consider Saturn

For Business Consider Mercury and Saturn
For Dangers and ill health consider Rah over planets indicating
the relatives.
Consider Ketu for obstructions, de-link and disputes
Consider Mars for tensions, violence and harassments
Consider Moon for travel, cheating and loss
These will enhance the qualitative details of the predictions.
For this Purpose - the Sign is divided into 4 directions North, East,
South, and West.
Group the planets on the right side Marked places in direction- Each
direction above combines planets in 1,5,9 and the next direction
becomes 2nd i.e. for North East, for East, South, and For South West.
The Opposite Directions are 7*\
Now consider the planet for the matter you would like to get results,
and read the results of combination of other planets from the chart
appended.
Planets mentioned below are enemies to the main planet are
enemies. Enemy Planet's association will negate the matter while
friendly planets will enhance significations. . ,

The above is purely an introduction to Naadi system of prediction;
however this can be used for acid test for the results we arrive in
stellar astrology. For details please see "Prediction Secrets
Naadi Astrology" by the same publisher.
Application of Naadi System for horary is explained at the end of
KP Horary Chart analysis alongwith traditional method.
• In the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king .
• It is easier to destroy than to build .
• It is not appropriate to start digging a well when the house is
ablaze with fire.
• Keep away from people who try to belittle your am bitions .
Small people always do that, but the really great make you feel
that you, too, can become great."
• Life is a bridge. Cross over it, but build no house on it.
• One who knows how to talk will have no fights, one who knows
how to eat will have no sickness.
• Seeing the peacock, the rooster spread his wings .
• Strong winds may blow the tree down, but the grass will still
stand.
• What you give away is yours and what you hide will go to
others.
• Whatever you can do or dream you can , begin it. Boldness has
genius, power, and magic in it.
• With grace of god even the most useless person can become grea
• You can V build a reputation on what you are going to do.
• You will receive the benefits only after paying the due.

Effects on above
Promotion
Success
Signifies
Atma
Name
Fame
Bright
Body Parts S Diseases
Right Eye
Head
Heart
;Fever
Strokes
Pitta
Places Indicated
Thatched huts,
Bright Places
Transfers
Losses/Blames
Mind
Blamish
FraudH’hief
Change
Adulterous
Cunning
Left Eye
Mental
Lungs/Kidneys
Infections
ColcVcoughs
Kafa/Jala
Water Places
Hazards
Enemity
Ego
Anger
Cruel
Enemity
Proud
Dominating
Bones/Blood
Spine
Heart
Injuries
Accidents
Fire
Hills/Stones
Wall
Commercial
Communications
Intelligence
Diplomatic
Logical
Romantic
Skin
Lungs
Shoulders
Anemic
Blood defects
Vata
Lands-Agro Lands
Education places
NORTH WEST
Bath rooms
Water realted
NORTH
Visitors Hall
Education Place
Directions & Vaastu
EAST
Right Window
Thatched Huts
Deity
BRAHMA, RUDRA, VISHNU UNIVERSAL MOTHER SUBRAMANYA NARAYAN A/KRISHNA
Japa, Dhyana Serving Mothers Serving Brotherhood Serving Students
Gayathri Lalitha/Raja Rajeswari Subramanya Upasan Viahnusahaaranama •
SOUTH
Kitchen
Bedroom
Compound Wall

Divine Place Wealth Place Dining/related Main Entrance Back Door
Divine Articles Wealth Articles Dilapidated Bldgs. Godowns Toilets
Comfort Places Dustbins Electronic/Brooms Staircase/Gullies

Now we give below the signification of planets as recoded in
general astrological texts.
SUN: Represents the inner self (Atma), success, progress. It is a
male planet. Its colour is orange red. It indicates East direction.
Warrior, father, politicians and administrators are indicated by Sun.
It indicates the power, position, honour, name and fame. It's nature
is Satwic. Gold, Government, politics, public administration are
some of the portfolios attributed to Sun. Bilious in element it
represents right eye, head, heart. The disease prone to are
sunstroke, fever, headache etc., it rules over Leo sign. Venus,
Saturn and Rahu are inimical to it. It gets exalted in 1 0 degrees in
Aries sign and exactly 180 degrees opposite sign in Libra it gets
debilitated.
MOON: It indicates Mind, fickleness, mother, loss, expenses,
travel, and changes. It is a female planet. Cream white is its colour.
It indicates water, irrigation, milk, food, chemicals. Its direction is
North West. It represents the business community. It has prime
signification over astrology. It represents left eye and prone to
infections, colds, cough, asthma, blood defects, kidneys and
diseases of private parts. It rules over Cancer sign. Venus, Saturn
and Rahu are inimical to it. It gets exalted in Taurus at 3 degrees
and 180 degrees opposite sign in Scorpio it gets debilitated.
MARS: is a plane of pride and prestige besides being a quarrelsome
planet. It promotes anger. It is a fiery and male planet. It represents
blood red colour. It indicates South direction. Warrior by nature it
signifies brothers and husband in female horoscope. Technical,
machinery, hard works, agriculture, defense, armed forces,
uniformed services and dental surgery and related profession are
indicated by it. It represents ores, granite, mining and any produce

of earth. Accidents, injuries and violence are indicated by it. It
signify, flesh, muscles, teeth, backbone. Black magic is one of its
indications. It rules over Aries and Scorpio. It gets exalted in
Capricorn at 28 Degrees and 1 80 degrees opposite sign of Cancer
is its debilitated place.
MERCURY: is the prime significator of education, intellect and
business. It indicates friends of both sexes. It is both male and
female in nature. It has the colour of green. Its direction is north. It
represents business community. It signifies younger siblings,
maternal relations. Mathematics, accounts, statistics, planning
and analysis are itsT' subjects. It also indicates astrology and
logic. It represents writing, publishing and stationery materials. It
also represents ambassadors, Writers, and teachers. It signifies
forehead, neck, shoulders, tongue, and skin. Allergies are the
prime disease indicated by Mercury. Ketu, Mars are prime
enemies to it and with Jup it is controlled. It rules over Gemini and
Virgo. At 15 degrees in Virgo it gets exalted and opposite sign in
Pisces it gets debilitated.
JUPITER: Learned, male planet. Indicates Ether and yellow
colour. North east is the direction. Religious, Preacher: Audit,
philosophy, nobility, well behaved. Jupiter is Satwic in nature, Priest
by cast, Indicates Law and it is main indicator of finance, and
children. It indicates banks, endowments, teaching institutions,
meditation centers. Life insurance is also indicated by Jupiter.
Nose, Fat, Liver, jaundice are diseases indicated by Jupiter. Venus
and Rahu are enemies. It rules Sagittarius and Pisces. Exalted at
5 Degrees in Cancer and opposite sign Capricorn is its debilitated
sign.

VENUS: Spouse, marriage, properties and luxuries are main
indication of this planet. Brahmin by caste, it is a female planet.
Venus is White in colour & watery by nature. It indicates South
east direction. Expertise in any field is indicated by this planet.
Pleasures and luxuries are indicated by this. Beauty, arts, music,
dance, drama, cinema etc., are other indications of this planet.
Prostitution and related profession are indicated by this planet.
It also signifies diabetes, phlegm, cold diseases and sex related
problems. Womb and ovaries problems in females are indicated
by this planet. Jupiter, Moon, Sun and Ketu are enemies to it. It
rules over Taurus and Libra. In Pisces at 27 Degrees its get
exalted and in Virgo it is debilitated.
SATURN: Basically all astrological texts attach all malefic indication
to this planet. But it is a planet representing karma of person. As
a matter of fact, it only gives the results accrued due to good or bad
deeds done by the person. But being a karma karaka, it does
support all works done by the person. But to be alert and not to
commit sin, it delays matter enabling a person to think before the
act is done. It makes the man to realize the purpose of life. Hence
it promotes low profile in jobs. It also prompts the person with
forewarning, by giving diseases, difficulties to make him realize his
past mistakes. Being a planet of efforts normally the person is
prone to lose physical strength and develop nerves disability. It
gives chronic troubles and pains so that the person turns to self
realization. Its colour is Blue. Western direction is attributed to this
pianet. It being a slow planet Laziness is attributed to this planet.
It rules over natural 1 0'" house of zodiac Capricorn and natural gain
place 11th Aquarius. Sun, Moon, Mars, Ketu are inimical to it. Its
exaltation is in Libra at 20 degrees and in Aries it gets debilitated.

RAHU: It is a shadow planet. All shadow deals are attributed to
it. Traditionally it officiate Saturn in many ways. However Naadi
differs a little bit. Saturn is a straight forward planet, where as
Rahu is a shadow planet. The nature of work by its influence will
have the tint of antisocial elements. Its colour is Black. It indicates
the South West direction. It is an out cast planet. It is a planet of
repetitive nature and hence over work is one of its significations.
All things happen suddenly. Accidents, injuries and death are of
sudden nature. It is foreign in nature and hence indicate all matters
related to foreign. It indicates big vehicles, x-rays, atomic energy.
It also denotes black magic. Asylums, Hospitals and Jails are
places indicated by it. Its motion is always retrograde, hence
many a times it reverses the matters. Thievish tendencies are
indicated by it. It is also responsible for illusions as it is a shadow
planet. If any disease is influenced by it is beyond the scope of
medical tests and cannot be identified. In general it indicates the
long parts of the body, like intestines etc., it does not rule over any
sign as lord. However some texts have prescribed Taurus as its
exaltation point and Scorpio as debilitation point. This is possibly
because Venus has some affinity with secret affairs of Rahu and
mind must co operates for such acts. Therefore the exaltation
place of moon is also attributed to Rahu. In general when Rahu
influences the Moon the persons will be eccentric in nature. Mostly
this is found in celebrities. Rahu represents Islam religion.
KETU: The nature of Ketu is quite different from that of Rahu.
Though there is suddenness in their results, the nature of results
varies. Rahu normally supports materialistic benefits and
prompts towards sin. Ketu robs materialistic comforts to turn him
philosophical. For this peculiar reason for all materialistic
achievements, Ketu acts as obstructive planet. It supports the

service oriented knowledge and works. Thus, a doctor, a
preacher, astrologer, exorcists are all supported by Ketu.
Philanthropists, Monks, endowment officers, are all indicated by
Ketu. In general it creates dejection towards bondage of work,
love and accumulation of wealth. Thus, obstructions, quitting,
divorcing and separating are some of its dangerous qualities, if
viewed materialistically. It is a planet of abortive nature, injuries and
disputes. It indicates cancer, piles and growth related health
hazards. Mercury, Venus, Saturn are inimical to it. Ketu also do not
have any ruler ship over signs. Ketu is debilitated in the sign where
Rahu is exalted and vice versa. Ketu signifies Christianity.
In order to use the proper signification with the combination of
planet at different levels which is explained elsewhere in this
book, the significations of planets and its enmities are modified
as per Naadi rules enabling the students to get at the right
combination of results.
20. ROLE OF PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS AND
HOUSE MATTERS
In stellar astrology the planet gets linked up with the Cusp at
various points as detailed earlier and there are different dignities
to the planet while linking to these cusps.
A Planet posited in a cusp is more important because it covers the
entire house.
The planet situated in a house will add up its signification to the
house signification. Then either he himself or the planet in his Star
will give the results of the house with these modifications.
The Sub Lord of the Cusp or Star lord of the Cusp is activated
by a planet posited in its star. In the event of no planet in its star

the same Sub or Star Lord will participate in giving results.
That means a cusp Sub Lord, if associated with other cusps as a
planet will modify the house significations according to its nature.
This is again same as above we need to change the dignity of
planet and read the same result as above.
As far as association of planet to planet is concern we recommend
the Naadi significations cited above.
It would be single point of view to give in running texts for each
planet related to a cusp in different manner and there is possibility
of missing the signification and co -relating with signification of
house. We have therefore adopted a table format where in for each
house matter we have tabled the significations of planets. This
would enable the reader to assess the impact on every aspect of
house and planet significations and arrive at results. By marking
significations to each planet we can also derive the cusp relationship
for each Significator.

If linked to
1st HOUSE
Activity
All ambitions
Beginning
Character
Fame
Health
Longevity
Vigor
Honour
Authority
Father
Politics
Delink
Express
Name
Fame
Health
Gold
Flow, Mind
Fickle
Fraud
Emotion
Mother
Water
Respond
Travel
React
Unsteady
Dare, Debt
Action
Sibling
Haste
Enemy
Violence
Accidents
Surgery
Iron
jup Q
Intelligent
Education
Friend
Trade
Speech
Convey
Analyse
Liberal
Communications
Mercury
Air-Gas
Hands
Neck
Forehead
Shoulders
Tongue
Skin
Money
Progeny
Law
Wisdom
Expand
Justice
Protection
Religion
Optimism
Tin
Marriage
Spouse
Joy
Attract
Wealth
Arts
Joy
Comforts
Pleasures
Fortune
Unite
Copper
Either-Gas
Fat Brain
Thigh
Feet
Nose
Liver
Glands

If linked to
2nd HOUSE
Death
Documents
Earning
Express
Speech
' Food
Observe
Wealth
Delink
Express
Name
Fame
Health
Gold
Mother
Water
Respond
Travel
React
Unsteady
Haste
Enemy
Violence
Accidents
Surgery
Iron
Banking Activity
Face, Eyes
Silver
Family
EL Broto Mother
4th to El Brother
6th to Father -
8th to Spouse -
1 0th to Child rennth to MotherIZtho Siblings
Fire-Bile
Pitta Bones
Right Eye
Heart
Skeleton
Cold
Blood
Left Eye
Lungs
Urinary
Bladder
Circulatory
system
Fire-Bile
Blood cells
Marrow
Eyebrow
Heart
Teeth
Muscles
Intelligent
Education
Friend
Trade
Speech
Convey
Analyse
Liberal
Communications
Mercury
Money
Progeny
Law
Wisdom
Expand
Justice
Protection
Religion
Optimism
Tin
Marriage
Spouse
Joy
Attract
Wealth
Arts
Joy
Comforts
Pleasures
Fortune
Unite
Copper
Profession
Steady
Limit
Discipline
Delay
De-link
Land Lazy
Setbacks
Blame
Lead
Sudden
Foreign
Delink
Illusion
Arrest ■
Fear
Deceptive
Provocate
Shadow
Gas
Mystic
Spiritual
Block
Detached
Dejection
Break
Liberate
Bondage
Alloy
Air-Gas
Hands
Neck
Forehead
Shoulders
Tongue
Skin
Either-Gas
Fat Brain
Thigh
Feet
Nose
Liver
Glands
Water
Meha Cold
Semen
Face
Uterus
Ovaries
Cheek
Fluids
Air- Fire
| Gas
Dilution
Intestine
Ear Head
Mouth
Lips
Tubues
Fire-Bile
Blocks
Nails
Hair
, Anus
Private part
Valves
■ Growths
Air-Gas
Digestive
Buttock
Knee
Foreleg
Chin
Nerve
Secretions

If linked to
3rd HOUSE
‘Communication
Courage - Ability
! House change
' Longevity
Sale of Property
S$lf Agreement
Short-Travel
Writing-Publish
Interviews
Neck-Shoulder
Younger Siblings
Father in Law
5th to El Brother •
7th to Father -
9th to Spouse -
11th to Children -
1 2th to Mother -
I 1st to Siblings
il JUP
Money
Progeny
Law '
Wisdom
Expand
Justice
Protection
Religion
Optimism
Tin
Either-Gas
1 Fat Brain
Thigh
Feet
Nose
Liver
Glands
Marriage
Spouse
Joy
Attract
Wealth
Arts
Joy
Comforts
Pleasures
Fortune
Unite
Profession
Steady
Limit
Discipline
Delay
De-link
Land Lazy
Setbacks
Blame
Lead
Sudden
Foreign
Delink
Illusion
Arrest
Fear
Deceptive
Provocate
Shadow
Gas
Mystic
Spiritual
Block
Detached
Dejection
Break
Liberate
Bondage
Alloy
Copper

II linked to
4th HOUSE
Basic Education
Conveyance
Happiness
Home Place
Lands
Masses
Private Life
Properties
o
SUN
Peace
Honour
Authority
Father
Politics
Delink
Express
Name
Fame
Health
Gold
D
Flow, Mind
Fickle
Fraud
Emotion
Mother
Water
Respond
Travel
React
Unsteady
Silver
C?
Dare, Debt
Action
Sibling
Haste
Enemy
| Violence
Accidents
Surgery
Iron
Intelligent
Education
Friend
Trade
Speech
Convey
Analyse
Liberal
Communications
Mercury
JUP
Money
Progeny
Law
Wisdom
Expand
Justice
Protection
Religion
Optimism
Tin
VEN
Marriage
Spouse
Joy
Attract
Wealth
Arts
Joy
Comforts
Pleasures
Fortune
Unite
Copper
SAT
Profession
Steady
Limit
Discipline
Delay
De-link
Land Lazy
Setbacks
Blame
Lead
a
RAH
Sudden
Foreign
Delink
Illusion
Arrest
Fear
Deceptive
Provocate
Shadow
Gas
KET
Mystic
Spiritual
Block
Detached
Dejection
Break
Liberate
Bondage
Alloy

If linked to
5th HOUSE
Speculation
Disease Cure
Divinity
Love
Oppose to Work
Pleasure pursuit
Politics
Sports
Wisdom
Heart, U. Belly
Children
Brother in Law
7th to El Brother -
9th to Fatherllth to Spouse -
1st to Children -
2nd to Mother -
3rd to Siblings
o
SUN
Honour
Authority
Father
Politics
Delink
Express
Name
Fame
Health
Gold
Fire-Bile
Pitta Bones
Right Eye
Heart
Skeleton
Cold
Blood
Left Eye
Lungs
Urinary
Bladder
Circulatory
system
Fire-Bile
Blood cells
Marrow
Eyebrow
Heart
Teeth
Muscles
Intelligent
Education
Friend
Trade
Speech
Convey
Analyse
Liberal
Communications
Mercury
Air-Gas
Hands
Neck
Forehead
Shoulders
Tongue
Skin
Q VEN
SAT
Marriage
Spouse
Joy
Attract
Wealth
Arts
Joy
Comforts
Pleasures
Fortune
Unite
Copper |
Profession
Steady
Limit
Discipline
Delay
De-link
Land Lazy
Setbacks
Blame
Lead
Sudden
Foreign
Delink
Illusion
Arrest
Fear
Deceptive
Provocate
Shadow
Gas
Mys
Spirit
Block
Detached
Dejection
Break
Liberate
Bondage
Alloy
Either-Gas
Fat Brain
Thigh
Feet
Nose
Liver
Glands

If linked to
o
6th HOUSE
Enemies
Job & Service
Obstacles
De-Link Partner
Debts -Loans
Diseases
Litigations
Win over
Struggle - Fear
Stomach
Mtrnl. Ulcles
Marital Problems
8th to El Brother -
1 0th to Father •
1 2th to Spouse -
2nd to Children -
3rd to Mother -
4th to Siblings
Honour
Authority
Father
Politics
Delink
Express
Name
Fame
Health
Gold
Fire-Bile
Pitta Bones
Right Eye
Heart
Skeleton
Cold
Blood
Left Eye
Lungs
Urinary
Bladder
Circulatory
system
Fire-Bile
Blood cells
Marrow
Eyebrow
Heart
Teeth
Muscles
Intelligent
Education
Friend
Trade
Speech
Convey
Analyse
Liberal
Communications
Mercury
JUP
Money
Progeny
Law
Wisdom
Expand
Justice
Protection
Religion
Optimism
Tin
Marriage
Spouse
Joy
Attract
Wealth
Arts
Joy
Comforts
Pleasures
Fortune
Unite
Copper
ven| \ sat <0.
Profession
Steady
Limit
Discipline
Delay
De-link
Land Lazy
Setbacks
Blame
Lead
Sudden
Foreign
Delink
Illusion
Arrest
Fear
Deceptive
Provocate
Shadow
Gas
Block
Detached
Dejection
Break
Liberate
Bondage
Alloy
Air-Gas
Hands
Neck
Forehead
Shoulders
Tongue
Skin
Either-Gas
Fat Brain
Thigh
Feet
Nose
Liver
Glands
Water
Meha Cold
Semen
Face
Uterus
Ovaries
Cheek
Fluids
Air-Gas
Digestive
Buttock
Knee
Foreleg
Chin i
Nerve
Secretions
Air-Fire
Gas
Dilution
Intestine
Ear Head
Mouth
Lips
Tubues
Fire-Bile
Blocks
Nails
Hair
Anus
Private parti
Valves
Growths

II linked to
7th HOUSE
Death
Business
Partners
Martial - Life
Opposite Person
Foreign relation
Legal matters
Journey Break
Foreign contact
Waist - LBelly
Spouse
El.Broto Father
9th to El Brother11th to Father -
1 st to Spouse -
3rd to Children -
4th to Mother -
5th to Siblings
o
SUN
MOO 071
Delink
Express
Name
Fame
Health
Gold
Fire-Bile
Pitta Bones
Right Eye
Heart
Skeleton
Flow, Mind
Fickle
Fraud
Emotion
Mother
Water
Respond
Travel
React
Unsteady
Silver
Dare, Debt
Action
Sibling
Haste
Enemy
Violence
Accidents
Surgery
Iron
Cold
Blood
Left Eye
Lungs
Urinary
Bladder
Circulatory
system
Fire-Bile
Blood cells
Marrow
Eyebrow
Heart
Teeth
Muscles
JUP
•) SAT
s
Intelligent
Education
Friend
Trade
Speech
Convey
Analyse
Liberal
Communications
Mercury
Money
Progeny
Law
Wisdom
Expand
Justice
Protection
Religion
Optimism
Tin
Marriage
Spouse
Joy
Attract
Wealth
Arts
Joy
Comforts
Pleasures
Fortune
Unite
Copper
Profession
Steady
Limit
Discipline
Delay
De-link
Land Lazy
Setbacks
Blame
Lead
Sudden
Foreign
Delink
Illusion
Arrest
-Fear
Deceptive
Provocate
Shadow
Gas
Mystic
Spiritual
Block
Detached
Dejection
Break
Liberate
Bondage
Alloy

c f
Dare, Debt
Action
Sibling
Haste
Enemy
Violence
Accidents
Surgeiy
Iron
Fire-Bile
Blood cells
Marrow
Eyebrow
Heart
Teeth
Muscles
Intelligent
Education
Friend
Trade
Speech
Convey
Analyse
Liberal
Communications
Mercury
JUP
Money
Progeny
Law
Wisdom
Expand
Justice
Protection
Religion
Optimism
Tin
VBJ
Marriage
Spouse
Joy
Attract
Wealth
Arts
Joy
Comforts
Pleasures
Fortune
Unite
Copper
SAT
Profession
Steady
Limit
Discipline
Delay
De-link
Land Lazy
Setbacks
Blame
Lead
a
RAH
Sudden
Foreign
Delink
Illusion
Arrest
Fear
Deceptive
Provocate
Shadow
Gas
KEY
Mystic
Spiritual
Block
Detached
Dejection
Break
Liberate
Bondage
Alloy
Air-Gas
Hands
Neck
Forehead
Shoulders
Tongue
Skin
Either-Gas
Fat Brain
Thigh
Feet
Nose
Liver
Glands
Water
MehaCold j
Semen
Face
Uterus
Ovaries
Cheek
Fluids
Air-Gas
Digestive
Buttock
Knee
Foreleg
Chin
Nerve
Secretions
Air-Fire
Gas
Dilution
Intestine
Ear Head
Mouth
Lips
Tubues

If linked to
9th HOUSE
o
SUN
Past Merits
Higher Education
Foreign Travel
Piligrimage
Legal matters
Spiritual
Others Agreement
Occult-Intuition
2nd relation / wife
Thighs
Honour
Authority
Father
Politics
Delink
Express
Name
Fame
Health
Gold
DWcf
Flow, Mind
Fickle
Fraud
Emotion
Mother
Water
Respond
Travel
React
Unsteady
Silver
MAR
Dare, Debt
Action
Sibling
Haste
Enemy
Violence
Accidents
Surgery
Iron
IVER'
Intelligent
Education
Friend
Trade
Speech
Convey
Analyse
Liberal
Communications
Mercury
Father
Brother/Sister in Law
11th to El Brother
Istto Father -
3rd to Spouse -
5th to Children -
6th to Mother -
7th to Siblings
Fire-Bile
Pitta Bones
Right Eye
Heart
Skeleton
Cold
Blood
Left Eye
Lungs
Urinary
Bladder
Circulatory
system
Fire-Bile
Blood cells
Marrow
Eyebrow
Heart
Teeth
Muscles
Air-Gas
Hands
Neck
Forehead
Shoulders
Tongue
Skin

£ NB? JUP J VEN ^ SAT Q RAH KET
Intelligent
Education
Friend
Trade
Speech
Convey
Analyse
Liberal
Communications
Mercury
Money
Progeny
Law
Wisdom
Expand
Justice
Protection
Religion
Optimism
Tin
Marriage
Spouse
Joy
Attract
Wealth
Arts
Joy
Comforts
Pleasures
Fortune
Unite
Copper
Profession
Steady
Limit
Discipline
Delay
De-link
Land Lazy
Setbacks
Blame
Lead
Sudden
Foreign
Delink
Illusion
Arrest
Fear
Deceptive
Provocate
Shadow
Gas
Mystic
Spiritual
Block
Detached
Dejection
Break
Liberate
Bondage
Alloy
Air-Gas
Hands
Neck
Forehead
Shoulders
Tongue
Skin
Erfher~Gas |
Fat Brain
Thigh
Feet
Nose
Liver
Glands -
Water
Air-Gas
MehaCold Digestive
Semen
Face
Uterus
Ovaries
Cheek
Fluids
Buttock
Knee
Foreleg
Chin
Nerve
Secretions
Air-Fire
Gas
Dilution
Intestine
Ear Head
Mouth
Lips
Tubues
Fire-Bile
Blocks
vNails
Hair
Anus
Private part
Valves
Growths

If linked to
11th HOUSE
Fulfillments
Hopes
Profits
' Gains
Success
Political
Friends
Satisfaction
Income
Calf muscles
Elder Brother
Ptrnl Uncle
1st to El Brother3rd to Father -
5th to Spouse -
7th to Children -
8th to Mother -
9th to Siblings
Honour
Authority
Father
Politics
Delink
! Express
Name
Fame
! Health
Gold
Fire-Bile
Pitta Bones
Right Eye
Heart
Skeleton
Cold
Blood
Left Eye
Lungs
Urinary
Bladder
Circulatory
system
Fire-Bile
Blood cells
Marrow
Eyebrow
Heart
Teeth
Muscles
Intelligent
Education
Friend
Trade
Speech
Convey
Analyse
Liberal
Communications
Mercury
Air-Gas
Hands
Neck
Forehead
Shoulders
Tongue
Skin
XJ
KET
Mystic
Spiritual
Block
Detached
Dejection
Break
Liberate
Bondage
Alloy
Fire-Bile
Blocks
Nails
Hair
Anus
Private part
Valves
Growths

c f
Dare, Debt
Action
Sibling
Haste
Enemy
Violence
Accidents
Surgery
Iron
Fire-Bile
Blood cells
Marrow
Eyebrow
Heart
Teeth
Muscles
JUP
VEN
Intelligent
Education
Friend
Trade
Speech
Convey
Analyse
Liberal
Communications
Mercury
Money
Progeny
Law
Wisdom
Expand
Justice
Protection
Religion
Optimism
Tin
Marriage
Spouse
Joy
Attract
Wealth
Arts
Joy
Comforts
Pleasures
Fortune
Unite
Copper
Water
Meha Cold
Semen
Face
Uterus
Ovaries
Cheek
Fluids

21. SIGN SIGNIFICATIONS
MESHA-ARIES
Fiery
East
Barren Chara
Bile
Positive Quadruped Male
Acute Mysterious Violent Rythmic I Impulsive jprishotodaya I Warrior
Cruel
SIGNIFIES
Adjustable
Adventure
Aggressive
Artistic
Assertive
Confidant
Courage
Creative
Dynamic
Energetic
Enterprising
Fickle Mind
Freedom
Independent
Nervous
Planning
Quarrel
Restless
Selfish
Short tempered
Strong will
Stubborn
Vitality
BODY PARTS
Arteries Brain
Brain
Eyes
Face Bones
Head
Muscles
Pineal Gland
Upper Jaw
DISEASES
Brain related fever
Coma
Epilepsy
Eye problems
Fire-Accidents
Head eruptions
Headache
High fever
Inflammations
Insomnia
Nerve centre damage
Neuralgia
Paralysis
Piles
Pyorrhoea
Vertigo
CAREER
Agricultural
Architecture
Chemicals
Dentist
Engineers
Fire services
Gambling
Industry
Individual enterprises
Judicial Jobs
Leadership
Machinery & tools
Metal works
Surgeons
Thieves
Uniformed services
Union leaders

Lord VENUS
Bhadhaka CAPRIC0RN-9th
Bhadhakadhipathi SATURN
Maraka GEMINI-SCORPIO
Marakadhipathi MER-MAR
* VRISHABHA-TAURUS
Prudent
Tonsils
Property dealings
Reliable
Vehicle related
Rigid
Strong will

MITHUNA-GEMINI
Positive Biped
Human Voice
SIGNIFIES
Activity
Adaptable
Amusements
Artistic
Changeable
Charming
Conversations
Imaginative
Intellect
Inventive
Logical
Mathematics
Planning
Progressive
Reading Writing
Sensual
Unrest
Versatile
Witty
Young
Male
Airey
Lord
Bhadhaka
Bhadhakadhipathi
Maraka
Marakadhipathi
West
MERCURY
$AGITTARIUS-7th
JUPITER
CANCER-SAGITT
MOO-JUP
Musical I Intellect
BODY PARTS
Arms
Bronchial tubes
Fingers
Hands
Nervous
Ribs
Shoulders
DISEASES
Asthma
Breathing problems
Catarrh
Chest problems
Collar bones
Fractures
Arms
Lung disorders
Nerves trouble
Pneumonia
Rheumatism
Stammering
Tuborculosis
Accounts related
Advertisements
Air Travels
Space related
Combined business
Communication
related
Export Imports
Intellectual pursuits
Journalism
Lecturer
Media
Publication, Press
Sea related jobs
Textiles cottons
Travel related jobs
Typing

Lord
Bhadhaka
Bhadhakadhipathi
Maraka
MOO
TAURUS-1 1th
VENUS
LEO-CAPRICORN
KARKA-CANCER
Marakadhipathi SUN-SAT
Negative MuftHeged Female Watery North Fruitful Chara Phelgm
Pristodaya Priestly
Moksha Emotional Sensitive Unstable
SIGNIFIES
Adjustable
Domestic
Emotional
Gets influenced
Henpecked
Imaginative
Intelligent
Intuitional
Over sensitive
Psychic
Restless
Sensitive
Shy nature
Unforgiving
BODY PARTS
Breasts
Digestive Canal
Pancreas
Ribs
Sternum
Womb
DISEASES
Blood Problems
Epilepsy
Gastric problems
Lack of resistance
Less stamina
Little vitality
Lung disorders
Phobias
Tuborculosis
Ulcers
CAREER
Athletic related
Food related
Liquid
Transports
Milk related
Music
Pearls
Performing arts
Religious science
Sea related jobs

SIMHA-LEO
Lord SUN
Bhadhaka ARIES-9th
Bhadhakadhipathi MARS
Maraka VIRGO-AQUARIUS
Marakadhipathi MER-SAT
Individualistic '
Music
Proud
Sensitive
Sincere
Stubborn

KANYA-VIRGO
Lord
Bhadhaka
Bhadhakadhipathi
Maraka
Marakadhipathi
MER
PI$CE$-7th
JUPITER
LIBRA-PISCES
VEN-JUP
Intellect Voice
SIGNIFIES
Analytical
Cautious
Diplomatic
Discriminative
Economical
Fond of op sex
Fussing
Futile imaginations
Impractical
Impulsive
Intelligent
Lack of confidence
Methodical
Modest
Peace loving
Selfish
Soft spoken
Truthful
Female | Earthy South Barren Ubhaya Windy
Medical Human Psychic Mental Stirshodaya Business
BODY PARTS
Abdomen
Back lower nerves
Intestine
DISEASES
Arthritis
Constipation
Gas problems
Hernia
Indigestion
Infections in intestine
Masturbation
tendency
Nutrition deficiencies
Plexus region
Spleen troubles
CAREER
Accounts
Critic
Dentist
Industrial ventures
Management
Maths
Mental activities
Scholars
Teaching
Writing

Lord VEN
Bhadhaka LEO-1 1th
Bhadhakadhipathi SUN
Maraka SCORPIO-ARIES
Over sexy
Transport related
Positive
Refined
Romance
Thrusts views

VRISHCHIKA-SCORPIO
Negative tfultileggep Female Watery North Fruitful Sthira Phlegm
Sensitive Violent Secretive Material Medical Occult Pristodaya Priestly
SIGNIFIES
Critical
Emotional
Excited
Fickle
Inclined to cruelty
Jealous
Materialistic
Not adjusting nature
Sensual
Suspicious
Unforgiving
BODY PARTS
Anus
Bladder
Cervix
Genitals
Prostate Glands
Sex organs
Urinary system
DISEASES
Bladder stones
Cystitis
Fistula
Hydrocele
Mensural
disturbances
Piles
Prostate problems
Rectal problems
Syphilis
Throat problems
Ulcers
Urinary genital
Vernal diseases
CAREER
Armed force services
Diplomacy
Dock yards
Female oriented units
Godowsand stores
Industrial Units
Legal professions
Performing arts
Physicians

SIGNIFIES
Boasting
Business attitude
Careless
Dynamic
Energetic
Enterprising
Frank
Hasty
Honest
Impulsive
Irresponsible
Non hypocritic
Orthodox
Philosophical
Religious
BODY PARTS
Arterials
Hips
Liver
Neuralgia of Hip
Pelvis
Sacrum
Thighs
Lord
Bhadhaka
Bhadhakadhipathi
Maraka
DHANUSH-SAGITTARIUS
Fiery
JUP
GEMINI-7th
MERCURY
CAPRICORN-GEMINI
Marakadhipathi SAT-MER
East Semi-Fruit Ubhaya I Bile
Prishtodaya Warrior
DISEASES
Fits
Gout
Hip related problems
Injuries
Liver problems
Nerves disorders
Obesity
Paralysis
Pelvis
Rheumatic pains
Thighs related
Typhoid
CAREER
Advisory profession
Animal husbandry
Astrology
Councilors
Legal related
Librarian
Literature
Medicine related
Ministers
Philosopher
Preachers & teachers
Priests

Lord
Bhadhaka
SAT
SCORPIO-1 1th
Bhadhakadhipathi MARS
Maraka
AQUARIUS-CANCER
MAKARA-CAPRICORN
Negative 4Leg/Water Female Ea
Soumya
Sacrifices Lame
SIGNIFIES
Cautious
Cruel
Cunning
Determined
Hypocrite religious
Lazy nature
Methodical
Mindful efforts
Patient
Pessimist
Practical nature
Reliable
Ruthless
Shameless
Marakadhipathi SAT-MOO
South ]Semi-Fruit| Chara Windy
Pristodaya Business
BODY PARTS
rteries
enes
lands
Joints
Knees
Nerves
Skin
DISEASES
Acidity
Depressions
Knee problems
Leprosy . .
Rheumatic pains
Sino-infections
Skin related diseases
Tooth problems
CAREER
Administration
Architecture related
Civil works
Dental related
Executive services
Harbours
Marine products
Meditation etc.
Notorious activities
Public works

Lord
Bhadhaka
SAT
LIBRA-9th
Bhadhakadhipathi VENUS
Maraka
PISCES-LEO
KUMBHA-AQUARIUS
Marakadhipathi JUP-SUN
Positive Biped
Mystic Intellect
SIGNIFIES
Male
Aiery
Voice Humane
BODY PARTS
Ankles
Eccentric
Easily provoked Arteries System
Fluctuated fortunes Calves
Hardworks
Idealistic
Independent
Innovative
Loyal
Misunderstood
Progressive
Rational thinking
Uncertainty
Glands
Nerves
West
Sthira
Bile
Musical Shi&Ddayal Service
DISEASES
Back bones
Blood related
Breathing disorders
Gas problems
Prone to injuries
Spasm disorders
Vein problems
CAREER
Archeologist
Back door activities
Mental works
Occult subjects
Physical hardworks
Social related
Space related

Lord
Bhadhaka
JUP
VIRGO-7th
Bhadhakadhipathi MERCURY
Maraka
ARIES-VIRGO
MEENA-PISCES
Marakadhipathi MAR-MER
Negative I Aqua I Female Watery North Fruitful Ubhaya Pheigm
Unstable Secretive Emotional Intellect Psychic Philosophic 1 Ubhaya Priestly
SIGNIFIES
Change
Compassion
Confused
Gets mislead
Greedy
Indecisive
Intuitions
Learned
Orthodox
Psychic
Religious
Reserved
Superstitions
Sympathetic
BODY PARTS
Feet
Lymph organs
Pituitary glands
Toes
DISEASES
CAREER
Addictions to Drugs Drug related
Boils
Colds
Gastric problems
Gland disorders
Gout
Impaired memory
Mental distortions
Mucus
Export-Import
Hospital and related
Occult related

22. K.P. HORARY CHART ON NUMBER BASIS
we cast the horoscope based on a number between 1 and 249
pronounced by the consultant for a question. We take the
Ascendant as the number denoting the sign, star and sub in the
table given. We have the commencing point of Lagna for a
number given, in degrees, minutes and seconds. All we need
to know is the corresponding houses to this particular rising
degree of Lagna. There are number of astrological software
available and most of them provide the facility to erect a chart
for stellar system and a few of them have provision for number
charts also. But for those who do not have software that can
give a number chart, we can use the regular software with
requisite ayanamsha alternations.
For this purpose we will take an example horoscope for a serious
question. Today is 5'h June 2007. We shall put a question now:
the Question is:
"What is that I am doing? When it will be completed and
how?"
KP Number given
34 Time 19:07. Week day is Tuesday.
Now the Lagna for KP No 34 is 17:46:40 Vrishabha. The Sign
Lord Venus, The Star Lord is Moon, Sub Lord is Mercury.
(Note: The Lagna Sub Lord itself indicates, the matter: Writing
and Publishing, Moon+Mercury is Astrology, Venus is Expertise.
The Day Lord Mars indicates Printing and Publishing.)
Now we cast the horoscope by computer for Kp No: 34.
If we use the computer with the horary number facility we can
use that. Other wise we can use regular programme and arrive
at the Number Lagna.

We will use now regular programme and put the horary chart by
computer.
The Lagna for Number 34 is Taurus commencing at 17.46.40.
On 5-6-2007 sunrise at Hyderabad is 5-41 a.m. and the rising
lagna is "Vrishabha".
Vrishabha Lagna is at 19.14.21 degrees but we want Lagna for
17.46.40. We have to reduce 1 degree, 27 minutes and 41
seconds to match the lagna degrees. For this purpose we have
to cast little earlier than 5.41 . 4 minutes of clock time is equal
to approx 1 degree of Lagna. For 1 minute it is 15 minutes of
Lagna. If we make 2 minutes more it is 30 minutes of Lagna.
Therefore we must reduce the time little less than 6 minutes.
After adjusting the time to 5.35.02 a.m. we get the lagna
Vrishabha at 17.46.40 as denoted by KP number 34. We can
now consider the remaining houses as given by the computer.
Note: This is only to note the Cusp points for 12 houses.
No planetary position from this chart to be considered.
Str Sub

For the same number we have also used a programme which
facilitates to give the cusp points, by using number. The following
are the cusp points reported by this programme.
There is hardly any difference and up to sub level we get correct
report in both the horoscopes.
But we normally use the former method due to updated data
resources being used for computation of houses and we shall
also be taking the planetary position for the time of question from
the same programme. Of-course, we must check from the
software programme whether it is backed up by reliable technical
support with sufficient knowledge on the subject.
Now to get the planetary position we have to again use the
normal programme and cast a horoscope for the date and time
19.07- 5th, June 2007. and take only the Planetary position.

Incorporating these two we make the Question chart.
Dasha Bhukti periods

Mar-21-54 Mer.Sun
XI-09-18 $at,Ven
■ - Si vV v i.
MOCh13^9MOO, Jup.
W-08-46 Sunken.
k
Rah47-SJ RahiSun 1
* X-06-51 Rah, Rah
V» I
QUESTION
It will be completed and how?
KP NUMBER 34
Time 19:07
XII-14-19 Yen,Ven 1-17-4640 Moo, Mar
■ .cMrKjV*'*
Veil 0567 Sal, Mer .
m 08-46 SaLVen
Sat 26-08 Mer,Jup
IV-06-51 Ket<R8h
KeM7*33Ven,Mar
VIli-13-25 Ven.Von
J /Am frr*vfv '".x*. yJt *->
vn-1746 ManMaK' VI-14-1M0 R«h,M^ -V-0&-18 Sun, Yen

In order to make easy application of rules, we have designed
a desk board where In all the components are taken care off,
giving the Significators and their performance capabilities
at one stroke.
The replicate of desk board appended herewith for ready
reference.
We shall give the details of analysis:
In this example chart we have not disclosed the content of
Question, and wanted to know what exactly I am doing at present.
For this purpose we have to Analyse Lagna (the ascendant)
1. Lagna is Taurus. Venus is lord of it who is in the Sign of Moon.
Moon indicates mind and mental work. Taurus sign is of
speech.
2. The Lagna is in the Star of Moon and sub of Mer. This
re-confirms the work is related to intelligence.
3. Sun is posited in the Sign. Sun the King of all planets indicate
the atma, dignity and status. He is also in the star of Moon
and he is in Venus Sub.
4. Jupiter aspects Sun and is again in Mer Star and Ven Sub.
Jupiter is divinity, adviser, preacher and religion.
The Lagna is indicating the divine subject of intellectual nature
of high status which relates to planet connected with it. The
combination of “Moo+Mer+Jup” itself indicates Astrology, Sun is
brightness, bringing to light, the subject astrology. Mer is
publishing and writing.
The Planets involved in Ascendant have disclosed the nature of

efforts by the self. Now let us take up the Ascendant Sub
Analysis.
Sub Lord of Ascendant is Mercury:
See the Desk Board:
Mercury is indicating:
1st Level - 2, 4, 6, 10 -Translation, Education, Efforts and work
2nd House is taken for translation because it is the house of
additions; it is the house of expression and speech.
3rd house represents original writing. Present book is the
modified presentation of its original Telugu version.
4m House is basic knowledge; this work contains most of the
basics in detail.
This is an educative book.
6th is efforts - 10th is recognition and profession.
At the 2nd Level it is indicating 1 , 5, 6, 7
It is the higher knowledge of divinity 6th and 7th is indicating self
efforts for society.
1st and 6th indicate sickness. Of course, I was not well and
5th shows recovery, now I am recovering.
Mer is in its own sub and hence all the above is again supported
by Mer as Sub lord.
Planets involved, the Sub of Ascendant have all confirmed the
nature of work involved and the conditions thereof.
The Moon representing the mind must reveal the actual matter.
Moo in Desk Board indicating

1, 3, 9 at both at1st and 2nd Level
It is writing work by the self, related to occult matter.
The sub lord is indicating
What all the Ascendant has disclosed is confirmed by Sub lord
of Moon.
Now it is clear that the both Ascendant and Moon confirmed that
I am doing a work of astrology, translation, addition, modification
and writing and publishing.
Now we should go for matter confirmation by 3rd house Cusp sub
Lord.
3rd Cusp Sub Lord is Ven.
In the Desk Board Ven indicating:
Since the matter is confirmed at the 1st level itself it is not
necessary to go into other levels. However other levels will again
indicate same as Ascendant and Moon, in this case.
Having got the matter confirmed we need to go in forsignificators
for houses 3,9 and 11 which are to be seen for writing and
publishing which fall under communication.
In the Horary astrology, once the confirmation of matter and right
selection of relevant houses are made, we need to look directly
for Dasha Bhukti and Antra Lords who would be indicating these
houses to time the event.
Look at the Dasha Bhukti and Antra statement attached.
Moon Dasha is currently running:

Moon had already established his strong signification for the
required houses.
Jupiter is Bhukti and Antra Lord running from 05-06-2007 to
During this period the work cannot be completed
1) Due to the fact that the work is in progress and may not be
completed by this date.
2) Jupiter is retrograde and he does not cross over to 6m house
and will be staying in 7th house itself and 7 1h is not detrimental
to the matter under consideration.
However, the work will have to be completed only after this date
After 12-7-2007 Saturn Antra Begins and it lasts till 26-09-2007.
This is the right period for this work to get published.
Now, we shall use the dictum of Prof: KSK, that a retrograde
planet will give result only after it becomes direct.
Jupiter as Bhukti Lord in our case is becoming direct only after
7th August 2007.
So we safely accept this rule and try to pin down the event
between 7,h August 2007 and 26-9-2007.
It is now the Sun transit which is more useful in pinning down
the timing of event.
After 7'h August Sun will be transiting in Moon Sign which is 3rd
house of Horary chart and he will be transiting in Jup /Sat sub
during 11mto 14th this is the period of fructification of this work.
The horary answer can be cross verified by Naadi system and
Traditional Astrology method. For this purpose we need to cast
the horoscope for 5,h June 2007 at 19:07.

N E S W
E N W S
In Naadi system Lagna is not essential. Since we are also looking
into Traditional method we are marking Lagna also in the above
chart.
Naadi Method of Analysis:
The grouping of planets according to Direction

Since Jupiter is retro we have shown it in the previous direction
also.
The hora lord at 19:07 is Jup.
Jup is in North Direction: He is in the House Mar.
Jup is connected to Ven & Sat.
Venus is "Paanditya" i.e. higher knowledge.
Saturn is "Karma" i.e. Work.
Jupiter is Jeeva - that is human life.
Jup connects to Mar, Mar is printing.
Jupiter is Retro and Joins Mer.
Mercury - Writing, publishing, knowledge.
Mercury is in the Axis of Rah and Ketu.
Rahu represents Secrets, and number of persons.
Rahu since connected to Jeeva represents number of "Jeeva"
Ketu in axis indicate occult subject
Ketu in the house of Sun - the house of Atma
Summing up all we get the matter denoted by Hora Lord Mars.
It is a work of secret knowledge related to human beings being
written and published.
Now the timing of event is based on the transit of planets.
Jupiter becomes direct in August remain in Vrishchika and by that
time
Mer and Sun will get connected to Jupiter. Saturn transits in
Simha connecting Ketu and Rahu.
This is around 2nd week of August.

Analysing by traditional method:
Lagna is Scorpio
Jupiter is in Lagna and aspects 5m house, 7th house and 9th
house
There is an exchange of Moo and Sat in house 3rd and 9,fi
Sat is aspects 11th house
The Lagna Lord has linked the houses 5,7, 9 and the 3rd Lord
The matter is of higher knowledge to society which is related to
occult subject and under publication.
Timing of the event:
Dasha Bhukti and Antra
The planets that are involved to fructify the matter have all
involved during the above dasha, bhukti, antra and sukshma
period.
Confirming from other methods will make the astrologer more
confident in giving prediction to the consultants.
A/a aham karta sarvasya Hari karta
SATYANARAYANA NAIK

23. REMEDIAL MEASURES
The karma theory is the prime key factor in Indian astrology. The
planets are designated with the powers to bestow the persons
with the results of past karma at appropriate time. There are
several theories with diverse opinion with regard to this. During
research on the subject "Remedies" I have experienced certain
incidents. It is worth to share these with the readers.
I have been suffering from bronchial infection resulting in
breathing problem. Even after consuming different types of
antibiotics for several days, there was no improvement and some
other problems developed in the digestive tract.
During these days I happened to meet a gentleman called Sri
Kondeti Nageswara Rao, who is a yoga specialist conducting
classes at Hansa Yoga Kendra, at Hyderabad. During my
meeting with him, he showed me some of the case histories of
curing cancer, Leprosy, Asthma, thyroid problems by advocating
Asanas and Pranayama.
Of late, there have been many TV shows and camps of Sri
Ramdev ji Maharaj, claming the cure for many diseases through
yoga and pranayama. All these encouraged me to take a
chance and see how these will work on my problem.
Day by day I found there has been improvement in my health
and at the end of 1 month my lungs were clear and I had stopped
taking the antibiotics. I continued these exercises and with in a
period of 4 months I recovered all my confidence and now my
health is under total control.
There is a classic quote which says “the Past karma will trouble

the person in the shape of chronic diseases". Planets give the
results of karma in the shape of diseases. The diseases are
cured by practising yoga and pranayama. Logically, it means that
we are appeasing planets through yoga and pranayama.
If planets are appeased by yoga and diseases are cured, then
why should not the same yoga and pranayama give relief from
materialistic problems.
By Pranayama, the mental confidence will be increased.
By Certain Yoga the energy centers are activated.
The energy centers are
Mooladhara
Swadhistana
Manipura
Anahata
Vishudha
Ajna
Sahasraara
Mooladhara is the - Foundation which is essential for strong base
and denotes confidence and radiance.
Ajna is relates to Knowledge
Manipura is for work
Anahata is for relationships
Vishudha is for social activities
Swadhistana is enjoyments and desires
By practice of simple yoga and pranayama the chakras can be
energised.
no

Instead of going into details I would like to introduce the simple
yoga and pranayama by which all the six charkas are activated
and the planetary propitiations are fulfilled, to a great extent.
Warm up exercise
1) Gentle jogging 36 times forcing breathe while exhaling
through both nostrils, keeping attention on right toes. Repeat
this shifting attention to left toes.
Repeat this 3 times.
2) Stand erect facing east, take deep breath and exhale slowly
Repeat “Om aadityayacha somaaya, mangalaya,
budhaayacha, guru shukra shanibhyascha raahave
ketave namaha
Repeat 19 Times.
3) Lie down flat facing sky. Keep your legs straight a foot apart
and hands on the sides.
Keep your palms a little away from the body.
Now breath out repeating Om: while pulling stomach inside to
its maximum repeating 1 Gayatri mantra.
Gradually chant up to 5 gayatri mantras.
Now relax with inhaling the air slowly. Do it 6 times at each
charka starting from Mooladhara to Anja charka
Now relax and close your eyes and experience visualizing each
part of the boady from toes to head with normal breath.
Remain in that state for 20 minutes and then slowly get up and
sit in Padmaasana.

Breath a little fast with both nostrils and close eyes and
concentrate on Anja charka.
Relax for 5 minutes and get on with routine.
This will increase your level of concentration and confidence and
will be able to discharge your responsibilities with ease.
Homa and Daana Prakriya
Offering planetary cereals into fire by repeating mantra of each
planet.
For this purpose we should know which planets are creating
problem.
In KP it is very easy to find out
After selecting the signifying planets for a particular matter, find
out if these planets are in the sub which are signifying houses
which is detrimental to the matter under consideration. Select
those sub planets and offer grains related to the planets into the
fire or donate the same to cow or poor.
Sun - Wheat, Moon - Rice, Mars - Redgram, Mercury -
Greengram, Jupiter - Bengalgram, Venus - Beans, Saturn -
Til, Rahu - Urad, Ketu - Horsegram.
While offering in to the fire, repeat the Bija mantra of each planet
and offer thrice in the fire for the selected planet with the relevant
cereal dipped in ghee.
To feed a cow a minimum quantity of 1.25 kg. of mixed grains
recommended. For feeding poor, cook the respective grams as
food or side dish and serve with rice or rotis.

Use readymade copper pyramid type vessels to offer grains to
planet in fire. This should be done facing east. Chanting of
Gayatri mantra is recommended.
The Bija mantras can be had from any books of pooja of
navagraha or there are several books having these details.
These mantras are short in length and therefore it takes few
minutes perform this ritual. First offering to Ganesha with cow
ghee is recommended.
After offering the grains give thrice tharpana to each planet.
Visit the Navagraha Temple and make pradakshina and
namaskara on the prescribed days.
Gem therapy
Similarly, you can wear the stones of such planets as described
earlier:
If the sub Lord is indicating negative results of the required house
signified by a Planet and
1) Ifthe Sub Lord is Sun, Mer, Jup, Ven, Sat, do not wear these
stones of Sub lord but instead wear the stones of the Planet
signifying the House
2) If the Sub Lord who is obstructing the matter are Moo, Mar,
Rah or Ket wear the stones of these planets.
This system is based on the nature of gems which are
transparent and opaque in nature. The later are opaque in nature
hich reflect the bad rays and allow the significator to function.
The former absorbs light which renders more obstruction to the
planet signifying "matter". Therefore we avoid this and wear the
gem of planet signifying matter..

Besides this theory gem can also be prescribed based on naadi
system which is purely dependent on signification of planets.
Here major obstructing planets are only Moon, Mars, Rahu and
Ketu.
Affliction by these planets, as per naadi system, to any of the
other planets such as Mer, Ven, Sat Jup and Sat are considered
and gems are prescribed.
For more detailed study on this please read "PREDICTION
SECREETS NAADI ASTROLOGY "
Net aham karta sarvasya Hari karta
SATYANARAYANA NAIK
