READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_k_p_how_to_judge_longevity_k_hariharan.json
Dataset number: 231 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 128,899 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_K.P._How to judge longevity_K. HARIHARAN
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_K.P._How to judge longevity_K. HARIHARAN
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 105
  • total_words: 22906
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.961
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOW TO JUDGE
LONGEVITY
By
K. HARIHARAN

CONTENTS
PAGE
About Krishnamurti Padhdhati ... 1
What is Krishnamurti Padhdhati ... 2
Longevity— Assessment ... 6
Longevity ... 10
On Predicting Longevity of Death ... 27
Mother's Longevity ... 30
Longevity of Mother through K.P. Horary ... 34
Daughter's Chart Gives Clue Regarding
Mother's Longevity ... 38
Longevity Through K. P. Horary ... 42
Premature Death ... 47
Longevity— K.P. Verified ... 50
Ascendant an Important Factor in Determining
Longevity ... 55
Longevity-Horoscopy ... 58
Premature Death of a Child ...- 63
Longevity Assessment and Premature Death of
the Child ... 67
Grand Father's Longevity and End Through
Grand Son's Birth Chart

PaGP
The Demise of my Officer and K.P. Horary ... 78
Longevity ... 81
Child Birth and Short Life ... 84
Longevity of a Couple ... 88
Longevity-How Stellar Astrology Precisely
Predicts — 91
Doctor Gives Number to Know the Longevity of
the Patient ... 96

PREFACE
Astrology is a science which dates back to the times of
the CHALDEANS. BABYLONIANS AND EGYPTIANS.
At a time, Monarchs and other members of the Aristocracy only could afford an Astrologer's services.
Today, we can all take advantage of the knowledge,
which this science can impart to us.
To facilitate the common public to understand and learn
this Art of predictivity, many books have come into the field
and the Astrological knowledge had spread.
An Astrologer, to predict the future, requires a Horoscope of the native which consists twelve departments, each
one signifying a segment of life namely, personality, money,
brothers and sisters, home, children, health, partnership and
marital life, longevity, father, career and prestige, friends,
hidden matters and expenditure.
Covering these items, many books on Astrology had been
published by Late Prof. K.S.K., under his famous Padhdhathi.
all these books covered many items in his readers
numbering to six, and so 1 have chosen to publish books in
a more explicable and descriptive manner each of the above
segments or portion of a man's life.
In this book, I have chosen to write elaborately on
Longevity duly giving various lessons to make easy for the
students of Astrology to assess total span of life from a
nativity or a Horary Chart, to make the student thoroughly
familiar with the principles under the system of SUB THEORY
find also to arrive at the significators connected to MARAKA
and BHADHKA houses.

The entire lessons are treated with clear explanations
under Krishnamurthl Padhdhathi (Sub Theory) which is
gaining momentum and it has certainly revolutionising the
whole concept of the predictive science of Astrology,
Longevity is the most important part and f feel that all
students shall master this subject in the assessment of longevity, before other matters are attempted from a birth nativity.
It is my earnest wish to publish separate books with
elaborate and detailed explanations with more examples on all
other portions of life also, as is done in this book.
In presenting this book, I have two fold objects to
fullfil, namely to acquaint the students of Astrology, already
well conversant with SUB theory, to master the way of
assessing the span of life ; and to well introduce to the other
Astrologers the existence of such a system cf K.P, and its
principles and also bringing home to their mind that such a
lucid system is available by using which the event of death
is easily and perfectly predictable and such a task is a trying
one for Astrologers in general.
Most of the principles incorporated in this book are all
tested and verified by late Prof. K.S.K. and his beloved
disciples.
I am sure this book will be received well by the students
of Astrology, more so by those who are versed in ADVANCED
STELLAR THEORY.
K. HARIHARAN.

ABOUT KRISHNAMURTI PADHDHATI
Astrology is a noble science which defines the action on
celestial bodies upon animate and inanimate ones and their
action there on.
The knowledge of Astrology dates back to 5,000 B C. In
all parts of the world, there are Astrologers and books on
Astrology in various languages.
Astrology with these books suffered set back in predictive
position and gradually reached a stage that the faith in
Astrology and on Astrologers has gone down badly in the
recent past, as the rules stated in a work are contradicted by
those in another work and in the many readers are left to
guess ultimately.
At this stage, in the 1st decade of this Century, a great
soul was born who took pains and did leseareh for quarter
of a century to find out the lapses in the predictive position
of Astrology.
He was the revered Sri K. S. Krishnamurti born on
1-11 -1 908 of a middle class family of Tanjore District, TAMIL
NADU.
The inquisitive mind in him nevar missed the lapses in
both the system, (Eastern & Western) and after great labour,
he was led to conclusion, that Astrology as we had inherited,
is an imperfect Science and the traditional principles passed
an to us are vaque, general, confusing, contradicting and at
the same time not universally afflicat9.
The Western system also suffered from such deficiencies.
After more than two decades of incessant toil by
Sri K. S. K., emerged what is known as KRISHNAMURTI
PADHDHTI, Scientific predictive system, both Natal and
Horary.

It is a masterly exposition of the STELLAR SYSTEM, an
Innovation of predictive events and an easy precise guide to assess
the worth of any birth chart.
Sri. K.S.K's erudite scholarship caught the eyes of Sri K. M.
MUNSHI who recognised the need of propagating Astrology on
sound lines and created a chart, for the subject and appointed Sri
K S. K. to it and at an annual convocation of the BHARATHIYA
VIDYA BHAVAN Sri. K.S.K. was awarded in the title "JYOTHISHA
MARTHANDA" for his outstanding services rendered to
Astrology.
He brought about a scientific journal from 1963to spread
Astrological knowledge and to us "ASTROLOGY & ATHRISHTA"
came into being, which brought out Articles on KRISHNAMURTHI
PADHDHATI.
WHAT IS KRISHNAMURTI PADHDHATI?
Sri K. S. K., after deep thinking and contemplation was led to
conclude that there was a missing link in the predictive position of
Astrology.
To fill this vacuum, Sri K, S. K. carried on research, with the
result he could finally find out that Stellar position of planets have a
major say in the effects.
An idea of the foundation in which the edifice of
KRISHNAMURTI PADHDHATI was built, is given here as under:—
A planet tenanting a constellation affects the matters of the
house owned by them While the results of the house occupied by
the constellation Lord are fully brought out, those and the results of
the vacant houses are also affused.
If any house is occupied by another planet the tenant
planet acts only partly through the house occupied by another
planet, because any other in the constellation of the occupant will
be stronger to affect the results of that house.
The occupant of the house will move the matters of the house
it occupies apart from the results it has to offer due to

its constellation position, if there is no planet, In any of
constellation.
The lord of a house will attain thq statusof a significator,
only if the house owned by it, is vacant and these in no
planet in its constellation.
.Whether or not such results as are Indicated by the tenant
planet will come to pass depending on the 'SUB' position of
the constellation lordship or constellation to the matters
signified by the constellation lord of the tenant planet, the
tenant planet fructifies the matters of which it is the significator due its constellation position.
If the tenant planet is placed in the 'SUB' of a planet who
occupies or owns houses detrimental to the affairs of the
constellation lord, the matter is not fullfilled.
The SUB lord signifying a house which is Xllth to the
house denoted by the constellation lord, proves harmful.
The sub lord should not be in unfavourable aspect to the
CUSP of the house signified by the constellation lord. The
aspects are to be computed by reckoning the distance in
terms of the longitude.
Ths term 'SUB, needs explanation to understand the same
in the correct perspective.
All astrologers know very well that the Arc or the extend
of a star is 133-20'. It is divided into unequal proposition
of the Dasa Years allotted to each planet in the VIMSHOTTARI. System of 120 years.
Each such part is known as the SUB, contracted form of
SUB-DIVISION.
The 1st SUB in a Constellation is named after the lord of
the constellation itself and others follow as obtaining in the
VIMSHOTTARI Dasa System Viz.. SUN, MOON, MARS,
RAHU. JUPITER, SATURN, MERCURY, KETHU, VENUS.
That is in SATURN star, the sub will be that of SATURN,,
the 2nd SUB that of Mercury, the 3rd one will be that of Kethu
etc. till the cycle of the nine planets is completed.

A
In other \frords, if the constellation is akin to Dasa, the
SUB is skin to bukthi and the SUB-SUB is akin to Anthra
and so on,
A planet in the Padhdhati terminology becomes a malefic
or benefic, not in consideration of its nature, but by reason
of its owning beneficial or malefic houses or occupying such
houses.
Neither JUPITER is benefic nor SATURN is a malefic
planet.
Beneficial (Advantage) : 1, II, 111, VI, X, XI
Malefic (Disadvantage) : IV, V, VII. VIII, IX, XII
Just as a planet is governed by the star lord and sub lord,
so also, the CUSP are governed by the SUB lords in accordance with the degree rising on the SUB of the house.
Prof. K. S K. attaches importance to the sublords of
different cusps their star deposit and was emphatic to ssy that
the cusp denote exclusively the indications of BHAVAS
reflected for the native of "the birth chart and so the cusps
must be given their due importance in the analysis of the
chart, NATAL or HORARY, as the cusp exclusively indicates
the matters of that house alone
If the Sub lord Of a BHAVA signifies that particular house
or the connected group of houses telling the matter, or the
matter questioned is promised.
If the matter is promised, it will materialise in the conjoint period of the significators of the relevant houses.
For construction of a house, the relevant houses are IV,
XI. and XII. If the sub lord of the IVth cusp is in the constellation of a planet in IV, XI and XII, you will be able to
construct or own a house.
That is how to proceed.
Sri K.S.K's another valuable discovery is the discovery of
the RULING PLANETS, which serve as a master KEY in
KRISHNAMURTH1 PADHDHATI System. He aptly gave the
name RULING PLANETS to those stellar bodies that rule over

a particular moment governing-an event a momentum discovery that has simplified predicting an event accurately.
He further emphasised that his ayanamsa should be
followed while working out charts Natal or Horary invariably.
Prof. K.S.K. has divided the entire ZODIAC of 360° into
249 unequal parts in terms of Vimshottari Dasa, bukthi system
and each number represents a particular degree and minute in
the NIRAYANA Zodiac. This system is used successfully in
giving uncanning predictions under HORARY.
These discoveries have totally revolutionised the act of
predicting the destiny and thus opened up a new chapter in
the annals of Astrology.
Successful Astrologers do accept that KRISHNAMURTI
PADHDHATI is the definite improvement in the predictive
System.
Let me end this, by telling that K.P. Astrology is also
traditional Astrology known as HINDU Astrology. But Sri
K.S.K. filled up the gaps found in the tradition Astrology
with connecting links and set it on a sound scientific base
with the introduction of the SUB-LORD theory and RULING
PLANETS without changing the basic principles apart from
findingout the system of HORARY against No. 1 to 249,
through which amazing predictions are being given.

LONGEVITY —ASSESSMENT
The span of life one to enjoy in this janma is called
longevity.
It is classified into 3 groups :
(a) Short life (0 to 33J years)
(b) Middle life (33)} to 66 £ years)
(c) Long life (66 f to 100 years)
The determination of a person's longevity presents no
serious problem when a correct horoscope of birth is available.
After casting the horoscope with the correct birth dasa,
if one applies the rules stated in the Advanced STELLAR
ASTROLOGY (Krishnamurthi Padhdhati) as outlined by,late
Prof. K.S.K.,' one can determine the longevity correctly.
Suppose one does -not possess his nativity or if his birth
particulars not being correctly known, without taking chances,
an Astrologer can predict the event of death correctly by
resorting to HORARY TECHNIQUE evolved by our Late
Guruji Sri K.S.K, in which the lagna cusp is fixed in some
particular Nirayana degree in terms of the number given
between 1 and 249, which stand for 249 unequal divisions of
360° ZODIAC, made by him strictly in terms of VIMSHOTTARI
DASA SYSTEM.
The 249 divisions are given in this book for reference to
the students.
This Padhdhati in sharp contrast to the old traditional
system jnd methods given to us by our sages, gives simple
and iiccufatu rules to assess the extent of longevity and the
time of Djjmise, which had been conjoined after much -
practical application and tests by Sri K.S.K., and his beloved
students.

The houses to be judged, primarily are the. ASCENDANT,
the 1 1 f rd and Vlllth, which gives longevity for the native
SATURN who is the Chief Governor of longevity.
The death inflicting houses are lin'd, Vllth, Xllth and
Bhadhakasthanas. 10th house while discussing about death,
it takes lead in the direction, as it tells about one's retirement
from the world.
In padhdhati terminology longevity should be assumed in
terms of the strength of Ascendant and its SUB lord mainly.
According to the strength of the lord of the constellation
in which the SUB lord of the ascendant is situated longevity
is assumed.
Further, one should assess the strength of houses J, III,
and VIII and the Vrayasthanas of these houses i e., XII, II, and
VII alio.
Xrl, II and VII are the death inflicting houses (maraka
sthanas) and you must also find out the Bhadaka houses.
BHADAKASTHANAS are the worst malefic* who never
hesitate to put an end to one's life.
Of the 12 signs, ARIES, CANCER, LIBRA and CAPRICORN are movable signs (chararasi). To Aries born Aquarius
is the Bhadakasthana and Saturn is the Bhadakadipathi. To
Cancer born, Taurus is the Bhadakasthana end the lord ot
Taurus, Venus is bhadhakashnathipathi.
Simlarly to LIBRA, the sign Leo and the owner SUN, is
the bhadhakadhipathi; and to Capricorn, the sign Scorpio and
its lord Mars are Bhadakasthana and bhadakasthanadhipathi
respectively.
For people born in Fixed signs. (STHIRA Rasi), Taurus,
Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius, the IXth from these signs as
bhadakasthana and their lords SATURN, MARS. MOON and
VENUS are Bhadakasthanadhipathi respectively.
For people born in Common signs (Dwisvabhava Rasi)
GEMINI, VIRGO, SAGITTARIUS, and PISCES, the Vllth
house, these form as Bhadhakasthanas and Jupiter, again

Jupiter, Mercury, again Mercury as bhadhakasthanadhipathi
respectively.
At the outset, we must work into the LAGNA CUSP SUB
lord to decide if the longevity is shOrt, medium or long.
The disposition of the sub lord of the Ascendant is the
deciding factor in the assessment of longevity
If the sub lord of the Ascendant is in the star of a planet
posited in Bhadhakasthmias or Marakasthar.as and also
connected to VI, VIII and XII. .you must lecfcon the life to be
very short, even in a Natal chart in general and while
examining in a Horary chart, it is surely reckoned to be very
short from that day and time itself.
If the sub lord of the ascendant is in'thestar of the planet
situated in l. V, IXand X are owning these houses, this reveals
the fact that the native of the chart has a long life.
(For sthira iagnas only the IXth signification of LAGNA
CUSP SUB lord portends short life. This should be noted).
If the lagna cusp sub lord signifies both benefic and
malefic houses, life is medium (middling).
Vlllth house tells the total period, of one's life to suffer or
otherwise, lllrd is also on similar lines a supporting factor
to determine the length of one's life.
It is needless to state here again that fhe 12th for these
three houses (i.e., I, ill and VIII,) XII, II and VII ate to be
taken as Marakasthanas (death inflicting houses).
I "nave explained above how to arrive at the Bhadhaka
sthanas. They are more stronger in inflicting death to a
native and only with the influence of Bbadeka Sthanas death
is brought about.
I" the matters of assessment of death, if the planets
connected to Xth they are also to be taken as maraka, as Xth
tells, among other matters, the retirement from this world
altogether.

F
If a person were to run the conjoint periods of the significator of Maraka and Bhadaka houses, what is the result ? If
the lagna-cusp sub lord signifies benefic houses, he lives long
and dies in the above conjoining period that comes after 66?
years. If the sub lord tell middle age, he dies in conjoining
period that comes between 33J and 66f years. In similar
period he courts death before 33^ year, if the sub lord tails
short life.
The above rules, and explanations are to be applied to all
births Including Twins after working out the birth chart or
Horary chart using- Bala's Ephemeris and Bala's Universal
Tables of Houses duly deducting Krishnamurthi's Ayanamsa.
For the benefit of the students various examples are
given in detail, duly explaining the correct way of assessment
of the longevity and the period of death under K.P. theory.

LONGEVITY
According to Western system :
(a) By progression, if a malefic comes to the cusp of
any angular house.
(bj If a malefic forms evils aspect with ascendant.
(c) If a malefic progresses in the 6th house and afflicts
the 4th cusp.
(d) If a malefic progresses in the 8th house and
adversely aspects 7th cusp.
(e) If a malefic throws evil aspect from the 12th house
to the meridian.
(f) IfJJupitet, though a benefic, forms evil aspect with
Neptune (MOKSHA),
(g) If Neptune forms evil aspect with malefics.
(h) . If Uranus, Saturn or Mars receive strong unfavourable aspect from other evil planets
()) df they afflict the lord of the ascendent or the
ascendant; danger for longevity is to be portended.
So also during transit, such aspects are to be taken to fix
the exact time.
According to Hindus, the span of life of a person may
be classified into 3 groups.
(a) short life (0 to 33) years)
(b) middle life (33.) to 66§ pears)
(c) long life (665 to 100 years)
Our sages have grouped the following combinations:
SHORT LIFE:
1. Moon conjoined with a malefic-not mitigated by the
-aspect from a benefic and malefic in lagna and 7th bhava.

2, Moon in a kendra (either in 1 or 4 or 7 or 10) and
melefics in other kendrasthana.
3. Weak Moon in 1 2 ; evil planets in 8 and 1 no benefic
in kendra.
4* Benefics in 3 and 8 afflicted by malefics.
&. Moon is lagna and malefic in 7.
6. Moon, Sun and Saturn in 8.
7-' Mutual exchange between lords of 1 and 8.
8. Lord of lagna in 3 or 6 or 12-malefics In 6 or 8-no
favourable aspect from benefics.
9. Moon, Sun and Mars in 9th house-devoid of beneficial aspects and so on.
(The above is a general principle. It needs further consideration. One should not declare hastily the results
applying the above rules alone).
MIDDLE LIFE:
1. Saturn in lagna. Moon in 4, Mars in 7, Sun in 10,
benefics in evil houses.
2. Jupiter in lagna in Sagittarius, Mars and Node in 8.
3. Saturn in lagna. Moon in 8 on 12.
4. Venus in lagna, Saturn in kendra, most of the other
planets in 3 and 1 1 .
5. Sun in 7. Mars in 5 and Saturn in Aries.
LONG LIFE:
1. No evil planet in kendra ; Jupiter in a kendra position
counted from lord of lagna.
2. Moon in 9, no evil in 8, benefics in kendra.
3. Benefics in between first and 6th houses and malefics
above horizon.
4. Leo iagna-majority of planets in Kona-Trine houses.

5. Cancer or Taurus lagna : Jupiter deposited in lagna
Three more planets exalted.
6. Cancer lagna occupied by Jupiter. Two planets in
exaltation.
7. Leo lagna with Jupiter. Venus in Cancer Mercury in
Virgo malefics in upachaya stana 3 or 6 or 11
8. Moon in Pisces, Sun in Cancer, Aries lagna, Seturn
in Capricorn, Mars in Libra.
Thus various combinations are given. To my knowledge
there are 284 such rules. Readers cannot remember all these
combinations. Each rules can be applied only to a few
births. They are general. They fail miserably in case of
twins.
But our sages have propounded various methods to
calculate the age of a person. They involve so much of
calculations that a person needs hours and days to arrive at
one figure. Those .who would have gone through a few
magazines, would be knowing many methods as a symposium
is given. This is this theory. This has confused many ;
which is to follow and which is correct. God alone has to
help the reader. Publishers do not advocate any one of the
various calculations giving reasons.
The following examples and explanation will be useful.
This method is applicable to all births including twins.
1 . Note the correct time of birth and the time of query.
2. Erect horoscope using Ephemeris and Table of houses.
3. Deduct Krishnamurti Ayanamsa.
4. Note the Ascandant-Nirayana position-referring to
the table ascertain the lord of lagna, the lord of the constellation and the lord of the sub. Dasa lord is the lord of the
constellation ; bhukthi lord is the lord of the sub.
If that person were to run the conjoined period, o f these
three planets, what would be the result ? Will he lead a
healthy liff- or will he suffer ? If tho suh halongs to 4 benefic.

he lives long. If the sub is governed by a malefic, his life is
short. This is very clear in the case of twin births where one
lives and the other dies. The sub lord is the deciding factor.
If the sub lord is a benefic, then it is necessary to calculate and find out the span of life. Lords of 1 , 5, 9, and’lO are
benefics.
Lord of 7,8 and 12 are malefics. If lords of 1 , 5, 9 and 10
also rule 5 or 8 or 12. consider the planet as mostly a benefic.
The planets owning other houses are considered as a
benefic or as a malefic, by noting the other house which
they own, How to judge the longevity is explained with two
examples Bhadakasthana.
Kendradipathya and Marakasthanas are explained.
•Ex 1. Chart js as follows : —
Mars, lord of iagna rules the sub of the ascendant. Health
vitality, resistance against infectious diseases, immunity,
activity are judped from the strength of the ascendant, planets
in the lagna bhava, those occupying their constellation, the

good or bad aspects to the ascendant and to the lord of the
ascendant.
Benefics in the ascendant contribute for long span of life,
Lord of the ascendant forming favourable aspect with the
ascendant or receiving harmonious aspect from benefics
promise long life.
Ascendant is Scorpio. It gives good health and much
actiyity
Its lord is Mars. As per Hindu System it is aspecting the
lagna and fortifying it. Therefore health and longevity are
assured by Mars.1
Disease is indicated by the 6th cusp 6th house, planets it
the constellation of the occupants of the 6th house, the
occupants of the 6th house, the planets in ihe constellation of
lord of 6, the owner of the 6th house, planets conjoined with
them or aspected by them affect the health and cause such
disease signified by them when they operate their dasa or
bhukti or anthra and there is aspect to them by progression
and by transit.
In this .case (so also Taurus bcrns) lord of 1 is also the
lord of the 6th house. So the same planet owns both the
ascendant indicating health and also the 6th house threatening disease. Then when Mars (lord of 1 and 6) dasa or
bhukti or anthra is on. how to say whether one will maintain
robust health or one will fall ill as Mars has to offer health
and cause disease also ? Note down which planets form
favourable aspects with Mars and the ascendant) and which
form (a) adverse aspects w.th Mars, (b) good aspect with the
6th house and (c) adverse with ascendant. He will maintain
good health during the dasa or the conjoined period of Mars
and the benefic who from harmonious aspects with the
ascendant and the lord ot the ascendant. He ought to have
fallen ill and he will have ailment during the dasa of the
planet forming evil aspect with ascendant or good aspect
with the 6th cusp or lord of 6 or planet in 6. According to
K.P., significators of 6th house ’ruling the sub period in Mars
dasa will cause disease and significators of If give cure.

8th house isLcalled the house of "Longevity". Therefore
planets in the constellation of evil planets In the 8th house,
except Saturn, occupants of the 8th house planets in the
constellation or in the sub of lord of 8, lord of the 8th cusp
and planets in any manner connected with them threaten (a)
danger to one's life (b) the cause of death and (c) the place
of death.
But houses 2 and 6 are maraka houses and 12th house
indicates moksha. The reason is as follows. Houses 1, 8
and 3 are judged for longevity and benefics in these houses
contribute for long life. 12th house to any bhava is the
negation of the bhava. Therefore the 12th house to 1,8 and
3 are 1 2, .7, and 2 and they are evil for one's longevity. That'
is why, houses 2 and 7-are said to be marakasthanas and 12
is called the mokshasthana. ,
So one is to judge the houses,’ 1, 8 and 3 and then 2, 7
and 12.
First of all one is to judge whether a person is promised
"Poorna Ayush i.e., full course of life running between 66 and
100 or Madyama or middle life (age between 33 ann 66) of
short life (between 0 and 33).
Then one is to workout, calculate and ascertain (a) which
planet will rule thedasa in that age and the area covered by
the maraka planets; (b) according to progression, the time
when the lagna, the lord of the lagna and the very slow
moving planets Saturn, Uranus and Neptune receive evil
aspects; (c) according to transit (Gochaiam) when evil
aspects are formed to the ascendant, its lord etc. As per K.P.
when significators transit in such sensitive points ruled by the
slgnificators.
Also, erect a chart for the moment at which there is the
urge for one to answer the query and note the evil planets for
that moment. Ruling planets for that moment reveal,
Finally ask the person to mention a number within 249,
consider 'he position of the planets and judge. These are for
confirmation and confidence.

BHADH4KA STHANA :
According to .the Hindus, bhadhakasthanadhipathis are
the worst malaficswho wili never hesitate to put an end to
one's life. Of the twelve signs, Aries. Cancer, Libra and
Capricorn are movable-chara-signs, and the 11th house
counted there from are bhadhakasthanas i.e., to Aries born,
Aquarius is the bhadhakasthana and the lord of Aquarius is
the bhadhakasthanadhipathi. To Cancer-born, Taurus is the
bhadhakasthana and the lord of Taurus, Venus is the bhadhaasthanadhipathi to Cancer borns Similarly to' Libra the 'sign
Leo and the Luminary Sun and to Capricorn, the Sign Scorpio
and its lord, Mars are bhadhakasthanas and bhadhakasthana
adhipathis.
For people born in fixed signs Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and
Aquarius, the 9th sign from those houses are bhadhasthanas
end their lords are bhadhekasthanedhipathis.
For people born in common signs Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces, the 7th house therefrom and the lords of
those houses are bhadhakasthanadhipathis.
HOW TO JUDGE:
1. Of all the planets, those which occupy the constellation of the occupants of the bhadhakasthana are the most
evil. Next, the occupants of bhadhakasthana of the planets
occupying the constellation of the lord of the bhadhakasthana, and the lord of that evi! sign, those in the constellation are stronger. Also, the planets conjoined with them or
being aspected by them acquire unfavourable effects
KENDRASTHANA:
2. Next, the Hindus consider kendhra adhjpathyam as
harmful waxing Moon, unafflicted Mercury, Venus and Jupiter
owning the houses 1.4,7 or lOcountedfrom lagna are regarded
as kendhra adhipathis and a few astrologers are terribly afraid
of them as thev have not collected materials and studied
from the facts and figiras
There are hundreds of people, born in the years 1909 &
1923 in the ascandam Virgo with moon in Hasiham star,

having Jupiter in the maraka sthana, two, owning the kendhra
houses 4 and 7 who art now living having enjoyed their lives
for 16. years of Jupiter. dasa and are now 'running Saturn
dasa. Therefore to decide one's longevity, taking kendhradhipathyam is not correct, Many other methods .are to be
included.
MARAKASTHANA:
3. Next consider the planets in the constellation of those
in Marakasthanas, the occupants of maraka sthanas, those in
the constellation of marakasthanadhipathis, the lods of
marakasthanas, and those conjoined with Or aspects by them.
Thus one is to analyse and judge.
The lagna of the example horoscope is Vrischika. it is a
fixed sign. The 9th house is the bhadhakasthana. Moon Is
the lord of the 9th house. No planet is in the bhadhakasthana. Hence one is to consider its lord Moon after judging
the strength of the planets in the coastellation of Moon i.e.,
Rohini or Hastham or Sravanam, Only Mars in Rohini star.
Venus is a kendradhipathi owning the 7th house. Venus
alone is in Bharani governed by Venus,
But there is a note in one of .the signs of Venus and Kethu
in tha sign of Mars. Rahu represents Venus; Kethu denotes
Mars,
But there is a node in one of the signs of Venus and
Kethu in the sign of Mars. Rahu represents Venus; Kethu
denotes Mars.
Therefore Rahu and Kethu are definitely evil. Tenant is
stronger than owner.
As puma ayush is promised by the aspect of Mars to
lagna, Jupiter's aspect to lord of lagna etc., and as it is, he is
now running 63 years of age, consider which dasa will prove
to be evil. Mercury dasa Venus bhukthi from 4-6-1962 will
operate upto 4-4-1965.
Venus in the 6th bhava, in the dasa, of lord of 8 can
cause cataract in the eye. It will be developing in this period
and in the bhukthi of Sun, in the constellation of lord of lagna
Marsfwfll give vision with aid of a surgeon.

Later Moon bhukthi will be pleasant which will be
continuously enjoyed during Mars sub period.
Rahu bhukthi begins on 7-7-1968. Rahu is undoubtedly
evil. Dasanatha Mercury, lord of 8, in the constellation of
Rahu. in mokshathana, representing kendradhipathi Venus, is
also undesirable. Kethu in the constellation of Mars is not
favourable. Kethu is in the 6th sign, but in the 5th bhava. It
is said that Kethu in the 5th house conjoined with marakasthanadhipathi will inflict death.
Therefore Budha dasa, Rahu Bhukthi, Kethu anthra' will
be the end.
Budha dasa, Rahu bhukti. commences on 7-7-68; Kethu
anthra will be between 2-1-70 and 25-2-70.
As per transit on 18-2-70. Saturn will be in Kethu star.
Saturn sub and conjoins [exactly Kethu (the anthranatha),
opposing Rahu, the bhukthi natha.
Therefore longevity upto 18-2-1970 is promised,
this native passed away at 7-30 a.m. on 18-2-70)
Example II — Mars. Rajayogadhipathi rules the sub.

Sub lord of the ascendant shows one's health, vitality,
immunity and longevity. Planets, benefic, by lordship,
occupying lagna, do not guarantee for long span of life; so
also malefics to affect health. Though Cancer natives are
considered to be fragile jn their youth, they pick up health
later and lead a healthy life, yet longevity depends upon the
exact position of the lagna, the sublord and the lord of the
constellation, in which the sublord Is deposited.
6th house shows disease. Planets occupying or owning
the house are weaker in strength than the planets in the constellation of the occupants and owner.
8th house shows unexpected minor or serious Incidents
affecting one's health and causing anxiety to life.
12th house threatens with danger, hospitalisation end
end of life (Moksha).
Houses, 1, 8, and 3 are to be examined to ascertain whether one will live long or is blessed with short life. The
houses 12'to 1, 8, and 3 are 12, 7, and 2. Twelfth house to
any house is the house of negation to the next house Hence,'
houses 1 , 8 and 3 are the houses of longevity whereas houses
12, 7 end 2 are the "Maraka Houses".
The planets, in the constellation of the occupants of the
bhadhakasthana, are the strongest evils; next the occupants
of bhadakasthana ; next those in the constellation of the lords
of the bhadakasthana and lastly the lords of these evil houses.
Next, one is to judge the maraka sthanas, the second and
seventh houses, whatever be the sign in which ascendant
falls. Having considered and selected the strong evils, note
when they will operate conjointly (according Udu Oasa
System).
Lagna is Cancer: It , is a movable sign, 11th house to
Cancer is the bhadhakastana, i.e., Taurus, Neptune alone is in
Taurus. As Neptune is not allotted any star, no planet is in
the constellation of the planet in bhadhakasthana.
Venus is the lord of the sign Taurus. BaranI, Poorvapatguni and Poorvashada are ruled by Venus. No planet
occupies the constellation of Venus. So Venus itself is a

significator. It is in the constellation of Rahu which occupies rnarakasthana. Therefore Venus is a very strong evil
planet
Leo is the 2nd house, and its lord is Sun. It is the maraka
sthanadhipathi to Cancer-boms. No planet is found in the
second house, Rahu is in Sun’s star. Sun is in the constellation of Saturn. Saturn is .maraka sthanadhipati. Sun is
another rnarakasthana. Its lord is Saturn It was in its own
constellation. Therefore both are evil.
Saturn's stars are Pushya, Anuradha and Uthrattathi
Uthrapathrapada). Majority of the planets are under the sway
of Saturn. Kethu is in Pushyam star. But all the planets in
Scorpio, i.e.. Sun, Mars. Mercury, Saturn and Uranus are in
Anuradha star, None is in Utbrapatharapada. When the
majority of the planets Bre in the same star, find out in which
sub according to Krishnamurthi Padhdhati they. are. Those
planets in the star of Saturn and the sub of the other significators fcr death are definitely EVILS; Mars is the strongest
malific.
(a) as it is in its own sign ;
(b) as it occupies the constellation of Saturn, and
(c) the sub of Mercury.
Hence Mercury, Mars, Saturn, Venus and Sun are evil.
As Mercury dasa is operating, select Mars sub petiod. In
that sub period, the conjoined sub sub of Saturn, Venus end
Sun will operate.
It will be after 1 9-12-1972; it will be in the second half
of February 1973.
Sun will transit ip the 2nd degree of Nirayana Aquarius,
whose constellation is ruled by Mars and the sub ruled by
Mercury. Hence when Sun transits in the 8th house, i.e., in
Saturn's sign Aquarius, in Dhanlsta stsr governed by Mars,
and the sub of Mercury in the 3rd week of February 1973,
health will fail.
Therefore planets promise l<Jpg life till atleast 15*2*1973.
This person is yet alive.

MODE OF DEATH :
Hindu sages give many combinations and mention how
on® meets with. one's end. One need not apply strictly. It is
to be modified to our age.
DEATH THROUGH A LION :
(a) Sun and Moon in 6 or 8
(b) Mars in 4 and in 1 0
(c) Mercury in Jupiter's sign, Mars in the sign of
Saturn Tiger.
DEATH THROUGH COBRA BITE OR SEPTIC OR
POISONING:
(a) Rahu and Venus in 10,
(b) Rahu and Sun in the Navamsa of atmakaraka and
aspected by evil planets.
(c) Mars in 4, Saturn in 8 and Sun in 10.
(d) Saturn in 2, Moon in 4, Mars in 10.
(e) Saturn, Sun and Rahu in 7.
DOG BITE:
(a) Sun in 4 ; Jupiter and Mars in. 10.
(b) Malefic in 12 and 8.
FIRE ACCIDENT:
Moon in Aries or Scorpio and hemmed ,in between
malefics.
LATHI CHARGE:
Mars in 10, Sun in 4 aspected by Saturn.
Waning Moon.in 8, Mars in 10, Saturn in 4 and Sun in 1,
GAS:
Moon in 10, Mars in 9, Saturn in 1 and Sun in 5-gas,
smoke carbon monoxide.
End: Pleasant, Painful, good or bad
Benefics in 8, 8th cusp receiving beneficial aspect at
birth show peaceful and pleasant end.

Malefi'cs, especially Saturn in 8, threaten prolonged ailment and long suffering cr accident by falling down Uranus
threatens unexpected, sudden end, mostly due to accident,
electrocution, sunstroke, aircrash. etc.
Neptune indicates poisoning, drowning and unnatural
death. Mars in 6 bad end,
Mars in 12, Saturn in 8-dirty daath. Sun with lord of
lagna in Capricorn or Aquarius-lightning or electrocution.
Moon and lord of 9 in 8-peaceful death. Saturn in 4, Moon
in 7 and Mars in TO. drowning.
Sun and Moon in a dual sign-drowning.
Thus many yog8S are given by our sages. To commit, to
memory and to recollect at the time of scrutiny of a horoscope
is a problem, almost close to 'impossibility.
Also, they say, find out the 22nd decanate from the lagna
and judge the characteristics of th=s decanate lord and predict
the mode of death. On finding out the decanate occupied
by lord of the 8th house. Its lord will reveal the mode of
one's end. As at the outset, it fails in the case of births with
a short interval between the two, like twins, the above is to
be taken as a general principle alone,
But according to Krishnamurthi Padhdhati, one is to take
that : —
(a) danger is indicated during the conjoined periods and
sub-periods of the lord of the sign, lord of- the star and the
lord of the sub where the 8th cuso falls and the lord of the
constellation in wr.ich the sublord is deposited.
(b) danger shown during the conjoined period of the
lord of the sign, lord of the star, the lord of the sub and the
lord of the constellation where the lord of the 8th house was
deposited : or
(c) if the sub is ruled by a benefic, promising long life
or cure, even tnougn there is danger, one will escape and
survive. If the sub lord is a malefic, significator of death one
will succumb to it. Jupiter sub shows pleasant end; Mars
sudden ; Saturn chronic and lingering one.

PLACE OF DEATH
If the sublord of the 8th 'cusp is the significator of the
houses 1, 4 and 10, shows that the and is in his own place.
If the sub lord of 8th cusp is the significator of 3rd house
Shows that while one is making a short journey, mostly on his
return journey, one passes away. Sublord of cusp 8, if significator of the houses 6 or 8 or 12 indicate, death in the jail or
in the hospital or in an unknown place.
If the sublord of the 8th cusp is the significator of 9th
house death will happen during long journey or in a far off
place :
AIR ACCIDENT:
The horoscope of one who was born with Moon and
Jupiter in Cancer like Lord Shri Rama, having a similar name,
was one of the 117 passengers by the Air India Boeing 707,
reported to have crashed, is as under :
The other horoscope belongs to his wife who survived.
Male chart-born on 2-11-1931 Monday.

Jupiter dasa balance 3 years, 8 months, 28 days.
The following is the chart of the wife who has survived
her husband.
Mercury dasa balance 4 years, 5 months, 24 days. By
air crash it is meant.
(a) one has the opportunity to go by air, on a, long
journey.
(b) and the unexpected end.
(c) in a far off place.
Long journey is indicated by the 9th house. Planets in
the 9th house are Moon and Jupiter. Rohini, Hastham and
Sravanam ere ruled by Moon. Kethu alone is in Hastham.
Mercury is lord of 9. It is in Shookshma Parivarthana
yoga with Jupiter. Venus, Mercury and Moon are in Jupiter's
constellation. Jupiter alone is in Mercury's constellation.
Hence, Mercury, Jupiter, Moon, Venus, and Kethu are the
signiftcators.

Find out whether there is a node occupying the sign of the
significators. Rahu is in Pisces ruled by Jupiter. Hence take
Rahu as the strong significator. ‘
Therefore, the conjoined periods of Mercury, Rahu,
Kethu,' Venus and Moon should create a chance to go overseas.
Actually, he left India during Mercury dasa, Rahu bhukti,
Venus'anthra, Saturn shookshma, as Mercury is in 12, in his
own sub. Rahu is in bhadakasthanadhipathi Sun's sub
Venus is in the constellation of Jupiter and sub of Moon
(both. in 9). Moon is the constellation of Jupiter and sub of
Moon. All these are connected with 3, 9 and 12: hence he
made the journey.
Why should there be an unexpected end ? Danger and
death are denoted by the sub lord of the cusp of the 8th
house. Sublord is Jupiter, Lord of 3 in 9 in the constellation
of lord of 9, Mercury, who is always for travels. Venus
denotes the vehicle ; Mercury, the travels, Hence, this end
was far away from native place. As the same planets rule
the sub of the 8th house there was danger.
Let us note the ruling planets then. It was a Monday
ruled by Moon The star was Sathabhisha governed by Rahu.
The sign is owned by Saturn. The ascendant at that time of
the crash might be 11° Capricorn. In the constellation ofT
Moon and it would have coincided with Mercury i.e., to the
place of accident. Mercury would be rising in,' the East then.
Why should the lady lose her husband in a far off place ?
She was running Venus dssa, Mercury bhukti, Venus
anthra. The 7th cusp is to be taken as the ascendant of the
husband. Then Venus is in t'ne constellation of lord of 6
Mercury who is in the constellation of lord of 8 Sun, This
disposition is danger to husband.
For her, tne 8th house shows mangalyam. If receives
aspect from Viercury, Sur/ and Mars. This combination
indicates Mercury, during travels. Sun; by fire accident;
Mars, sudden end to him causing Dhurbagyam to her.

Look at the Yogas in her chart ; Chandra Mangala Yoga :
Sunapha Yoga ; Lagna Adhi Yoga ; Nipuna Yoga ; Vesi Yoga ;
etc. What have they done to her ? Let traditional astrologers
consider these and correct themselves. Is there any amangalya
yoga?
From the above discussion it will be clear as to how
K, P, Method gives ^accurate predictions even to such tricky
problems and that too in a logical and lucid manner.
Long live K. P.

ON PREDICTING LONGEVITY OF DEATH
Innumerable rules and planetary combination are given in
the classic books on Astrology, and with there to determine
the longevity of a native has been proved a hard nut to crack.
Opinions of those authors differ much and we are left to
ponder over as to what is the correct method of divising the
time of demise.
On the other hand K. P. gives, as given in 'previous
articles, simple and accurate rules to caldutate the length of
life and the time of death, which has been confirmed after
regular tests by Sri K. S. K. and his disciples.
Lagna, the llnd and the VII Ith are the houses to be
judged primarily Saturn is the chief governor ofjongevity.
It has been already explained that II, VII houses are
maraka houses along with the Xllth which is being Xllth to
lagna.
Bhadhaka lords are more malefic to end the life and they
have been the Xlth lord for those born under movabie signs,
IXth for fixed sign and lastly VI Ith for common sign.
Prof, K. S/K, has simplified this and explained to us the
theory and findings over longevity as under : —
If ascendent sub lord is a benefic and if it signifies
houses, 1, 5, 9 and 10 or if it owns or occupying these houses
the longevity is all right, Houses 6, 7, 8 and 12 are bad and if
the ascendent sub lord signifies these ones longevity is bad.
Also in Horary astrology, if the "ascendent sublord
signifies Maraka and bhadhakasthanas, life is short.
To verify the authenticity and accuracy of these rules and
followed by is chart of John F. Kennedy, President of U.S.A.
cast under K. P. is taken up ; —
Date of birth : 29-5-1917
Place of birth - : 42°-0' N Lat, 10° -Q' E Long
Ayanams8 of K.S.K. ; 22°-36'

Balance in Venus period at birth : Yrs. 3-10-24 days .

To assess the longevity in a native we have to examine
the ascendent and its cuspal sub lord.
Jupiter is the sub lord of ascendent cusp.
This planet owns the VI and V 1 1th cusps and is in the
Vllth bhava.
It has been noted that Vllth is the bhadhakasthana for
common signs. Hence the birth has taken place in Virgo a
common sign.
The above sub lord Jupiter being in Vllth has attained the
bhadhakasthanathipathyam fully no planets in Jupiter star
and the ascendant sub lord Jupiter with its disposition in the
Vllth bhava as the lord of Vllth and Vlth is not at all a good
factor for long life.
The same Jupiter is in the star of Kethu in IXth bhava and
this tells a' long life.
But the star lord Kethu represents Mercury who lords
X! fth cusp and posited in the VI llth bhava, in closer proximity
to Mars owner of Vllllh cusp. This simply shorten the life
span.
President Kennedy's death suddenly at the age of 46, the
above combination and the ascendant sub lord is dispositions.
I like to explain astrologically the violent death of the
President on 22-11-1963.
VI llth cusp and bhava tells about the native of death.
Here the sub lord of the Vlllth cusp is Mercury and the
same Mercury is in association of Mars in a violent sign
ARIES accounts for this nature of death.
President passed away in Jupiter Dasa, Jupiter Bukthi,
Moon Anthra.
As already stated Jupiter is a full Maraka and Bhadaka,
as Jupiter is in Vllth having no planets in its stars,
Moon is in the star of Venus, owner of ||, Marakasthana
and it is in yill enhancing the power Pf Moon to inflict death.

MOTHER'S LONGEVITY
Following is the horoscope of a child born on 27-10-68,
Sunday at 7-30 p.m. 1ST at’ 11°N Lat. and 77°-0' E Long.
The baby was born on 27-10-1968 and the mother fell ill
and was admitted in the hospital.
In spite of the treatment, she breathed her last on
16-11-1968 leaving her beloved child to the mercy of the
almighty. Mother survived only for 20 days,
On the basis of Krishnamurti Padhdhati, reasons, why
the child's mother died within a spell of so short period is
clearly obvious. The Padhdhathi alone can explain.

At the time of birth the cuspal and planetary positions
First of all, we must see the position of the IVth cusp to
find put the longevity of mother.
Here the IVth cusp falls in Cancer 27°*1 5'.
We should find out of this IVth cusp is well fortified or
adversely expected and rendered weak.
The IV cusp owns in Moon and the cusp falls iin the
constellation of Mercury and Sub is ruled by Jupiter.
Moon is the general karaka of Mother and aiso owner of
the IVth cusp that tells about mother. Moon is the VI Nth
bhava, but on the IXth cusp. I Xth is the VI th from IVth
telling about illness. Moon ie in the constellation of Sun.
Sun owns the Vth cusp which ie a Maraka House for mother.
Thus Moon is highly afflicted.
IVth cusp is under the constellation of Mercury, Mercury
js in the star of Moon, on the Vlth cusp and Mercury U in the

Vth the Maraka house for IVth and is in the sub of Moon
signifies Vth house. Thus Mercury is also afflicted.
Jupiter is in the constellation of Sun, owing Vth which is
the Maraka house for mother. Further Jupiter is in Vth having
no planet in its stars Vishakam, Purattadhi and Punarpoosam.
So he is a full significator of Vth in the Marakastanam for
mother. Jupiter is further in the sub of Saturn signifying the
Vth again Maraka housa for mother. This is vital point to
tell how the longevity of mother is badly cut down.
As' these combination in terms of the IVth cusp and the
Karaka Moon, go a long way to tell how the longevity of
mother is badly afflicted with the result the mother was short
lived and lived only a very few days, after the baby was born.
At the time of birth the baby was running Sun period.
Mars bukthi, Jupiter Anthra.
Now. we should find out in whose period the mother
passed away.
For that we should select the strongest significators
bringing about her death.
Mothers Lagna is Katakam. It is a chara rasi (movable
sign), XI is the Bhadakasthana. Mercury is the owner of the
Bhadakasthana (for IV, M is the XI). As llnd 'cusp falls in
Gemini 3 - 1 5'. Mercury is in the Marakasthana for IVth cusp.
But these are planets in Mercury' star and so he is not to
bring about death. Saturn is in Mercury star and so Saturn
is a Bhadhaka. Then consider Marakasthana !i and Vllth from
IVth are Marakasthana. They are Vth and Xth.
Vth is ruled by Sun.
Jupiter is in Sun star-Uthradam.
Moon is in Sun star Uthradam,
Mars is in Sun star Uthradam.
Jupiter is in Vth having nO planets in its stars,
Kethu is in Vth having no planets in its stars.
So the Sun, Jupiter, Moon, Kethu and Mars are Marakhas
Xth is ruled by Saturn.

Saturn is in the star of Mercury in llnd. Owning the llnd
cusp the badhakasthanam,
Venus is in Saturn star Anthra.
No planets in Xth.
So Saturn snd Venus are death inf.'iciting planets.
The demise came on 16-1 1-1968 on that day the child
was having Sun major period, bukhthi of Mars and anthra of
Saturn.
These three planets find in a strong place birth Ii9t of
marakhas and Saturn bukhti, anthra lord is in more a bhadakha, as well as a marakha as she was death cusp which is the
Vllth from the IX denoting mother.
On the moment of death 5 p.m. on 16-1 1 -1968, it was
Moon sookshma. It has been explained about that Moon is a
marakha, being in the star of Sun, owner of V cusp.
It was a Saturday, and Saturn rules the day, and Saturn
is both Marakha and Badhaka.
At the moment of passing away the luminary Sun was'in
Vrichikam, Mars Rasi, in the 'constellation of Visakam of
Jupiter and in the sub of Mars. Mars, Jupiter is needless to
repeat that they are .strong Marakhas.
The another luminary Moon was at that moment in
Mercury Rasi Virgo is Uthradam Sun Constellation and in the
Sub of Venus who are also strong significators of 'death.
At that moment of passing away, the lagna degree was
in the sign aries in the constellation of Bharani of Venus.
The student may well note how Krishnamurti Padhdhathi
pin points the time of-occurence of events.

LONGEVITY OF MOTHER
through K. P. Horary
I and My younger brother are discussing about the
correctness and efficacy of Krishnamurthi Padhdhati and
during the course of discussion and chat, my brother evinced
his interest in knowing the longevity of our mother, aged more
than 75 and suffering from high blood pressure since lOyears.
I thought to solve the query resorting to Horary method,
propounded by late Prof. KSK, Accordingly I told him to give
a number between 1 and 249. He said "235".
The Data forming the basis of the Horary investigation
is as follows :
Takingup for Judgement : 1 -40 P.M. I.S.T.
Place 22°-42' N. Lat.
71 MO, E Long.
Ayanamsa used: 23°-3V (KSK)

Planets
Star lord Sub lord
Saturn Rahu Jupitei
Rahu Mars Jupiter
Kethu Mercury Jupiter
If the Ascendant is in movable sign, Xlth house in the
bhadhakastana, if the ascendant falls in a fixed sign IXth
house is the Bhadhakastana, it the Ascendant falls in a
common sign, th'e Vllth is the bhadhakastana.
Whatever be the sign while the ascendant falls, the
llnd and the Vllth houses are Marakastanas. Therefore one is
ro judge all these three houses and find out the significators.
If the query is for younger sister or brother, take third
house connected from Horary Lagna as the Ascendant for that
youngster. If it relates to mother take the fourth house. If it
refers to children take the fifth house, 33 Lagna to childrenFor wife take the seventh, for father take the ninth and
for eider brother o; sister take the eleventh and find out.
Here the query is about mother to consider the IVth
cusp as ascendant, All’ calculation will be considered hare
from IVth' cusp as ascendant.

i shall again write the Horary chart and rearrange the
cusps keeping the IVth as Lagna for making easy for students
to understand the system a'nd proceed.
Note the sublord of rhe ascendant. If he is deposited in
the constellations of the significators of Badhakasthana and
Marakesthana, the life will be short from the time of the
judgement. It will not be for many years.
If the sub lord of the ascendant were to be in the constellation of the significator of 6th house, the person will
suffer from disease but [will not succumb to it. And if the
sub lord of the ascendant is deposited in the constellation of
the significator of the eigth house, he will meet with accident.
If the sublord of the ascendant is in the Horary chart in the
significators of theXIlth house, he will be in bed for a long
period and may be hospitalised.
Death is indicated only by the significators Marakha and
Bhadhakasthana.
According to the strength of the lord of the constellation
in which the sublord of the ascendant is deposited, one has
to fix the dasa and sub periods. The conjoined period of the
significators will operate and indicate the life span.

Here the ascendant of the mother is 7’-28' Gemini. It's
Mercury sign, star and subiord is Rahu.
Rahu is placed in Xllth house and is aspected by Jupiter
the Vllth lord (both Badhakha and Marakha). Rahu is in the
star .of Mars and sub of Jupiter, Mars is lord of Vlth in closer
proximity wrth Venus the Xllth lord and also with Mercurythe
lord of IVth that tells the end of life. Sublord Jupiter is the
Badhakha and .Marakha.
Hence Rahu is the significator of IVth, VII and Xllth,
and so it is evil to cause death of the mother of the querent.
Stariord Mars is along with Venus lord of Xllth* (Moksha)
hence Mars is weak in strength. So the sublord Jupiter is
badhakha and Marakha and it is too weak also. So it le" JS
to say that querists mother's life is too short.
Further I looked into the VI cusp, as it tells the strength
of the current disease and health condition.
VI cusp sublord is Mars here.
Marshs posited in the third bhava along with Venus the
lord of XII and Mercury lord of I. Mars is in the star of Kethu
in VI, Mars and Venus is closer proximity, Venus is karaka
for kidney, urinary disorders whereas Mars shows disease of
private parts.
Mars, Venus and VI Cusp are fixed signs which tells that
she will be suffering from kidney disorder for a long duration.
She was admitted to hospital during October 1983, for
kidney "trouble.
The Xlth cusp sublord is Venus, n is in Kethu star and
in Venus sub. Star lord Kethu is in VI with Jupiter lord of
Badhaka and Marakha. Sub lord Venus is lord of Xllth. This
tells about non recovery from illness.
If the Xlth cusp sub lord signifies I, V, or Xlth one can
recover from ill-health.
On 5/6-10-83 Wednesday at 4-40 a.m. the querist's
mother passed away, . It was Kethu dasa, Kethu bukthi and
Moon anthra. Kethu is in VI with Jupiter both Badhaka and
Marakha and iVloon owns the II cusp and no planets in Moon
star and no planets in II Bhava. And so Moon is a powerful
marakha to inflict death on her.

DAUGHTER'S CHART GIVES CLUE
REGARDING MOTHER'S LONGEVITY
If a person is destined to live up to a certain period, he
will live up to that time and his horoscope will clearly reveal
his end. At the same time his wife-'s chart will show that her
husband will meet his death and the chart of the son and
daughter too will point to the same event. It is not, as many
people wrongly assume that the chart of any member of a
family causes the event of death of another member. Truly
speaking they will only reflect the evant the horoscope of the
various members of the family being inter-linked.
A person for instance,- may be running the Vimshottari
period of planets signifying X, Ml, VIII, and IX. 'This for body
ill for father's longevity Why ? These houses stand respectively as llnd, Vllth, XI 1th and Vlllth reckoned from the IXth
which stands for father. It would not however be right to
rush to the conclusion that father's end will certainly come.
For this, the horoscope of the father will also have to be
investigated. Unless both horoscopes concur, the event of
father's death will not come to pass.
Similarly when a person undergoes the Dasa period of
planets signifying V, X, III and XI, which become the llnd,
Vllth, Xllth and Vlllth connected from the house denoting
mother, there is cause to fear mother's death provided only
when her horoscope too points to the same result.
Similarly the conjoint period of the significators of houses
VI, XI, - IV, and XII give rise to fear regarding longevity of
one's children and so on.
The horoscope of a girl, furnished below, was placed in
my hand to say how long her mother would live.
After thoroughly scrutinising' the chart, I could tell the
conjoint peribd under Vimshottari Dasa system, when the
demise of mother will take place.

Date of birth: 16/17-1-1954.
Time: 4-57 a.m. I.S.T.
Ayanamsa : 23u~7'
The IVth house in any chart tells about the native's
mother, among other matters.
Considering the IVth cusp in the above chart to represent
the mother's lagna, the Vth and Vlth are to be renumbered as
llnd and lllrd houses and so on. ,
On this basis, the Vth house becomes llnd of the mother
and the Xth becomes Vllth. The lllrd house stands for the

Xllth (Marakasthana or Liberation from body) taking the IVth
as lagna for mother.
- The llnd and Vllth which stand opposite to Vlllth and the
.'agna (the houses of life) are to be taken as Marakhastanas
also they stand in twelfth to the lllrd and Vlllth houses
described as houses of longevity, The Xllth house being the
Xllth to lagna which denotes tne body, shows annihilation of
body. This house is called the house of Moksha or emancipation.
Significators of Death :
llnd House: Mars governs the cusp.
No planet occupies the house.
Jupiter is posited in Mars star.
Jupiter is also the Sublord of the Vllth
house from IVth.
Kethu is in the star of JupiterVllth house : Mercury owns*the cusp.
and No planet in Mercury, stars.
Saturn is in the Vllth and no planet in
Saturn stars.
Xllth house: No planet tenants the house.
Saturn owns the cusp.
No planet is posited in Sat. Stars.
.Saturn is also the sub lord of the Xllth
cusp.
In the fag end of 1971 I was consulted by the daughter
that her mother is suffering seriously.
I could find that the major period of Jupiter was on from
16^-6— 1971. Jupiter is in the star of Mars in VIII with
Saturn. Mars owns the llnd cusp. So I could suspect that
the trouble may be connected to her throat and there is some
obstructing matter these to have checking effect as Saturn
combines with Mars. She accepted that her mother could • ot
eat food and takes a long time in the process. '

I scrutinised and told her that there is no trouble for her
life till the middle of 1974, and she went away.
Again she visited me during the end of May 1974 and
wanted to know her mother's longevity, as she is having
choking ‘effect in her gullet.
i again checked, up the Vimshothari Dasa in progress. It
was Jupiter Dasa, Saturn bhukthi, Kethu Anthra (from 7-5-74
to 26-6-74) I thought it was time for her demise. So I told
her that it would be bad before it is 26-6-74 and if by God's
grace she completes June, no fear upto Jupiter Anthra i.e.,
Kethu, the Node in the star of Jupiter, a powerful
marakha did not leave her and she died in Kethu Anthra itself.

LONGEVITY THROUGH K.' P. HORARY
The determination of a person's longevity persents no
serious problems when a correct horoscope of birth is available.
A correct horoscope is deemed to have bsen made out,
only when correct time of birth is made available.
"An Astrologer's prediction can only be as true as the
Correctness of the time of birth" That is what PS. Iyer, a
reputed Astrologer and g contemporary of Our Guruji Sri KSK
rightly said.
After casting the horoscope with the correct birth date, if
one applies the rules stated in the Advanced Stellar Asbology
as outlined by 'Late Prof, KSK, can determine the longevity
correctly :
Suppose one does not possess his nativity or if his birth
time not being correctly known, without taking chances, an
Astrologer can predict ne event of death equally effectively
by resorting to Horary technique evolved oy our Guruji Sti
KSK, after decades of research, experimants, and observation.
During my travels, I chanced to visit one of my friend's
relative who was ailing then. His illness was tremending him
anb he was eager to know his longevity.
I asked for his birth chart and jhe had no horoscope and
also the date, and time of birth not correctly known.
Under such circumstances I had -to resort to the horary
method developed by Sri K.S.K.
In this system the Horary lagna is determined in a different manner.
Horary lagna is determined in this system for the point of
Zodiac which corresponds to the number betwaen 1 to 249
which the query utters. The Astrologer goes by the number
given -and fixes up the lagna and .other houses based on the
number.

bo | asked that ailing friend to mention a number between
to 249. Unhesitatingly he uttered the number '56*.
According to the Krishna'murthi Padhdnathi scheme of
Zodiacal division numbering up to 249. this number 56, refers
to. the portion of the Nirayana Zodiac commencing at 20'
Gemini and extends upto 21a-46'-40' in the same sign. The
point of commencement which is 20° Gemini becomes the
lagna degree of the chart of the query: and other corresponding cusps being found out for the latitude of the judgement.
The Nirayana planetary longitudes to be worked out for the
time as the query is taken up for judgement.
Thus the Nirayana Horary chart was drawn and
given hereunder;
No. given ; 56 (between 1 to 249)
Balance in Vimshottari Dasa of Jupiter- years 0-1 0-2
days.

In my experience as astrologer, I have been watching in
Horary chart, the lagna cusp sub lord tells the mind of the
querist. Here the sub lord is Jupiter and this pianet is
stationed in the VIII house which stands for the longevity of
the person, and the number is given to know his longevity.
The reader may well note how exactly the number indicates
the query and how well Krishnamurti Horary technique is
invented by Sri K S.K. as a predictive wing of his system
named after his name Krishnamurti Padhdhathi.
This Padhdhati in sharp contrast to the old traditional
methods decended to us, gives simple and accurate rules to
calculate the extent of longevity and that the time of demise,
which had been confirmed after much practical applications
The houses to be judged, primarily, are the ascendant,
the lllrd and the Villth. Saturn is the chief governor of
longevity. In this Horary chart Saturn is in XII, with no
planet in its star and Saturn signifies XII fully.
Houses II, VII and XII cusp classified as Marakha or dects
inflicting houses because they stand in Twelfth to the lllrd'
Villth and the Lagna or Ascendant.
Above all, the Bhadhakasthana lord is the most vicious
pianet to kill the native unhesitatingly.
For movaole sign, on the lagna, the Xlth house is
Bhadhakasthana for fixed sign, the IXth house is a Bhadhakasthana, and for common signs, the Vllth is a Bhadhakasthana.
“"K.P. reader III states as follows :
"If ascendant sublord is a benefic and it is signifies I, V,
IX and X or if it happens to own and occupy these houses, the
longevity is alright.
Houses VI, VIII, VII and XII are bad and if the Ascendant
sublord signifies these houses longevity is bad ;
"If lorns of I, V, IX and X also rule. VI, VIII and XII
consider the planet a worthy benefic".
"AI60 in Horary Astrology, if the ascendant sub lord
signifies Maraka and Bhadhakasthanais, the life is short after
the time of judgement".

Applying these principles to the chart above, the lagna
falls in the constellation punarvasu ruled by Jupiter and the
Asc sub is ruled by Jupiter.
The sub lord Jupiter owns VII a marakasthana and as
told above with classification of Bhadakasthana, for Mithuna
lagna (common sign VII) is also the bhadakasthana. Hence
the Asc. sub lord Jupiter is the rules of Marakha and
Bhadakhsthana.
And further, the sub lord Jupiter is in VII Ith house, the
house of longevity. It cannot act to contribute life as it is
not Vlllth house significator, as there is a planet Moon in its
stars, and the other hand, Jupiter is in the star of Moon in
Vlth, the house of sickness and owning llnd, a Marakha
house for Mithuna lagna.
Summing up, the sub lord of Asc. Jupiter has attained
the Bhadakasthana and Maraka powers, without any redeeming factor.
So it is final, the native has a very vary short life from
the day of judgement in terms of Horary.
Longevity is under the dominion not only of the Lagna
but also under the Vlllth as well as the 8th to 8th to lllrd.
Death ensures during the conjoining period of the
significators of the Vrayasthanams of the above 3 houses viz.
lagna, llnd and VI Ith along with bhakasthana house.
The significators are : -
1) The planets owning II, Vll and bhadakasthana.
2) The planets is the constellation of these houses.
3) The occupant of these houses.
4) The planets tenanting that the constellation of the
occupants.
Following are the death inflicting significators in this
particular cases:
llnd house : No planet, there owned by Moon.
Jupiter owning Vllth and Venus owning
XI Ith are in Moon stars.
VMth house : No planet there.
Jupiter owns his house.
Moon is in 'the star of Jupiter.

Xllth house: Saturn and Kethu ara posited there with
no planets placed in their constellation.
Venus owns Xllth.
Rahu is in Venus star Poorvashada.
As node Rahu is in Dhanus and so it also
assumes the effect of Jupiter as marakha
and bhadaka powers.
The student may also note that the Vllth cusp is most
Badhaka and Marakha house is ruled by Jupiter as sign lord,
Venus as constellation lord and Rahu as sublord.
You must know lagna cusp' combination is a life giving
ono and exactly the opposite degree the Vllth cusp deals with
the Life . This is general theory as it is the house of detriment
to lagna.
the three planets Jupiter, Venus and Rahu ruling the
Vllth cusp, are also Bhadakasthana and Marakha as detailed
above are the worst death Inflicting planets.
While examining the Vimshothari Dasa in the Horary
chart, you will note that the native was running the major
period of Jupiter bukhthi of Rahu and the Anthra Dasa of
Venus.
Venus Anthra Dasa runs between 9-5-73 to 3-10-73.
So it was indicated by me, the end will be in that period
of Venus Anthra.
A? Rahu a node was the sub lord of Vllth cusp and also
in the discussion you will v.Pte that Rahu fully represents
Jupiter who is both Marakr.s and Bhadaka, I just brought
down. The time of demise to Rahu sookshma ‘which was
worked out to run between 30-6-1973 and 22-7-1973 and
bid good-bye to them, without intimating the same to the
particular.
I was intimated through a letter that the end actually
came in the evening on 17th July 1973. It was Rahu
sookshma as I told them already.
Students may well note how K.P, pinpoints the time of
death with such accuracy through K.P. Horary system of
prediction under Krishnamurti Padhdhathi.

PREMATURE DEATH
Following is the birth chart of a girl who died in her age
By applying the principle of Krishnamurti Padhdhathi,
I could hint her demise in forward to the father as a precautionary step
Date of birth : 11-2-1959
Balance in Saturn period at birth years 11-4-17 days.

The Lagna is jointly ruled by Mars as rasi lord, Venus as
constellation lord and Moon as the Sun lord.
In the light of the principle, let us see how the Sub lord
Moon played the part in making the longevity as short as 19
years.
As per Krishnamurthi Padhdhati, if the Sub lord of the
Lagna Cusp is in the constellation of the occupant of Marakasthana or Bhadhakssthana, the life of the native is rather
very short.
Moon the Sub lord of Lagna cusp, is in the constellation
of Saturn, who is the lord of Xlth Cusp which is the
Bhadhakasthana for Chara Lagna (Maham). This Saturn is
rendered very weak by being placed in the star of Kethu in
Xllth (House of Moksha) and so Saturn signifies XI It h fully.
This Moon owns the IVth Cuso which tells her last days.
This is rather unfortunate
Moon is the Sub of Venus who is the owner of the llnd
and Vllth houses which are Marakasthanas for Mesham and
that Venus is placed in Bhadhakasthanas also. Thus Moon
is rather rendered so malefic as to give very short life for the
native.
The girl had passed away on 7-5-1978 in the major
period of Mercury bhukthi of Mcon, Anthra of Saturn.
Mercury the De?a lord, owns the Ilf and Vlth Cuflps.
placed in Xth bhava in the star of Mars, and in the Sub of

Jupiter in VII signifying the Bsdhakastuana So Dasa has
connection with death inflicting signification.
The bhukthi, Lord Moon, is in the star of Saturn, the
owner of XI the Cusp, the Bhadhakasthana, and is in the sub
of Venus owning II and VII in XI. Lastly the Anthra Lord
Saturn, is the Bhadhakadhipati and is posited in the star of
Ketu, placed in XII in ohavem, (the house of Moksham.)
The students may well note, how the sub lord theory
reveals the intricate points in a life such as death etc.

LONGEVITY — K.P. VERIFIED
Now again ! shall discuss in this article the Longevfty of
an infant as per K.P. «
According to traditional system, the Auyui or Span of life
is clarified in the three main grouc-s. As already discussed
Alpaysu-short (life upto 33 years 4 months) Madhyayu (33
years 4 months to 65 years 8 months) and Dhergayu (65 years
8 months to 100 years). 100 years and above being considered to be poornayul.
There are certain combination of planets and specific
point or degree in each sign which promote or alter the
longevity of the native.
These rules are general and vague toe, and these miserably fail in actual practice.
K.P. on the other hand, deals with the Longevity in a clear
manner free from all manner of doubts and is universally
applicable.
These rules can bo applied both in NATAL & HORARY
Astrology. The only difference is that, in the case of a
Nativity, the span ci life can be judged from the time of birth
of the native, where as in Horary, it can be assumed from the
time of judgement of the query.
Given below is the chart of an infant who passed away
an hour after it was born
The delivery had taken place on a Tuesday the 9th
November 1971 at 6-37-33 a.m. I.S.T. in a Nursing home K P.
Ayanamsa used 23c21\
Place of birth: 23°-10'N' Lat,/09°59’E Long.

At the time of birth, the sign Libra was rising, the exact
degree 25°-45'

The Ascendant was thus in the sign Libra ruled by Venus
(Lord of 1 & VIII) in the constellation of Jupiter. (Lord III, V
& Vlllth) and in the sub of Mercury (Lord of IX, XI & XII).
If the Ascendent falls in a movable (chara rasi) the Xlth
is Bhadhakasthana, if the same falls In a fixed sign (sthira
rasi) the IXth is Bhadhakasthana and if the ascendent is a
common sign fUbhaya rasi) the tVI1th house the Bhadhakasthana. Whatever be the sign in which the ascendent falls'
the llnd and the Vllth house are Marakasthana.
According to Krishnamurti Padhdhati is the ascendent
sub lord is In the constellation of a planet which is bhadakasthana or Marakasthanam short life is indicated.
If the Lub Lord of ascendant falls in the star of a planet
in Vlth house, the native will suffer from disease but will not*
succumb to it.
According to the strength of the lord of constellation In
which the sub lord of ascendent is deposited, one has to fix
the Dasa and sub periods.
As already stated above the sub lord of, the Ascendent is
Mercury. Mercury is the Lord of IX, XI and Xllth. As the
ascendent falls in a moveable sign, the XI house is the
bhadhakasthana and these ascendant sub lord becdmes the
Bhadhakastanathipathl. He is also Marakasthanathipathi
being the owners of Xllth.
Bhadhakasthanapathi are the worst malefics who never
hesitate to put an end to the life.
In the above, Mercury having bhadhakasihanathipathi is
deposited in the constellation of Saturn and in the Sub of
SUN.
Saturn is the constellation lord, occupies, the Vllth bhava
which is a Marakasthanam. The sub lord of Mercury the Sun
is in the constellation of Jupiter in llnd bhava, a Marakasthanam.
From the above combination, one can note that Mercury
owns the Bhadhakasthana and Marakasthana is avll for
Longevity. His placement in the constellation of Saturn, a

maraka as discussed above, becomes a worst malefic to
influence death of the native, duly shortening the span of
life.
Significators : —
Xlth house : Ruled by Mercury
Jupiter is in Mercury Star.
No Planets in Xlth house,
llnd Bhava Ruled by Mars
No planets in Mars star
Jupiter is there
Sun is in Jupiter star.
Vllth bhava : Ruled by Mars
No planets in Mars star
Saturn is in Vllth
Mercury. Venus, Moon, Ketu, are in Saturn
star.
Rahu is in Makaram and as node represent ■
Saturn in VII,
So all the planets (i.e.) Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury,
Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu and all connected to
death inflicting houses.
When such is the -case, ho v can the infant born under
such a configuration'survive ?
The reader may with interest note that the child was born
at a.m. I.S.T. on 9-11 71 whan the birth was in
25°-45' in Libra ruled by Venus, in the constellation of Visaka
ruled by Jupiter and sent by Mercury and succumbed to death
as 7-55-44 a.m. I S.T. on the same day.
At 7-55-44 a.m. the Lagna degree has maiked to 215°-2'
is Scorpio ruled by Mars, Arudhra star ruled by Saturn.
Saturn sub was ruling then, the sub, sub was that of Rahu.
Why the death could sustain to that tima atleast ? There
is reason.
It is a point for thinking-and to note that when all the 9
planets are the significator of death, only the planets Mars
Saturn and Rahu should inflict death.

Moon was at that lime, transiting in Saturn '•.tar. Rahu
sub only:
If he was born to die, and with such a configuration, why
should not he die immediately after birth. It is a main point
for the students of K.P, to study.
A careful follow up and observation of the Sign/star/Sub
rising from the moment of birth, till death is very important,
as that moment of Lagna degree rising has undergone an
effective change.
Moon's position at the time of demise was 103°-48'and
thus under went a change in the same sub ot Rahu from Rahu
Sub-Sub of Mercury SuD-Sub i e "l03c'-46'-20" to 1 04t'-3'-20”-
At the time, when birth had taken place the lising star
was Visaka owned by Jupiter.
Though Jupiter signified death, as oar KP, a planet in a
constellation will offer, more prerfominary, the result of the
bhava occupied by the lord of the constellation. Hence
Jupiter by virtue of being placed in the star of Mercury
deposited in lagna bhava, should protect life of the native.
With the result, Jupiter was ruling the movement as the
rising star lord and Moon transiting the Jupiter Sub, Sub,
the child was protected from death.
IT is also evident Saturn star rising would be indicated
for Longevity and Saturn Sub, set ’the stage, and from the
Mercury Sub-Sub Mercury is a weak significator of Lagna
bhava, though significator of death also 8 DUAL planet and
DUAL action. Followed by -Kotu, Sub, which is under
Jupiter Sub, obtained from entering in to the fray. Next Venus
Sub-Sub, Venus owns Lagna cusp, In Sun Sub-sub, turned
to be very serious and therefore physicians vDharu/antari
SUB) attended. I.i Moon and Mars, seriousness continues asthese two planets net badly connected to death inflicting
houses.
Then comes the Rahu Sub-S,ib and Moon moved into
103°-48'the death comes as Rahu a node a full representation
cf Saturn, who Is & maraka and Rahu is no way connected
to Lagna at all even by Sub.

ASCENDANT AN IMPORTANT FACTOR IN
DETERMINING LONGEVITY
A child was born on 2-9*1976 at 9-20 p.m. (I.S.T.) at
13°-1'N. Lat and 76tf-70' E Long.
On the 4th day the child passed away and I was curious to
know how Krishnamurti Padhdhathi indicates this premature
death.
The horoscope worked out under PLACIDUS SYSTEM of
houses with the longitudinal position of planets is given
below
Neptune
Uranus*
Vii4 agr
Mercury
i Aft F# t ii#
ft* JA'W 1 Maf#
> VII

Venus
Saturn
Rahu
Kethu
Sun
Mercury
Rahu
Kethu
Kethu
Mercury
Mercury
Mercury
As per Krishnamurti Padhdhathi, Longevity should be
assessed in terms of strength of Ascendant, its lord and the
sub.
These should not be connected to Maraka or Bhadakasthanas for long J if 9.
The sub lord of th9 Lagna should nut be connected to
houses VI, VIII and XII to ensure a smooth life with discuss,
major obtacles, accidents and serious expenditure capable of
altering major structure of life.
On the contrary, the sub lord of the Lagna cusp should
be posited in I or V or IX or X bhava to show long life.
If benefics aspect the Sub. it ensures long life.
In this horoscope of the child, the reader may note that
the sub lord of the ascendant cusp is Rahu, and it is posited
in the Vllth Bhava, in its own constellation Swathi. So Rahu
is a full significator of Vllth a Marakasthana.
The same sub lord Rahu is in the Sub of Mercury in the
Vlth bhava. It is bed.
Further the Lord of Lagna cusp, Mars is in Rasi conjunction with Mercury in Vlth in the house of sickness, and also
with Venus Lord of Maraka house find and Vllth.
The Sub lord of Lagna cusp Rahu is squared by Saturn the
bhadhcikadhipathi for Mesha Lagna (the owner of Xlth for
chara, rasi). (Tho Longitudinal difference between Saturn
and Rahu is 95°*19'.)
Rahu is in the Marakasthana, and is represented by Venus
Lord of llnd and Vllth which are marakasthSnas and in turn
the planet Venus being in Vlth end in its own Sub,
All these combinations have rendered the sub lord of
Rahu very weak, and the same planet attained Maraka and
Bhadhaknsthana's power.

Atthetime-of birth, the child was running Kethu dasa
Rahu j B h u kt i and Saturn anthra from (27-8-1975 to
The Dasanatha Kethu represents Mars in kVlth with
Marakasthanadhipathi Venus and so attains maraka powers
and it is the Sub Lord of the llnd cusp and marakasthanam.
The Bukthanatha Rahu is in Vllth in its own star and so
Rahu is a full significator of Vllth, a marakasthana. Incidentally Rahu is the Sub Lord of the Vllth cusp, another
Marakasthanam.
The Anthranath'a Saturn owns the Xlth, a Bhadakasthanam and as there are no planets-'in its star Pooaaift,
Anusham, and Uthirattadhi, he is a full significator of the
•Xlth, the bhadhakasthana. More so, Saturn rules the Xlth
cusp and also as sub lord.
The conjoint period of the sub lord of the three houses
connected to death had brought about the death of the child,
amply, and well illustrating the validity and truth of the
principles ot K,P.

LONGEVITY-HOROSCOPE
When we consider the Longevity, it is necessary to know
whether one is short-lived, middle-aged or iong lived, and
the ascendant and its strength assessed on those lives
For this we must look into the Sub Lord of the ascendant.
Late Prof. K S.K opined as under
If the sub lord of the ascendant is deposited in the constellation nf the depositor of Maraka or Bhadakasthanas, life
will be short after the time of judgement. It cannot be many
years (only in Horary)
If the Sub-lord of the ascendant is in the constellation of
the depositor of 6th bhava. ho will suffer from diseases, but
will not succumb to it.
If the sub lord of the ascendant is deposited ir. the constellation of the depositor of 8th bhava, ho vvill meet with
accidents.
II the sub lera of the ascendant is deposited in the constellation of the pianet in Xllth bhava, he is liable tc be in bed
for long years ana hospitalised before his demise.
Death is indicated only by bhadakn or Marakasthanas.
According to the strength of tne lord cf the constellation
in which the sub-lord of the ascendant is situated, the Dasas
and Bhukti are to be fixed, after the assessment of the
strength'.
If it is Horary chait,- calculate from the chart for the given
- number when the conjoined period of thy significators of
Marakasthana and Bhadakastnana operate. (Please read
Horary Astrology by late Prof K.S. Krishneinurti).
When considering the planets to assess tne Longevity,
(1 ; Lords of houses l, V. IX and X are benefics, (2) Lords of
VI, VII and XII are malefics, (3) Lords of l,V, IX, V, also ruling
VI, VI H and XII considered us mostly bsnefics. (4) The

planets owning other houses areconsidered benefic or malefic
according to the-other houses ruled by them.
The span of life of a parson may be classified into 3
groups.
(a) Short life {0 to 33* years)
(b) Middle life (33?, to 66§ years)
(C) Lorg life (66§ to TOO years)
Further one should assess the strength of Houses k III
and VIII and the Vrayasthanas of the houses in XII, li and VII.
XII. II and VII are the maraka houses and you must also
find out the bhadhaka houses.
Bhadakasthanathipathis are the worst malefics who never
hesitate to put an end to one's life
Of the 12 signs, Aries, Cancer. Libra and Capricorn are
moveable (Chars) signs The Xlth counted from them are
bhadakasthanas. To Aries born Aquarius is ths bhadhakasthana and so Saturn is the Bhadhakadipathi. To Cancer
born, Taurus is the Bhadhckasthana and the lord of Taurus,
Venus is the Bhadhakadipathi. Similarly to Libra, the sign
Leo and the luminary Sun and to Capricorn, the sign Scorpio
and its lord Mars are Bhadhakasthana and Bhadakathipathis
respectively.
For people born in fixed signs, (Sthira rasi) Taurus, Leo
Scorpio and Aquarius, the IXth sign, from these houses are
bhadhakasthanas and their lords SATURN, MARS. MOON
and VENUS are bhadhakathipathis respectively.
For people born in common sign, (Owiswabhava Rasi)
Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces, the 7;h house there
from are bhadakasthanrts and Jupiter 'and again Jupiter.
Mercury and again Mercury are bhadhakadipathis.
If the sub lord of the ascenoant is not in the constellation
of depositor or lords of Bhadaka or Marakasthanas long life
is promised.
For wife, the Vllth house is to be judged trejtlng Vllfh
cusp as ascendent for wife for Longevity of wife (or partnership) the bhadhaka and marakasthanas to tha Vllth case
(Home) are to be judged as told above.

The native was born at 6-7 a.m. on 27th February 1931
at 3®*7'N Lat. and IOr-52'E Long
The Horoscope is as follows : —
Here in this birth chart, the Ascendant is formed at
8-39' Aquarius a fixed sign.
So the Maraka are Jupiter and Sun and planets in its star
are Maraka. No pianet in Jupiter, Venus, Saturn in Sun star,
Rahu Xth, llnd Sun, Jupiter in its star.
Being the ascendant is a fixed sign IXthisthe. Bhadhakasthana. So Venus is bhadhakadipaihi and the planet in its
star and no planets in bhadakasthana.
To assess the longevity, judge the strength of the ascendant Sub Lord. Here the sub lord is Rahu, Rahu is in II, but
as node it represents JUPITER, a depositor of Vth, a
benelic house while considering longevity and Rahu is in the
star of MERCURY, owning Vth and VIII, a benefic house and
■the house of longevity respectively, Budha being in XII, the
demise will be after hospitalisation and this is MOKSHA.
Any way long spar, of life is promised i.e. over 661 years.

To find out the date of Demise, it is necessary to judge
and ascertain the strong significator of planets and their Dasa
that happens to run after 66 years of age,
At birth the balance of Mars Dasa is 0 years 1 month and
20 days.
Hence he will be running Mercury oeriod from 17-4-1984
Mercury is in the Xllth bhava. Rahu is in its star and so
Mercury is not a full significator of Xllth.
Mercury owns Vth and Vlllth bhavas For longevity both
benefics.
Mercury is in the star of Mats in V. Mars owns HI and
X most benefic houses to confer longevity.
Hence he will enjoy life during Mercury period, So he wilt
not die up to 17*4-2001.
Then separate the major period Kethu from 17-4-2001 to
Kethu is in the Vlllth and is in the star of MOON owning
VI, deposited in IV. This portends sickness. Kethu as node
represents Mercury in Xllth telfs bedridden status also signifies V, a benefical house for longevity. So he will live up to
tha end, of course, it is a sickly period, and he cannot avoid
hospitalisation.
Next period of Venus starts on 17-4-2001. Let us discuss
if it in Maraka.
Venus is the owner Libra, the bhadhaka sign for Kumbha
lagna born. This native is born in Kumba lagna and so Venus
is a badhakadipathi.,
Here in this nativity Venus is in Sagittarius 29°-13' i e.
in the star Uthradam owned by sun for Kumbha lagna Sun ie
a maraka. As no planets are in Sun star, and in Vllth Sun
should be deemed asa full and 1st class maraka. So as Venus
as bhadhakdipathi deposited in the star of Sun, Venus,
attains full marakadhipathyam and it is final. Venus Dasa is
the last one.

Then what is'the date of his demise. For this we must
resort to the thoory of Ruling Planets, propounded by our
Gutuji Late Prof. K.S K.
To day it is a Saturday (15-2-86) and it is 7-14 p.m. 1ST
at Madras Incidentally it is Bharani star ruled by Venus, and
he is in Mcsha and so Mars is also an RP. Now it is Simha
lagna running and lagna degree is running in Pooram star. So
again Venus and Sua me RPs.
Summing up, finally the RPs|are Venus. Mars, Venus, Sun,
Saturn, Kethu and Rahu also as Kethu represents Libra and
Rahu, Aries.
Hence, demise should come in Venus Dasa, Venus Bukti.
Rahu Anthra, Rahu Sookshma on a day ruled by Sun star or
Moon in Simha.
Rahu anthra rules between 27*6-2009 and 27-12-2009
ard Rahu sookshma is from 27-6-2009 to 24-7-2009.

PREMATURE DEATH OF A CHILD
One ol my natives had a daughter on 17-1-1971 at 10-35
a.m. at Waltair.
The parents were very happy with the child as the father
was promoted to class 1 status within 4 months from the date
of birth of his child.
Their boy was married. As the child was not keeping
good health and finally expired on 26-8-1971 Wednesday, as
wee indicated by me.
Following is the horoscope of the child in K.P.
Date of birth : 17-1-1971
Time 10.35 a.m. 1ST

The parents doubted the child's longevity due to constant
deteriorating condition and I was requested to examine the
Longevity. v
Our guruji wrote in the Volume II Krishnamurti
Padhdhathi on page 41.
"If the ascendant sub is governed by a malefic the life is
short. This is very clear in the case of Twin birth, one lives
other dies. The sub lord is the deciding factor. Lords of
1, 5. 9. 10 are benefics. Lords of 6, and 12 are malefics.
If Lord of l, 5, 9, end 10 also rule 6 or 8 or 12 consider
planet as merely benefics.
Here the sub lord of the ascendant is Venus, Venus is the
lord of 8.
Venus has to give the clue if the child has full life or
not.
Venus is in the star of Saturn deposited in II a marakasthana. Saturn owns Xllth also and so it is a badakasthana.
The same sub lord Venus is in the sub of Jupiter.

Jupiter is in the star of Saturn in II, So again in terms
of sub also the planets Venus is rendered vsty week and
attained by more malefic native.
This combination gives clue but the child has no full life
As the birth is in a common sign. Mercury is both a
maraka and Bhadhaka when the horoscope was prepared, it
was Sun period and it was up to 4-3-1973.
Sun owns the Vlth cusp and-is in Xth in its own star and
so the child was sickly from the birth and the sub lord of
Lagna cusp as clearly indicated, tells very short life.
So I proceeded to find out the significators of II and Vllth
which indicates death.
. Ilnd Bhava : Saturn is in the Bhava.
Venus and Jupiter are in Saturn star.
Lord of II is Mars.
Rahu is in Mars star.
Vllth Bhava : No Planet in the Venus.
* Mercury owns Vllth.
No Planets in Mercury Star.
•This tells that Mercury is the shortest
* planet to inflict death.
Therefore, summing up, Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, Mars,
Rahu and Mercury are the deep death significators arrived at.
Sun ie in the Sub of Saturn.
Moon is in the star of Mercury a Maraka and Bhadhaka.
So alt Planets except Kethu are malefics and this itself
tells the weak status of the child's Longevity.
In such position, we have to work out the RULING
PLANETS, to get proper guidance.
So I worked out the RPs for 5-10 p.m. on 2-6-71 at
Lagna was arrived at 211°-18'
and Moon was in 153°-58'

It was a Wednesday.
So the RPs are Mars, Jupiter, Sun, Mercury and Mars.
So I finalised that the child cannot live later than Jupiter
Anthra In Mercury bukthi in Sun period.
MERCURY bukthi ends by 28-10-71 and Jupiter Anthra
Out of RPs, SUN stands, as Dasa Native, Mercury stands
as Bukthi native and JUPITER for Anthra Native.
Jupiter runs for 41 days.
How to pin point the day of event.
Now we have remaining 2 RPs in Mars and Mercury.
The demise should come when Mars and Mercury have a
say in this, during the above period.
It can be, the Luminary Moon transiting the Rasi of
Mercury, Mars star or Mars rasi Mercury star mostly.
I have hinted the parents but [it Is a (Pantra) period for
the child doing IVth month of August' 71 and ended further
correspondence.
As already indicated the child parsed away on 25-8-71
at about 9-15 a.m. when it was Kettai star in Vrichika rasi,
duly ruled by Mercury and Mars respectively. Day is
Wednesday ruled by Mercury.
This is how the Longevity and death has full control from
the RPs and the Sub Lord of the Lagna cusp.

LONGEVITY ASSESSMENT AND
PREMATURE DEATH OF THE CHILD
I discuss belew a peculiar horoscope of a female child
born on 12th January 1968 at 8-21 a.m. I.S.T. at 18° T N.
Lat. and 83-27 E Long.
Sidereal Time: Hrs. 15-47-22
Aayanamsa ; 23°-19'
The child passed away on the 27th January at 8-25 a.m.
1ST on her 16th day ot birth when the rising degree was in
Aquarius. Rahu star, Kethu sub. It was a Saturday when
Moon was transiting 9°-33' in Sagittarius, in Kethu star and
Saturn Sub. At the moment Sun was transiting CAPRICORN
13* the sign ruled by Saturn, star by Moon and Sub by Rahu.
Let me analyse the chart how the death has occured on
that day and time as predicted by me by using the advanced
Stellar system of astrology propounded by late Prof. K.S.K,

On a general survey one can notice that the Moon, a
strong marakha for makara lagna Is in IVth bhava, Jupiter a
strong malefic (Vyayadhipathi) in Vllth bhava for Capricorn
birth, Kethu and Uranus in the house of AYUSH the Vlllth,
and Sani and Rahu in another marakha house, the llnd bhava.
Moon is aspected by Saturn and Mars,
The ascendant is Capricorn, a movable sign. Hence the
Xlth is the %Bhadhakasthana. The Xlth falls at 1°-45' in
Saggitarius in Ji'piter sign, Kethu star and Venus sub.
Jupiter, Mars and Moon are marakas for this Capricorn
lagna, and as Saturn the lagnadhipathi being in II, in its own
star, turn out to be en inveterate maraka.
In Krishnamurthi Padhdhathi, the sublord of the lagna
cusp is the deciding factor, in assessing the longevity in any
birth chart
The sublord of the ascendent is Jupiter and the same
planet is the lord of the sign where the Xlth cusp has fallen.
Hence Jupiter the sublord of the lagna cusp is the lord ol
Bhadhakasthana. Jupiter is in the Vllth, a marakasthana is
in the 7th bhava in Leo, in the constellation of Kethu, a
depositor of Vlllth bhava. As there is no planet in Jupiter
stars, Jupiter is the full bhadhakasthanadhipathi. And so it
has been assumed that the life of the child is rather very short,
as the sub lord of the Asc. Jupiter is also a 1st class maraka,
being deposited in Vllth having no planet in its star.
To be more detailed, one may note that the above lagna
cusp sub lord apart from being the bhadakastanathipathi, and
Stationed in marakasthana in the region of 120° to 132°-20'
of Kethu, a depositor of Vlllth and also being in 131°-49'
happens to be in-the sub of Mercury, lord of Vlth and Vlllth
Cusps in the birth chart.
So it can be told that the child must be ailing with some
serious, infectious disease, rendering the body to suffer very
poor health.
Disease is shown by the Vlth cusp, and Vlth house etc. In
this birth chart, Vlth is unoccupied, but the lord of Vlth cusp
is Mercury, and the cusp falls in Jupiter star and Venus sub.

Mercury in general, rules nervous system, Jupiter liver
complaints and circulation of blood in the Arteries, .Venus for
kidney troubles.
The child died out of these complaints.
l According to Krishnamurti Padhdhathi, the following are
the significators of deaths :
1. The planets posited in the constellation of the
depositors of Bhadakasthana and Marakasthana.
2. The planets occupy the above houses.
3. The planets is in the constellation of the lords of the
above said house in Bhadhakha and Marakha.
4. The lords of these houses.
5. Nodes connected to these houses.
6. The planets which are conjoined with these significators and thus connected to these matters.
Let ma analyse the houses II and VII.
The llnd Bhava is occupied by Saturn and Rahu.
Saturn is in its own constellation Uthirathathi and hence
powerful maraka. He is in the sub of -Rahu a marakha. Mars
is in the constellation of Rahu. a maraka. Moon owns Vllth
and is in its own star and in the sub of Saturn, Rahu is in
Aries, the sign owned by Mars and hence Rahu is powerful to
discharge its duties as maraka.
The Vllth is occupied by Jupiter (Retrograde). No pianet
in Jupiter stars (Punarpoosam, Visakam and Poorattadhi).
Lord of Vllth bhava is Moon and as discussed above it ie
in its own constellation Rohini and hence powerful maraka.
Jupiter is in Kethu star and Kethu is in VIII th, with
Uranus.
Xllth house in general threatens danger and end of an
disintegration of this mortal frame. Sun and Mercury are in
XII. Sun is in its own constellation in XII and Mercury is

also in Sun's star. Venus is in Mercury star. As there is no
cusp in Leo, Sun is a full sifgnficotor of XII and has more death
inflicting powers.
Hence the total significators of death are Saturn, Rahu,
Moon, Venus, Jupiter, Sun and Mercury. Kethu also being a
Maraka as it is in Venus house and Mars star.
When we calculate the Vimshothari Dasa system, the
child's ruling1 moon dasa, 'Saturn bukthi, Sun Anthra (from
11-1-1968to 9-2-68) and Saturn sookhma (from 25-1-68 to
.At the 1st assessment of Lagna cusp, I noted that the
life was rather very short and the Dasa in progress was that
of Moon a powerful maraka. bukthi of Saturn, another
maraka.
It was Sun Anthra, a powerful Vrayakaraka imbibed withmaraka qualities being in XII in its own star on the Xllth cusp.
Sun in 27°-42' and XII cusp being 26s-15' in Sagittarius, in
the sub of Moon a very powerful maraka.
So it was predicted that the child would not complete the
Anthra of Sun at all, as the Sun being a full Vrayakaraka and
the Xllth cusp being imbibed with Vraya qualities only as the
sub lord of Xllth is also Sun in its own star Uthiradam.
The child passed away on 27th January 1968, a Saturday
at 8.25 a.m. l.S.T. in the same place of birth.
At the moment of Death, the lagna 'degree fell in 314°-57'
in Kumbha lagna ruled by Saturn, in the constellation of Rahu
and Sub division of the constellation ruled by Kethu star.

Grand Father's Longevity and end Through
Grand Son's Birth Chart
It is generally talked of that the birth of a child tells upon
the general fortunes or longevity ot the parents and also other
nearer kith and kin etc. It is not completely correct. No one
can change another's fortune or longevity. What Is already
ordained comes to pass.
It could be seen from the birth chart of a native all about
his or her parents, wife or husband, grand father or grand
mother ; and it is final that one cannot change another's
destiny.
Following is the birth chart of a child, to show, how the
planetary forces reveal the events, as the birth of this child
coincided with the sudden demise of its grand father through
its mother.
Our Guruji late Prof. K. S. Krishnamurti used to very
often say that the chart of a native indicates not only the
events of one's own life, but also the matters that happened
or to happen in the lives of his or her nearest kith and kin
i.e. : father, mother, brother, grands and so on.
This child Chi. Chithananda was born on 19-1 1 -1977,
Saturday at 3.69 p.m. at Madras.
Place of birth : Madras 13o'4/80°-1 T
Sidereal Time : Hrs. 19-43-29
Ayanamsa of K.S.K. ; 23*26'

Longevity of a person comes under the purview of I, II and
Vlllth houses.
1st house is very important to finalise one's longevity,
whether cr not it is short, medium, long i.e., above 66 days in
a general way.
Vlllth house tells the total period of one's life to suffer or
otherwise. Illrd also on similar lines a supporting factor to
determine the length of one's life.

It is needless to say that the 12th for mere these three
houses (i.e.. I. Ill, VIII) i.e., XII, II and VII are to be taken as
Marakasthanas. (death inflicting houses).
Bhadhakasthanas are more stronger inflicting death to a
native ; and only with the influence of Bhadhakasthanas death
is brought about.
Bhadhakasthanas : If the Ascendent falls bhava rasi
(movable or cardinal sign) the Rishis have opined that the
Xlth is the badhakasthana.
If the same ascendant fails in Sthira rasi (fixed sign) the
IXth, whereas the Ascendant falls Ubhayaa rasi (common
signs) the Vllth is the badakasthana.
Reverting to the matter under discussion, tha death of
the maternal grand father (mother's father) had occurred on.
the very next day of the child's birth (roughly at the 26th hour
after tha birth).
The IVth house from the ascendant, indicates all matters
regarding the mother, and the IXth these from (u) the Xllth
cusp represents the maternal grand father. All matters about
him are revealed in terms of Xllth cusp only.
So we must treat the Xllth cusp as the ascendant of the
Maternal grand father ; and proceed.
At the outset, we have to find out from the ascendant and
its sublord, if the same signifies any of the maraka houses or
bhadhakasthanas. if it is so indicating, we must take that the
life is very short or death to be imminent from the
birth of the child in terms of the signification of tha sublord
of the Ascendent (here it is Xllth cusp).
Here the sublord of the Ascendant (Xllth cusp) is Rahu ;
and it is posited in the VII bhava from Meena (Pisces) which
is a Maraka house for Pisces lagna and has assumed another
house also as bhadhaka since Pisces is a common sign
(Ubhaya Rasi.)
So the lagna has been rendered very very weak as Node
Rahu (as sublord of Ascendant) had attained the qualities of

the house of bhadhakasthana ; and as a result Ruhu has
become the 1st rate killer.
Furthermore, the same Rahu is *in the star of Moon a
depositor of Xllth bhava (from the Ascendant of grandfather),
as already explained XII is also to be taken as a death bringing house, and hence Rahu had also attained the Xllth house
significators.
Added to this Rahu is in the sub of Mercury who owns
the cusp on the VII. a maraka as well as Bhadaka house and
deposited in its own star in Kettai in Vrichikam, the Vlllth rasi
in the Zodiac.
As the constellation lord of the death inflicting planet
Rahu, being Moon (the fastest moving planet), one has to
finalise that the end will be rather very soon.
According to Krishnamurti Padhdhathi, the following
are the significators of death :
1. Planets posited in the constellation of the occupants
of houses II, VII, XII and bhadhakasthana.
2. Planets occupying the above houses.
3. The Planets in the constellation of the lords of the
above houses.
4. The lords of these houses.
5. Nodes connected to these houses.
Ilnd house : No planets. )
Mars own the cusp. > MARS
No planets in its stars J
VII house and as
Bhadhakasthana :
Rahu is there
Jupiter and Venus are
in Rahu's stars.
Mercury owns the
VMth cusp and
deposited in IXth in its
own star Kettai.
I RAHU
| JUPITER
}- VENUS
| MERCURY
KETHU
Ketu alone is in Merc.
Star Revathi.

XII house :
Moon is there
Rahu is in Moon's Btar
Hastham.
Saturn owns the Xllth
cusp. *
Mars and Sun are Sat.
stars, Roosam, AnusamJ
MOON
RAHU
SATURN €r MARS.
SUN
When the death of the maternal grand father had occured
the child ‘then was running Jupiter Dasa, Saturn bukthi
Mercury Anthra. Sun sookshma on 20-11-77 (Sun sookshma
from. 1 4-1 1 -77 to 21 -1 1 -77). ltwas a Sunday, Uthirattadhi
star' then ruling, owned by Saturn. Rasi Pisces ruled by
Jupiter, by about. 5-50 p.m. I.S.T. on 20-1 1-77, the demise
came when lagna degree running is Aries owned by Mars in
the constellation of Karthikai (1st pada) ruled by Sun.
It will be interesting to note that the planets as indicated
above at that hour that brought about the demise of the
Maternal grand father, are in the subs indicated against each
whose lords are death inflicting houses,
This article is prepared only to show one's chart portrays
clearly the methods of these connected to the native through
blood. So, if mishap befalls to the nearest relative one
should not blame the child's birth for such happenings. We
are all aware that mirror reflects the object ; and object is not
created by the mirror.

The Demise of My Officer and K. P. Horary
I was in Railways in Mechanical Department and my
Dy. CME/W was on Mr. M.N. Rao who was badly laid up in
bed and, on the evening of 29-11-1974, I heard that he was
very bad. Ah urge came to know his immediate future so I
resorted to Horary method of prediction under Krishnamurti
Padhdhathi.
From opening a book, I took a number between 1 and 249.
It was 79. I took to working at lO-Sa.m fST on 1st December
1974. The place of judgement was Madras. 13°-4780<>-17'.
Ayanamsa used for 1974 was 23"-24\
The Horary Map is hereunder :

As the Dy. CMEA N is my employer, it is necessary I must
look into the 10th house in the Horary chart as his Ascendant
for my calculations regarding his recovery or demise.
To facilitate the students of K.P„ I rearrange the chart
marking the Xth cusp as Ascendant, Xlth and llnd and Xllth
and lllrd and so on and take up for discussion.

At the out set, in such cases, we must look into the lagna
cusp sublord to decide if the longevity is short, medium or
long.
The disposition of the sub lord of Ascendant, is the deciding factor, this I have repeatedly told in other lessons too.
If the sub lord of the Ascendant is in the star of a planet
in Bhadhakasthana or Marakastana and also connected to VI,
VIII & XII, you must RECKON his life is very short for that date
itself, when we are examining and the demise is imminent.
If the sub lord of the Ascendant is in the star of planets
in I, V, IX and X. or owner of these houses, this tells that the
native of the chart has a long life.
For sthira lagras, tha IXth significator of Lagna cusp sub
lord only portend short life. It does not help to give long
life on the contrary.
If the sub lord of the Ascendant signifies both benefic.and
malefic houses, life is middling.
In the rearranged chart the native's lagna falls in {Aries)
Mesha 23°-19' and it is chara rasi. So Xlth is the bhadhakasthana and Sani is the lord of Bhadakastharia.
The lagna cuso Sub lord divides the longevity. Hence it
Is Saturn again. So the lagna cusp sub lord Saturn is the
owner of bhadakasthara. It is rather alarming.
And further the same Saturn in the star of Jupiter, owning -
IX and XII. IX tells a long journey and XII tells emancipation
(Moksha), and the starloid Jupiter is deposited Xth which
tell among other matters, the retiremBnt from this world.
So the sub lord ot the Ascendant is rendered powerless to
a maximum degree to protect the fife of the native. Further
more, Saturn, is in the sub cf Mercury who is deposited in the
star of Saturn again the Bhadakasthanathipathi and Mercury
lords Vlth cusp too.
Summing up, the desposition of Saturn, protends
immediate fatal situation.

On a superficial survey we note the-sign and star lords of
the lagna cusp are Mars and Venus and their position are not
favourable also. Even if they signify benericial houses, I, V,
IX, and X, as we have discussed the strength of lagna cusp
sub lord to be potent with evil significations that will prevail
on the sign lord Mars and star lord Venus, es, it has been
reiterated that the Sub lord alone is the final and strongest
force to decide the length of life (longevity).
Significators of Marakha and Bhadakasthana :
llnd House : Owned by Venua and is in VII.
Venus owns VII too.
No planet in Venus star.
Moon is in II.
Kethu is in Moon star.
Vllth House: Owned by Venus.
No planet in Venus star.
Mars, Mercury, Sun, Rahu and Venus in VII.
Moon is in Mars constellation.
Venus is in Mercury constellation.
No planet in Sun constellation.
Jupiter is in Rahu star.
Kethu is in Rishabam owned by Venus.
Xlth house: No planet there.
Saturn owns the cusp.
Sun and Mercury are in Saturn stars.
Further Xth house tells about the - retirement from the
world and Xllth house being negation to lagna and called
house of Moksha, these two also are not auspicious while
considering the longevity.
It was the Dasa of Mars, bukthi of Sun .Anthra of Venus,
in progress, when I took up this matter. Bukthi of Sun was
ruling upto 6-1 2-74 and it was the Anthra of Venua.
At the moment of judgement, it was a Sunday and Moon
was in Gemini 5°-32' and lagna was in Capricorn in' Uthre-
•fiada star in 8°-17'.

So I finalised that the death is very near and it should
take place in the Dasa of Mars, bukthi of Sun, Anthra of
Venus and sookshma of Mercury which falls between
He passed away on the evening of 3rd December 1974 on
a Tuesday when Moon was in Poosam star of Saturn, in the
evening by about 7-30 p.m. when it was Mithuna lagna of
Mercury with lagria degree having Mars star.

LONGEVITY
One of my friends, leading fleet owners of Bombay
province wanted to know when his old ailing mother relieved
of pains from cancer and reach the lotus feet of the Almighty,
I desired him to get a number regarding this from his
mother itself. (Any number between 1 and 249).
Number 25 was uttered by her and I worked out the
Horary chart at 10 a.m. on 8th April 1970. Place 22°-31' N.
Lat.
This number stands for 3°-0'-0'. Taurus rises at
Ascendant. The other cusps are worked out for the latitude of
the place where from I am working with the helpof Raphael's
Table of Houses, duly the sayana position of the 12 cusp
deducting the Krishnamurthi Ayanamsa 23°-20' for the year
This position of the planets are worked out for 10-00a.m.
Number given : 25 (1-249)
Time and date: IQ'OOam. 1ST on 1-4-1970. Wednesday.
Place ot workout the Horary : 22s -31' N. Lat.
Balance in Venus period : Years 8 y— 11 m— 17 d.
To tell tha nature of quary tha position and its bhava
connections of Moon, one gets guided,

The Horary Chart is as under:—
Here Moon is in the Xllth bhava in the star of Venus.
Venus owns the llnd a maraka house and is in the sub of
Jupiter, owner of IX cusp, Bhadhakasthana for Taurus Lagna.
So Moon's position tells me Nature of query in her mmd
regarding her demise.
To fix the Longevity of the querist K.P. advocates the
assessment through the Lagna cusp and its sub lord.
The sublord of ascendant is Saturn. Saturn is in Xllth
and no planets in its stars. So r>e is the full significator of
Xllth house. This portends bedriddenness or hospitalisation.
Now she is completely bedridden.
The same Saturn is in the sjar of Venus in XII. owning
llnd a marakasthana. So Saturn is a maraka.
Further the Saturn is in the sub of sub signifying Xllth.
This deepens the matter and telis the longevity is rather very
short and the demise is nearing.
According to K. S. K. the total disease is shown by the
significatots of Vllth Bhava and the Vlllth cusp Sub lord.

Here the Vlllth house lord is Mars and no planets in the
constellation of Mars. So Mars is very powerful.
Further the Vlllth cusp sub lord is Saturn. Saturn is ift
the constellation of Venus, a Maraka house Saturn is in the
Sub of Sun who is represented by Kethu. Kethu is also in the
star of Venus a Maraka.
Saturn is represented by Rahu,' in whose star Jupiter is
posited. So Jupiter has some tinge of total disease and
further having no planet in its star. Jupiter owns IXtfi the
bhadhakas house and is deposited in Vlth the house of
disease.
According to Vimshottari Dasa system she is runn ing
Horary period of Venus, bukthi of Jupiter (From 25-5-69 to
Venus owns Hnd cusp and is in Xllth duly opposed by
Jupiter from Vlth, owning IXth.
Jupiter is in Vlth and owns IXth and no planets in its
9tar8. So a cent percent killer.
So demise should come in this bukti itself. In which
Anthra?
To decide the same, we resort to the system of ruling
planets proposed by our Guruji Late Sri K. S. K.
At this hour of 10 a.m. on 8-4-70 when we have worked
out this Horary, the Lagna is running in Rohini star Venus
Rasi (Rishabham) and so Moon and Venvs are R.Ps.
It is Bharani constellation and so Venus and Mars are
RPs.
It is Wednesday so Mercury is the day lord.
So Venus, Moon. Venus, Mars, Mercury are the ruling
planets. (RPs.)
So I have chosen Venus Anthra for the damise to come
when Sun transits the sensitive degree formed by these RPs.
is preferably when it passes Venus Rasi (Libra), Mars, Star
(Chithlrai 3 and 4 Pada) Mbon sub which worked out to be
185a-33'-20' to 186°-40'-0' (Falls on 23rd and 24th October
She passed away exactly at 12-30 p.m. on 23-10-1970
when Lagna degree was ruling through Dhanus 'which contains the IXth cusp which is a badhaka da gree for stira Rasi.

CHILD BIRTH AND SHORT LIFE
On 14-12-1971 I was approached by one of my friends
who was expecting birth of a child through his wife, already
much advanced in age. He wanted to know when she will
deliver.
Immediately the ruling planets were worked out, and I
did not take any number from him, as the delivery was expected any moment.
Star Lord-Rahu,
Rasi Lord-Venus,
Lagna star Lord-Rahu,
Rasi Lord-Saturn,
Day Lord-Mars.
The delivery should take place when the sensitive point
in the zodiac conjointly ruled by the combination of the above
ruling planets is transmitted by Luminaries.
i selected the combination in Mars sign (Aries) and the
constellation of Venus and sub of Rahu (Saturn rejoined as it
has been retrograde.
The above combination falls in ARIES from 18°-6'-40' to
When Moon transit the above sensitive degree i e. by 27/
28-12-1971 and it was worked out to be around 3-00 to 3-12
(night) night of 27th.
It was then predicted to him that the delivery will take
place on the night of 27th December 1971.
Later he Informed me that the delivery took olace exactly
at 3-08 a.m. on the night of 27-12-71 as was predicted.
He asked me to prepare that birth chart of the new born
child and I did it as per K.P. and as perused it, I doubted the
survival of the child and hence I did not reveal that I prepared
the chart and advised him to remind me after a month,

As expected by me, the new born child passed away on
the fifteenth day and the demise took place on 11-1-72, at
I started analysing the event of the demise of the child
and the birth chart fs as follows : —
Date of birth: 27/28-12-71
Time : 3-8 a.m. I.S.T.
Siderial Time: Hrs. 9-32-15
Ayanamsa 23°-21'.of Sri .K.S.K.

While judging- the longevity of a person, one has to
consider the Bhadhakasthana and Marakasthanas.
A word about Btradhakasthsna. They are as under : —
For Chara Rasis (Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricorn) Xlth
is the Bhadakasthana.
For Sthira Rasis (Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius) IXth
is the Bhadhakasthanam.
For Dwiswabhava Rasis (Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius,
Pisces, Vllth Is tha Bhadakasthana.
For all lagnas irrespective, the II and Vllth are Marakasthanas, Xllth also to be judged as it is to the house of loss
as regards to the Birth (Lagna).-
According to Krishnamurthi Padhdhati. if the Sub lord
of the ascendant becorr.es the significator of either Bhadakasthana or Marakasthana or both life will be very short.
Here the sub lord- .of the ascendant is Kethu. Kethu is the
IXth and is in star of Saturn in the Vllth bhava (a Marakasthana) and it is in the Sub of Rahu who as node represents
Saturn in Marakasthanam. This combination portends very
short life and as already noted the child passed away on the
15th day.
On the day of the birth of this child it was Venus Major
period, bukthi of Rahu and Anthra of Sun. (Sun Anthra from
26-12-71 to 20-2-72) Sookshma of Sun,

On the day of demise it was Rahu sookshma (from 6-1 -72
Dasa Lord Venus ia in closer proximity to Rahu, who by
virtue of a Node representing the Maraka Saturn and for the
Venus it the Lord of the 8th posited in the constellation of
Moon In VI. This combination invariably cause danger to
the life.
Bukthi Lord Rahu (as above) represents Saturn in
Marakasthanam.
Anthra lord Sun i? Marakasthanam, owning the Xlth cusp
a Bhadhakasthanam .
Sookshma Lord 1$ Rahu a maraka, duly semi squared by
Jupiter from Marakasthanam (45°!
Hence the demise had taken place which it is Venus
Dasa) Rahu Bukti, Sun Anthra and Rahu sookshma operated.

LONGEVITY OF A COUPLE
The native is born on a Monday the 19th February 1912
The birth chart is as under :
Longevity of wife : As has been told in the previous
pages, longevity should be first assumed from Lagna only.
The sub Lord of Lagna cusp reveals the position.
To find out the longevity of wife, you must judge the
same from the Vllth cusp ana its Sub Lord Here in this
chart, the Vllth cusp falls in Dhanus 11°-58C and the Sub lord
is Mercury.
Mercury is deposited with star of Mars in the XI hh House,
i.e. Vlth from the Vllth Cusp Hence this portends a sickly
life and does not contribute to poornayush as the star lord
Mars in the vraya bhavadhipethi in terms of Vllth House.
Accordingly the native's wife passed away on 18-10*69.

Now let use discuss Dasa Bukthi that brought about the
demise of tha life partner.
The demise came'in the major period of Kethu, bukthi of
Saturn and Anthra of Venus.
Tne Dasanatha Kethu is in the X Bhava in lagna of Vllth
cusp and in the constellation of Mars in Vlth from Vllth. This
does not augur well, as he is a Vrayakaraka for Vllth.
Buktinadha Saturn owns Vlllth (i.e. Ilnd from Vllth) and
no planets in its star and so he is a first class maraka for Vllth.
Antharanatha Venus is in 2°-15* Makara. This tells that
he is in the star of Sun. Sun is in the Vlllth Bhava (i.e. Ilnd
from Vllth) Venus also a powerful maraka.
Incidentally she passed away in Venus sookshma itself,
Self: — Hitagna is Gemini 11 °-53r. It is a common sign
(Dwiswabhava Rasi) and so the Vllth is the badhakasthanam.
Ilnd and Vllth are Marakasthanam.
At the on set, we must lock into the Sub lord of the Lagna
cusp, Here it is Saturn.
Saturn is in Xlth Bhava and no planet in its star. Hence
he is a tull significator ot Xiim
This position promises a iong life. How the Sub lord
Saturn signifies fully XI, and as he is posited in the star of
Venus owning Vth he attains the signification ot Vth and
Saturn owns IXth cusp and he is the full significator of IXth,
since you find no planet in its star.
The sub lord Saturn signifies V. IX and XI and this
contributes poornayush for the native of this horoscope and
he still lives.
Let us discuss his span of I its.
Now it is Venus period from 29-7-1971 to 27-7-1991,
The significator of death inflicting houses.
Ilnd Moon owns the ilnd
No planet in Ilnd

Mars alone in its stars,
and Rahu a node tenants Mars house Aries
Vllth (Marakaathanamand Bhadhakasthanam for Gemini)
Jupiter owns the Vllth,
No Planet in Jupiter star.
So Jupiter Is a Maraka and Bhadhaka.
Venus is in Vllth. These are planets in its star and Venus
in the star of Sun In Vlllth and owns IVth both life giving
houses. (So Venua is not a Maraka dasa)
Saturn is in the Venus Star.
Xllth : — Mars is in Xllth
and Mercury and Kethu is in Mars stars.
Rahu Is in Mesha representing Mars in Xllth
owning Vlth.
So Rahu attains these significators.
Sun and Moon are in Rahu star.
Summing up. Sun, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars are
powerful marakas.
So demise will come in Sun period, Moon bukthi, Jupiter
Anthra and -Mars sookshma only not Saturn Sookshama as it
is now 7-40 p.m. on 18-3-86 and day is ruled by Mars being
Tuesday and it is Mrigasira star day.

Longevity— How Stellar Astrology
Precisely Predicts
My friend's daughter had been sick for a long period, She
was under medical treatment of experts, but she had only
temporary relief and she fell seriously ill again.
On seeing her gradually deteriorating health condition, 1
felt an urge to find out if she would survive for long.
So I took a number on her behalf and worked out the
Horary chart.
1 found that her disease was incurable and her life was
short after that day, and worked out the date of her expiry to
be 7-1-1980 and actually left her physical world about
10-00 a.m. on Monday 7-1:1980, as predicted.
The particulars of the chart and my analysis are furnished
below :
The query was judged at 8-00 a.m. Thursday, 20-12-1979
Horary No. 73 (between 1 and 249}
K.S.K. Ayanamsa used : 238-26' for 1979.

The houses VI, VIII and XII tell about disease, danger and
separation respectively.
The houses XI and V indicate cure.
The sub lord of the Xlth cusp is Rahu. Rahu is with
Jupiter, lord of Vlth in the 1 fnd (Marakasthana)
Jupiter is in the star cf the lord of Xlth (Bhadhakasthana)
in the Vlth and the sub of Moon ascendant lord in VI.
Rahu itself is in the llnd (Marakasthana) in the star of
Kethu in 8, and in the sub lord of Jupiter occupant of II and
significator of VI and Xlth being deposited in the star of
Venus. Thus the sub lord of Xlth indicate disease and danger
to life and no cure.
Rahu is also the sub lord of the Vllth cusp, Vllth cusp
and Lagna cusp.
The sub lord of the Lagna cusp is the deciding factor to
find out whether the longevity of the patient is short or
medium, or long after the date of the judgement.
As stated already, the sub lord of the Lagna cusp is Rahu.

Since tha ascendant falls in a maraka sign, the Xith is the
Bhadhakasthana while 'll and Vllth are Marakasthanas. Rahu,
the sub lord of the ascendant is in the llnd, a marakasthana in
the star of Kethu in Vlllth.
Kethu in turn is the agent of Saturn, lord of VII th a
marakasthana and also Vlllth.
Rahu is also conjoined with JUPITER, lord of Vlth,
placed in the constellation of the Xlth lord of Vlth.
Thus Rahu, the sub lord of the ascendant is being
connected to II, VI, VII, VIII and XI. Thus it is clear that the
persons will not live long enough.
The sub lord of the Vlllth cusp, points to the place of
death and mode of death.
Rahu, the sub lord of tha Vlllth cusp, strongly represents
Jupiter and Mars by association. Both Jupiter, Mars are in
the star of Venus, Lord of IV and XI in VI. This combination
gives an inference that the patient would breath her last in
her own house (IVth house) due to disease (Vlth house), with
ail her relatives around her (IVth again). It is a surprising
fact the natives, brother and father arrived justan hour before
her last moments while all other relatives were already around
her in the house.
Death comes off during the conjoint period of the
significators of the maraka and bhadhaka houses. VIZ: II,
VII and XI.
llnd house : llnd is owned by Sun.
Rahu, Jupiter, Mars and Saturn are the
occupants.
Kethu is in the star of Rahu.
No planets is in the star of Jupiter, Mars and
Saturn.
Venus and Saturn are in the stars of Sun,

Vllth house: VII is vacant.
Saturn owns Vllth.
No planets is in Saturn star.
Kethu is inthe Vllth.
As node Kethu represents Saturn, the sign lord
and so Kethu represents Vllth too.
■ Sun and Rahu are in Kethu's star.
Xlth house: No planet represents Xlth house.
Venus owns the Xlth cusp.
Moon, Mars and Jupiter are in the stars of
Venus.
Even Mercury has the power of inflicting death as it
owns the Xllth cusp, (separation); Thus all planets ate in
some manner or other, connected with death .inflicting
influence.
At such situations, we must resort to ruling planets for
cuspal guidance.
The RPs. or the time of judgement are as follows :
Jupiter rules the day.
Moon sign lord— Jupiter.
Moon star lord— Venus.
Lagna sign iord— Jupiter.
Lagna star ford- Sun.
Moon sub iord — Venus.
Lagna sub lord— Moon.
As Rahu is in Leo, Rahu also is RP.
Thus the RP's are Jupiter ,Rahu, Venus, Sun and Moon.
Among Ruling Planets, Rahu being a node stronger than
the Rasi Lord Sun, Jupiter with whom he is conjoin.
So we find RPs are Rahu, Venus and Moon.
At the time of judgement, the dasa and Bukthi of Venus
and Anthra and Sookshma of Moon was in operation.

Among the final ruling planets(i.e. Venus, Rahu and
Moon) Venus as the lord of the Dasa Bukthi and Moon as the
Anthra are in action.
The remaining ruling planet Rahu should come into
action as the sookshma lord to deal with the life of the
patients.
Rahu sookshma operates for 15 days from 24-12-79 to
Since the patient's life cannot extend beyond 9-1*1980
and this date is just less than a month from the date of
judgement.
I took the Moon's transit to determine the date of demise.
Moon should transit the sign of Dasa and Bhuthi lord
Venus and also the bhadhakasthana. Taurus in Moon star,
Rahu sub.
This occurs on the night of Sunday the 30th December
1979, between 8-30 p.m. and 11 -50 p.m. when Moon will be
transiting its own star.
In the Horary chart. Moon itself in the lord of lagna, as
such the end cannot come.
Hence the patient should escape death, in such a transit
of the Dasa bukti lords.
The next such possible position of Moon's transit in tha
star of Venus, the dasa and bukti lord. It's star Poo ram falls
in Leo, coinciding the llnd marakasthana.
(Leo is iuled bySun, where the Rp. Rahu is there.}
Moon transists this point on Monday the 7-1 -1 980 and the
native died at 10-00 a.m. when Moon transitted Pooram of
Venus and Sub of Moon.

Doctor Gives Number to Know the
Longevity of the Patient
I wanted to meet a Doctor friend of mine, who was at
that moment making some medical, check up on a patient who
was then struggling for survival. With much uncertainty,
perhaps, the Doctor was treating that patient.
When he saw me, as he already knows me as an
astrologer, wanted my astrological advise regarding the
longevity of that patient.
I asked him for a number between 1 and 249 and he said
74, with least hesitation.
A Horary chart was erected with 14° -53' -20' Kataka as
the point of ■ lagna, this being the point corresponding to
No. 74, according to K.P. method of zodiacal division.
The Nirayana Horary chart is as under :

Blance in Venus period
at the moment of judgement : Years 0 — 5 — 19 days.
r
At the outset, let me first settle which house describes
the patient for whose longevity, the Doctor himself had given
thenumber.
In astrological parlance, the lagna always denotes and
stands for the person who makes the query, in this instance
the doctor.
The Vllth house is said to show his patient. So the Vllth
house is to be assumed by the astrologer, to represent the
patient.
As the Vllth house in this chart under examination falls
in Makara 14°-53'-20*, this point for all purposes constitutes
as lagna of the patient and proceed as such.
Only to make the students understand the procedure I
again putthe Horary map, making the Vllth as lagna of the
patient, Vlllth as II and so on.

As regards to death inflicting houses, astrological texts
hold that llnd end Vllth houses which are the opposing
houses to the houses of longevity is Vlllth and 1st and also
strong in relation to the Vlllth and lllrd which relates to
longevity. The Xllth house stand for Mokshasthana, the
house of liberation of soul and also being a negating force to
lagna that governs the body.
In addition to this we have to take into account the
Bhadakasthana also. If lagna falls in chara Rasi, Xlth is the
bhadakasthana, if in sthira Rasi IXth, and if it falls In
Dwlswathara (common sign) Rasi Vllth.
As per Prof. K.S K., Bhadhakasthana plays a major role
in inflicting death.
First we must look into the lagna cusp sub lord to determine the lengths of longevity of the patient. It is 14°-63'-20*
in Marakam. So the sub lord is Jup'ter.
Jupiter is in lagna bhava, in the star of Moon the marakasthanadhipath’i and is placed in [Xllth the mokshasthana.
Further the same Jupiter is in the sub of Saturn owner of
II and no planets in Saturn star and in II. and Saturn is a
significator of bhadhakasthana. (Xlth house.)
Jupiter is along with Mars, the bhadakasthanadhlpathi
and Jupiter owns the Xllth cusp also.
All these combinations go a long way to tell that the
patient has the shortest longevity possible.
Let us determine who are all the marakas:
llnd House : It is vacant.
Owned by Saturn.
No planets in Saturn star.
So Saturn is the sole significator of llnd.
Vllth House : No planet here too.
Moon rules the home.
Jupiter tenants moon star.
So Moon and Jupitet are Vllth
significators.

Xllth house : Moon is posited there.
Jupiter is in Moon star and Jupiter lords
in this cusp,
No planets in Jupiter constellation.
Hence Moon and Jupiter signify this
nouse.
and Jupiter is powerful to promote the
affairs of Xllth house.
Xlth house (Bhadhakasthana):
Rahu is placed there,
- Kethu alone occupies Rahu's star.
Mars owns the Xlth cusp and Saturn is in
Mars Star.
Hence Rahu, Kethu, Mars, Saturn are
bhadhakas.
While judging this matter, It was Venus major period,
bukthi of Kethu and thh anthra of Jupiter (11-4-73 to
7-6-73) and sookshma of Saturn in operation.
Dasanatha Venus is in its own star and owns Xth cusp.
Xth tells about a native's last journey. If other factors lead
towards maraka position then the Xth will tend towards death
also as it stands for long journey and thus Venus assumes
Maraka powers.
Bukhthinatha is Kethu. Kethu is in the star of Rahu in
the Xlth the Bhadhakasthana.
Antharanatha Jupiter, as detailed above, he is above a
powerful maraka being in the star of Moon owner of Vllth and
in XII and also Jupiter owns Xllth cusp.
Sookshmanatha Saturn is the sole significator of llnd and
also attaint bhadhaka powers having been placed in Mars
star and Mars being the Bhadhaka, as it owns Xlth cusp.
According to Krishnamurthi Padhdhathi, the planets who
conjointly govern the lagna cusp show long long life,’ provided

they are the significators of I and V. If they are significators
of II, VII and bhadhakasthana they prove fatal and brine about
early death.
In this Horary chart, the lagna cusp is ruled by Saturn as
Rasi lord, by moon as constellation lord and by Jupiter as
sub lord.
As I have already discussed above, Saturn, Moon and
Jupiter are invested with very strong maraka and bhadhaka
powers,
After the examining the factors I had no illusion regarding
the patient's survival and indicates that he will succmmbleany
moment when lagna transists the star poorvashadha, as the
three planets ruling Moon's position, Jupiter as Rasi lord,
Venus as star lord, and Kethu as sub lord, shall have maraka
powers.
And it happened and the demise came on that night by
about 11. p.m. and the lagna must have been, transiting
Dhenus of Jupiter, Poorvashada of Venus and sub of Kethu.
