READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_kp_kalamsa_and_cuspal_interlinks_s_p_khullar.json
Dataset number: 234 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 476,739 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_KP_Kalamsa and cuspal interlinks _S.P. Khullar
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_KP_Kalamsa and cuspal interlinks _S.P. Khullar
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 415
  • total_words: 83949
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.957
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
KALAMSA & CUSPAL
INTERLINKS THEORY
SIMPLIFIED AND ENLARGED
S.P. Khullar
LT.S.
GM. Telecommunications (Rtd.)

Acknowledgement
The book on "Kalamsa and Cuspal InteJdinks Theory" has been
written under the spell of inspiration from all those who have
irresolute faith in the sacred science of Astrology. Some Astrologers
of the 20th century make claims of originality. According to them
their erudition is either inhenited or blessed by a god. I could,
however, remain focused in my approach due to the sincere and
awe inspiring devotion of my friends and students of the true science
of Astrology. My sincere thanks to them. My apologies to my family
who had to suffer a lot due to my single minded devotion to the
Subject of Astrology.
I am greatly indebted to Mr Ron S Gaunt and Mr Neville Lang of
Australia and Ms Sandy Crowther of U.S.A and many other learned
Astrologers who are members of Astrology Research Group.They
have played an instrumental role in helping me to revise this book
to make it easy for external readers to follow the concepts with
clear perceptions. Index has been added. This is a direct input from
Mr RS Gaunt.
Sagar Publications has shown the skill and professionalism they
have attained during the years. They have brought the revised and
enlarged edition of my second book "True Astrology-Kalamsa and
Cuspal Interlinks Theory" in amazingly short time without
sacrificing quality, lowe my sincere thanks to them.
S.P. Khullar
l.T.S.

Contents
Si . Title Page
No- No.
Introduction ix
1. Development of Nakshatra and Kalamsa Theory <1
2. Planets Behaviour in Kalamsa Theory 12
3. Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of Nirayana Ch3Lt 28
4. Philosophy Behind CuspaL Intedjnks Theory 104
5. Cuspal Inteilinks and Their Application 112
6. All about Ascendant 133
7. All about Second House 162
8. Analysing Horoscope for Educational Prospects 195
9. Analysing Diseases 206
10. Marriage and Married Life 218
11: Analysing the Tenth House-Profession 239
12. Analysing the Fifth House 259
13. Theory of Transit 276
14. VimsottlUi Dasa and Timing Events 297
15. Appendix I 375
16. Appendix II 379
17. Index

Introduction
The sacred science of Astrology was regarded by the greatest
scientist of the era Albert Einstein as a true science. He said,
"Astrology is a science in itself and contains an illuminating body
of knowledge. It taught me many things, and I am greatly indebted
to it. Geophysical evidenc~ reveals the power of the stars and the
planets in relation to the terrestrial.. In turn, astrology reinforces
this power to some extent.. This is why astrology is like a life-giving
elixir to mankind." In the recent past, however, Astrology has gained
epithet as pseudo-science or nothing but superstition. There is, in
fact, no mystery behind this degradation of astrology. It is a fact
that the science of astrology has not so far been able to free itself
from the clutches of its own charlatans. These ill-informed publicity
crazy moneymaking practitioners constantly solicit all possible
derisive comments from the educated or enlightened and from those
who have become victims of their depravity.
The attitude of s'leh pseudo astrologers can best be described in
the words of Shakespeare as follows:
"As flies to the wanton boys, are we to the gods;
They kill us for their sport."
Astrology, no doubt, wilt remain an enigma if the attitude of the
traditional astrologers will continue to be rigid and their minds
closed to the realities of life. We need to learn to discriminate. It is
shocking to say that even the intellectual giants like Carl Jung,
Sepharial, Alan Leo, Walter Gibson, WilliamJ Tucker, C.B-O. Carter
and H.S. Green who knew that "Whatever is bom or done this

moment of time has the qualities of this moment of time", also
showed as if they suffered from some sort of intellectual void during
their approach to Astrology. A moment can't be defined as an hour
or even a few minutes, then how the Rashi Chart or even the
Navamsa Chart (as studied and analysed by the Vedic Astrologers)
can delineate the nativity of a person. Neither the planetary positions
nor the aspects, nor the yogas change; and even the varga charts
may rema.in the same. And the less we say, the better it is, about the
Western Astrology, which primarily depends upon the theory of
Aspects and Progression. No two human beings are alike in the
universe. Each horoscope, therefore, has to be unique. Our
ancient seers used to construct and analyse charts to the accuracy
of a few seconds of the ascendant.. Let us try to match their calibre
to the best of our ability and use this sacred knowledge to provide
benefits to the society at large.
To me Astrology is, at bottom, a microscopic criticism of all facets
of life under the influence of celestial bodies. It is difficult for any
learned man to deny the influence of celestial bodies on life on
Earth. It is a different matter how to analyse this influence and
apply it to prediGtive astrology. People oppose things because they
are ignorant of them.
Laws of science are universal We do not say American or Indian
Laws of Motion. However, in Astrology nobody agrees on anything.
It is time, friends, to come to an agreement, at least in respect of its
elemental principles. There are so many misunderstandings that if
a radical change is not made, the fundamental role of Astrology
will be seriously limited.
My approach may not be an end in itself. However, I am making an
effort in my books under the Title "True Astrology" to present before
the readers how to approach the Subject of Astrology in a scientific
way. The reader's dedication, devotion and the open-minded
approach will bring rewards. However, let us not forget that our

Introduction
success in predktion is largely dependant on the accuracy of the
software, whkh we use for the calculation of planetaq' and cuspal
positions and also the accuracy of the birth data, which more often
than not is questionable.
No doubt blessed ones alone can discover what is hitherto unkoown.
I have only made a sincere and dedicated attempt to dig out and
revive our true concepts of astrology. The present book True
Astrology-Kalamsa and Cuspal Interlinks Theory is in tune with
the Navamsa andNadiamsa concept ofNadi Astrology. The aspiring
reader will doubtless fmd it an exposition of sound techniques of
predktive astrology. How to analyse the horoscope, to detennine
what is promised for the native for all walks of humalL life, has
been explained in simple and scientific way. Timing events and
use of transits are often thought of as complex and
incomprehensible. It is dealt in a very clear, practical and illustrative
way. ft can in no way be taken as unequivocal dogma. All that the
reader needs is an accurate horoscope.
Suggestions from readers are welcome.
S.P. Khullar
I.T.S.
GM. Telecommunications (Rtd.)

Chapter 1
Development of Nakshatra and
Kalamsa Theory
Astrology is, at bottom, a criti~sm of life. The horoscope is a
portrait, which depkts how the individual is going to lead his life.
No two human beings are alike in the universe. The horoscope of
each individual has thus to be unique. The Astrological System
based on the analysis of the Rashi Chart fails to account for this
because of the following:
1 . Potential and Promise of each house isjudged on the basis of
the Sign rising on the house and the strength of its lord. This
remains the same for all the persons born on a day within
approximately two hours.
2. Planets behaviour is delineated as per their accidental and
essential dignities, aspects and Shad Bala strengths, yogas etc.
whkh again are not going to show any significant change
within two hours.
3. Results of Dasa periods are declared as per the significations
of planets, their lordships, occupation, aspects, afflictions, and
the yogas they form. The results, in fact, will and should be
the same for all persons born on a day within two hours.
Nakshatra Concept:
The ancients considered that the delineation of a chart as per the
rising Sign on each house and the modification of behaviour_ of

planets as per their Sign position, more often than not, give results
which are contrary to what happens to the native. It was, thus,
decided to divide the Zodiac into 27 parts, each equal to 13 deg. 20
min. It was called a Nakshatra. Each Nakshatra was allotted the
rulership of a planet in the same sequence in which the Dasa periods
in Vimsottari Dasa are allotted. In Nakshatra concept the
significations of the house are influenced by the Nakshatra rising
on the house. The analysis of the horoscope was done on the basis
of the following:
1. The Nakshatra rising on the house was given preference over
the Sign. The planets influencing the house indicate Promise
or Potential of the house.
2. Planets behaviour was detelilllined as per their placements in
the Nakshatras rather than the Signs.
The characteristics of Nakshatra for various aspects like physical
and mental characteristics of the native, profession, sickDess etc.
were written synthesizing the attributes of the planets ruling the
Sign and Nakshatra lord vis-a-vis the houses they rule in the Natural
Zodiac. For example, the characteristics of Bharani will be under
Mars and Venus and the houses over which they have the ruler ship
in the Natural Mundane Sphere.
Navamsa Concept:
The Nakshatra division also did not provide satisfactory results.
The Zodiac was then further Sub divided. Each Nakshatra was
divided into 4 parts, each of 3 degrees 20 minutes. It was called a
Pada, or Charan or Quarter. Each Quarter was allotted the lordship
of a planet as per the following scheme.
Starting with 0 degree Aries and the N akshatra Ashwini the lordship
of the quarters were in the following sequence.

Development of Nakshatra and Kalamsa Theory

Nakshatra

Development of Nakshatra and Kalamsa Theory
Navamsa Chart:
It was expected by our ancients that the Navamsa Chart should
express the following:
1. The Nakshatra Quarter in which the Ascendant and other
houses rise at the time of birth.
2. The Nakshatra Quarter in whkh each planet transits at the
time of birth.
However, in the present days the Navamsa chart is cast as
follows:
1. Navamsa Ascendant is calculated by dividing the longitude
of the Ascendant degree in the Rashi Chart by 9 and the quarter
of the Nakshatra it rules, is found. The ruler of the quarter
indicates the Sign of the Navamsa Ascendant (Refer the Table
above). For example, suppose a person is born in Taurus Sign
inKrittika Nakshatra Pada 2; Saturn and the Sign of Capricorn
rule this Pada. Thus the Navamsa Ascendant of the native
will be Capricorn.
2. Starting from the N~vamsa Ascendant the other houses are
written in sequence. For example, if Capricorn is the Navamc-a
Ascendant, the 2nd house will be Aquarius, 3rd Pisces and
so on.
3. SimilaJdythe planefs longitudes are dividoo by 9 and knowing
the rulership of the Nakshatra quarter in whkh they are, the
planets are shown as placed in respective Signs ruled by the
Nakshatra Quarter lord.

Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Enlarged
Thus this chart only reflects:
a. Navamsa Ascendant as per the Sign ruled by the
N akshatra Quarter.
b. Planets positions in Signs ruled by Nakshatra Quarters
in which they are placed at the time of birth.
This chart, therefore, has lost the Significance of Nakshatra
quarters rising on other houses at the time of birth. The planets
positions do not bear any relationship with the destiny of the
native. This topic has been dealt in my book "Basics and Traditional
Concepts in the chapter "Navamsa and its Significance".
Role of Na~amsa in Horoscope Analysis:
The signiflGlltions of all the 108 quarters into which the Zodiac
was divided were — eclared by synthesizing the attributes of the
planets co-ruling each quarter and their lordship in the natural
Mundane Sphere. For example, inYavana lataka (Sphujidhw~a) it
is said, "Venus in Saturn Navamsa indicates a rich man with a gentle
wife who has little character and ends badly". Now, see how this
signification has been drawn. It is the synthesis of the signifi-tions
of Venus who is a peace lover and having the lord ship of 7th house
of the Natural Zodiac which represents wife. So he will have a
gentle wife. Its lord ship of 2 and 7 in the Natural Zodiac and under
the influence of Saturn lord of 10 and 11 in the Natural Zodiac
indi~te his high financial status (a rich man). Venus lord ship of 2
and 7 and SatlltlTs influence upon it hints that the native will die in
pain and agony. The horoscope analysis was thus resorted to as
follows:
1. Potential or Promise of each house was declared as per the
Nakshatra Quarter rising on the house. For example, the
physiGal characteristics of the native were delineated as per

Development of Nakshatra and Kalamsa Theory
the Quarter rising on the Ascendant..
2. Planets behaviour was assessed as per the Nakshatra Quarter
in which they were rising. For example, the mental set up or
the temperament of the native was declar- as per the quarter
of the Nakshatra in which Moon was transiting at the time of
birth.
If we see the Dhruva Nadi Literature, we find that each planet,
according to its Nakshatra quarter i.e. Navamsa, is given aparticular_
nomenclature as indicated below:
l.Lagnamsa 2. Dhanamsa 3. VikramBa 4. Sukhamsa
5. Putramsa 6. Shashtamsa 7. Bharyamsa 8. Nidhanamsa
9. Bhagyamsa 10. Karmamsa ll.Labhamsa 12. Vyanamsa.
In Hora-Sara, there is a verse which means: "If the lord of the Lagna
be posited in the Navamsa Rashi owned by the 8th house and the
lord of 8th house occupy the Navamsa Rashi owned by the Lagna
and if they (both) conjoined with malefic, the person concerned
will live for 50 years. "
In fact, study of the books like Deva-Keralam, Dhmva-Nadi, HoraSara, Vidya-Madhaviyam, and Prasana-Marg indicates that the
Navamsa in which a planet is placed or a house rises plays very
significant role in the delineation of the horoscope. Navamsa chart
is thus considered as our true geniture by the Tradionalists~u
However, its use in the hands of Modem Astrologers has
degraded its. real impact.
Development of Kalamsa or Sub-Theory:
The Navamsa concept improved the techniques of prediction
considerably. But Navamsa is on degrees 20 minutes. Which means
the persons born within a span of about 13 minutes will have the

Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Enlarged
same Nakshatrn Quarter rising on the Ascendant and all the planets
will also be rising almost in the same Nakshatra Quarters. The
nativities of all these persons should therefore be identical.. This
led the Astrologers to think of new ways to Sub - divide the
Nakshatra. One such division is based on the principle of dividing
the Nakshatra space of 13 degrees 20 minutes into 9 parts. Each
part is allotted the ruler ship of a planet in the same sequence as in
Vimsottari Dasa System. Each part is allotted the space in-the same
propotlion as the number of years allotted to its lord in Vimsottar:L
Dasa. The space allotted to each part is called "Kalamsa"or "Sub"
and the ruler of the part is called "Kalamsa Lord" or "Sub Lord".
Calculation of Kalamsa or Sub Area:
In VimsottarL Dasa, the life span of a human being is taken as 120
yrs. Dasa periods follow a specific sequence Le. Ketu, Venus, Sun,
Moon, Mars, Rahu, Jupiter, Saturn and Mercury. Each planet is
allotted a different period called the Da~a period as indicated below:
The Sub-period of ~ Dasa period'always starts with the Sub-periDd

Development of Nakshatra and Kalamsa Theory
of the Dasa period it-self. This is followed by the Sub periods of
planets in the above sequence. For example, if a person is born in
the Dasa of Venus i.e. when the Moon at the time ofbirfu is transiting
in the beginning ofNal<:shatraruled by Venus, the ftrst Sub-petiod
will be that of Venus. It is followed by Sun, Moon, Mars, Rahu,
Jupiter, Saturn, Mercury and Ketu.
Total Dasa period allotted to a planet in VimsottaJiiDasa is equivalent
to the total span of a Nal<:shatrai.e. 13 degree 20 minutes equal to
800 minutes. The Sub Area allotted to a planet is thus calculated
using the following fonnula:
The order of Subs in each Nakshatra is shown in Appendix I under
Tables A, B, C and D.

Application of Kalamsa or Sub Theory:
This theory got its impetus through two legendary figures of the
20th century named Mr. R. Gopalkrishna (popularly known as
Meena) and Mr. K. S. Krishnamoorfuy. The approach of the two in
application of this theory was, however, different.. Mr. Meena like
the Tradionalists while predkting results relied heavily on the nature
of Planets, Nakshatras and Signs on the basis of Law of Mode of
Action viz. Rajasic, Tamask and Sattawic. Mr. Krishnamoorthy on
the other hand used the theory more in consonance with the
Traditionalists concept of Navamsa whilili is used to qualify
the behaviour of planets..; and house significations as per the
Sub division in whilili the planet is placed or house position
rises.
Further division of the Nakshatra and Kalamsa or Sub and its role
in predicotive Astrology is explained in the chapter Sub-Sub and the
Cuspal Inteilinkages Theory.
Relationship between Navamsa and Kalamsa or
Sub:
Kalamsa or Sub is the microscopic version of Navamsa. Both are
used to specify the area of the Zodiac, which affects the behaviour
of planets or the significations of the houses. The main difference,
however, between the two are listed below:
1. Navamsa is always of 3 degrees 20 minutes. Kalamsa or Sub
ranges between 40 minutes to 2 degrees 13 minutes 20 seconds
depending upon its ruler.
2. Navamsa is the 9th part of a Sign. Kalamsa is the 9th part of a
Nakshatra.

3. There ate only 108Navamsas. There are 249 Kalamsas. The
division of 27 Nakshatras into 9 parts each should give us
only 243 Kalamsas. But there are 6 Kalamsas or Subs that
appear in consecutive Signs. For example, Rahu Kalamsa
appeal" Sin Aries, Leo and SagittaJiius, as well as in Taurus,
Virgo and Capricorn. Similarly, Moon Kalamsa appears in
Gemini, Libra and Aquauius as well as in Cancer, Scorpio atld
Pisces. This gives rise to 6 additional Kalamsas. This is to
spe~ify their influence, taking into consideration the impact
of Signs in which the Sub rises.

• Chapter 2
Planets Behaviour in
Kalamsa Theory
The planets play significant role in every crisis and in all critical
stages of man's evolution. How the planets cause an event to happen
in one's life is a Subject of serious study. In Kalamsa or Sub Theory
the planet's behaviour is detemlined on the basis of the following'
factors:
1. Nature of the Planets as modified by the Zodiacal degree in
which they are placed.
2. House or Houses, which they rule in the horoscope.
3. Positional Status of the Planets.
4. Influence of the Nakshatra and Kalamsa or Sub division lords
as per their house placements and significations. This is called
the Planet's Stellar and Sub-lord Status respectively.
5. Influence of Transit..
6. Influence of Retrogression, Combustion and Aspects.
Stellar Status: A Planet in Kalamsa theory is said to be totally
under the dictates of its Nakshatra lord. It, therefore, gives the result
of the house occupied by its Nakshatra or Star lord irrespective of
the fact that other planets also occupy the house occupied by its
Star lord. The planet also gives the results of the houses owned by
its Star lord, especially if these houses are vacant..

Planets Behaviour in Kalamsa Theory
Positional Status: The positional status of the planet measures the
capability of the planet to give the result of the house it occupies. A
planet can provide the result of the house it occupies only if it has
not taken the responsibility of being the Star lord of any planet in
the horoscope. Each planet has been allotted the ruler ship of three
Nakshatras. These NakBhatras refer to specific areas of the Zodiac.
A planet is said to have the Positional Status if no planet in the
horoscope is placed in the specific areas- of the Zooiac over which
it has the ruler ship. For example, the planet Venus will be said to
have the Positional Status and thus be capable to provide the result
of the house of its occupation and its houses of lordship (especially,
if they are vacant) if no planet in the horoscope is placed in 13
degree 20 minutes to 26 degrees 40 minutes of Aries or Leo or
Sagittarius.
The nature of result a planet will provide during its Dasa, Bhukti,
Antara or Sookshma periods (as per Vimsottari Dasa Period System)
will be as indicated below:
1. The results of the house occupied by its Nakshatra lord and
the houses owned by Nakshatra lord.
2. The results of the house occupied by the Planet and its houses
of lordship subject to the condition that the planet has the
Positional Status.
The planet itself acts as the source of these results irrespective of
its Positional Status. That is the results will be achieved as per the
nature of the planet as modified by the Zodiacal, degree in whkh it
is placed, the house it occupies and through the significations of
the houses, which it rules in the. horoscope. How and what results a
Planet provides during its Dasa period is called the Dasa potential-_
of the planet..

Significance of Kalamsa or Sub Lord:
Like Navamsa theory, the Kalamsa lord of the Planet qualifies the
nature of the result it provides as per its significations in the
horoscope. It also provides, and some times, more strongly the
results of the houses as per its own significations. The role of the
Kalamsa lord is thus more intricate and needs detailed analysis. On
one hand, its role is studied under the rule "Star proposes and
Sub disposes", on the other hand, it is indkative of the end result
arrived at through the significations of the house of occupation of
the Star lord. That is under this rule the "Star indicates involvement
and the Sub indicates commitment".
Role of KaJamsa: It is two fold, as indicated below:
A. It confinns the positive (favourable) or negative (unfavourable)
nature of the result..
B. It modifies the significations or the nature of the planet..
Suppose, a planet is in 15 degrees 50 minutes in Aries, the
planet is said to be in the Sign Aries, Bharani Star and Sun
Kalamsa. The specific modification of the nature of the planet
will be due to Mars - Venus (Star Bharani) and Sun. Another
planet may be in Aries at 21 degree. This planets nature will
be specified as per the influence of Mars - Venus (Bharani)
and Jupiter.
Let us try to explain the role of Kalamsa by an example. Let a
planet X be in a Nakshatra ruled by Y. Let Y occupies the lslhouse
that stands for the native's health, general success, name and fame,
self-efforts and longevity. Let X be in the Kalamsa of Z. During
the periods of X, the native's health, self-efforts etc. will come to
force. Whether the health will improve or deteriorate, whether the
self-efforts will meet with success or failure will depend upon the
role of Z.

Planets Behaviour in Kalamsa Theory
If Z is placed in favourable houses (more specifically if Z is
Significator of favourable houses) with respect to the 1st house, the
result will be positive. If Z is placed in 6 or 8 or 12 the native may
suffer health hazards but may succeed in competition (6) or may
have an overseas trip (12) etc.
Behaviour of Kalamsa:
Kalamsa lord should be analysed as a planet to detelilDine its true
behaviour. If it has the Positional Status then alone its position
with respect to Nakshatra lord position will affect the nature of the
result.. If it has no Positional Status then it will affect the Nature of
result as per its Stellar Status. It is, in other words, the significations
of the Kalamsa, which matters and cogfirms the positive or
negative nature of the result.
In the above example suppose Z is placed in the sixth, house and it
has no positional status, the native may not suffer any health
problem. It may, on the other hand, cause for improvement of health
ifZ is in the Star of a planet, whkh is placed in 5th or lith house.
Transit and Its Influence on Planets. Behaviour:
The planets, as their name suggest, are wanderers. They are
constantly on the move. It is an accepted fact that there is a positive
co - relationship between' the natal position of planets and the
position of planets at a later date in the life of the native. Thatis the
new position of planets does have the characterising effect on the
planets in the natal chart. This modifies the reiiUltsthat the native is
otherwise expected to get as per the Dasa periods of planets. Study
of Transits of planets forms an integral part of Predictive Astrology
in Vedic or Traditional System of Astrology as well as the Western
Concept of Astrology. In Vedic Astrology, there are a number of
theories of Transit.. Some of them are listed below:

1. Transit of Planets is examined with respect to the position of
Moon in the Natal chart. Each planet is said to provide benefic
result when placed in specific house position from Moon.
However, these auspilcious results are obstructed under certain
conditions i.e. if another planet is placed in a particular house
(Vedha position) with respect to the planet under consideration.
This is shown in the following table:
Benefic and Malefic Places

2. As per Brihat Prashar Rora Shastra and Phal Deepika, Transit
of Planet. s is also seen from the Natal Ascendant.. The benefic
position of planets in transit from the Nata.! Ascendant is shown
below:
3. Transit is also studied with respect to Janam Nakshatra i.e.
the Nakshatra occupied by' Moon at birth. Transit over the
2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th and 9th Nakshatras are said to give good results.
The transit over 3rd, 5th and 7th gives bad results while Janam
Nakshatra gives neutral result..
4. Transit of planets is taken as per their natural strength as
obtained due to their current longitude i.e. in a Sign and in a
house in the horoscope.
5. Ashtakaverga Theory: It'is basi-lly a theory to study the
behaviour of each planet with respect to all other planets
(excluding Rahu and Ketu) and Ascendant.. Since there are 7
planets and an Ascendant, there are in all 8 positions. For
each planet, a table is prepared for benefic and malefic points,
which it contributes to each Sign. Then a consolidated table is
prepared for each Sign. If a planet transits in a Sign, which
has more benefic points, it offers good result.

6. Invariably, the Astrologers consider the Transit of Jupiter and
Saturn as per their current positions with respect to the primary
house for all events, whether these planets form part of Dasa
periods or not.
Transit in Kalamsa Theory:
In Kalamsa Theory, the principle adopted is that a promised event
happens in the conjoint period of planets, which are fruitful
significators of the event when transit agrees. Agreement of
Transit means the planets responsible for executing an event should
also at the time of occurrence of the event be significators of the
event.. The term fruitful siguificators means those planets, which
are capable to provide only favourable results" of the houses
relevant for an event*. Suppose, Saturn is the fruitful Significator
of Mamaage i.e. say 7th house. Let Moon, Mercury and Venus be
the other significators of Mamaage say of houses 5, 7 and II. Let us
say we expect the marriage to take place in the conjoint period of
Moon, Saturn, Mercury and Venus. Then m~age will take place
if Moon, Saturn, Mercury and Venus transit in the sensitive zones
as indicated below:
That is during Transit the Dasa periods lords should transit in
a SigOoo Star or Sub, which are fruitful significators of the event.
Detailed discussion on Transit and its influence in prediGtive
tecl lliliquesis dealt in a separate chapter.

Planets Behaviour in Kalamsa Theory
Retrogression and its Effect on Planets.:
There is no unanimous opinion amongst Astrologers regarding the
role played by the retrogression of planets in prediGtive Astrology.
Astronomically speaking no planet retrogrades. Each planet
revolves in its orbit around Sun at its specified speed. If the planets
longitudes are observed from the Sun (i.e. heliocentric system) in
the background of the Zodiac, each planet will always appears to
be in direct motion. However, for Astrological purpose the
longitudes of the planets are observed from the surface of the Earth_
in the background of the Zodiac. Since the distances of the planets
from the Earth is very very large as compared to the radius of the
Earth, for all practical purposes the longitudes of the planets as
seen by the observer on the surface of the Earth are taken as
Geocentric longitudes. But due to different speeds with which each
planet orbits, the relative angular speed of the planet and the Earth
gives rise to the phenomenon of retrogression of planets.
There is a lot of confusion regarding the role of Retrograde Planets
in Astrology. Mr. Krishnamoorthy attaches no importance to the
role of retrograde planets in the analysis of natal charts but
emphatically claims of the important role that Retrograde Planets
play in the analysis of horary charts. Late Mr. M. P. Shanmugham
a staunch follower of Kalamsa Theory believes that the planets in
retrogression offer the results of those houses for which they were
vyadhipati (12th house) when not in retrogression. That is if a planet
is Significator of 8th house in a chart, during retrogression it willi
give the result of the 9th house. Under this atmosphere where
only confusion is confounded I would suggest, perhaps, rightly
to ignore retrogression and take the planet as per its Zodiacal
position.

Combustion and its effect on Planets behaviour:
If a planet appears to an observer on Earth to be in the same Sign as
Sun but at a few degrees away, it is said to be combust. . The degree
of combustion is proportional to its longitudinal difference from
Sun, on either side i.e. when the longitude of Sun and the planet is
the same, the planet is said to be completely combust.. Different
Astrologers have different opinions about the use of this apparent
phenomenon in predictive Astrology. The degrees of combustion
for the planets from Moon to Saturn are 12, 17, 14, 11, 10 and 16.
It may be noted that a planet can be said to be combust only when
it is behind Sun and is at the farthest point from the Earth. Viewed
from Sun i.e. in heliocentricv system, no such thing will appear.
Each planet, to me, appears to be individualistic and its. effect
in predictive Astrology needs only to be taken as per its. Zodiacal
degree.
Aspects and Their Influence on Planets
Behaviour:
Both the Traditional and the Western Astrologers firmly believe
that each planet as per its position in the Zodiac influences the
other planets and houses. This is termed as aspect.. The approach,
however of both is different.. Westerns claim to be more scientifilk,
because they compute the aspects on the basis of specific
longitudinal, positions of planets and house cusps whereas the
Traditionalists compute the aspects from Sign to Sign positions of
the planets and houses. The Traditionalists believe that even Signs
also aspect other Signs in a specific way. Aspects, according to
both are classified as benefic and maldic. Both believe that benefic
aspects symbolize progress, harmony and concord, whereas malefic
aspects denote dishannony and discord. I am, however, not able
to convince myself of the rationale behind the theory of aspects...
Behaviour of the planet, according to me, is individualistic^ ‘.and

Planets Behaviour in Kalamsa Theory
conditioned by its actual longitudinal degree obtained in the
Zodiac at the time of birth and its placement in the cllspal
positions.
Moreover, I find hardly any consensus amongst the followers of
Kalamsa Theory. Mr. Krishnamoorthy claims the Western Aspects
should be used and yet says that the mauiage of a person is delayed
when Saturn is in the 5th house from where it will aspect all the
relevant houses of mauiage. 1 have analysed the charts of some
learned Traditional Astrologers, who have mauied at the age less
than 22 years. Saturn in their horoscopes occupied 5th house.
Behaviour ofRahu and Ketu:
L The Earth orbits around the Sun from West to East and in the
similar way Moon also orbits the Earth in the counter
clockwise direction i.e. West to East- Since Moon's axis is
inclined to the Ecliptic at 5 deg 8 min. it cuts the Ecliptic.. .at
two points which are diametrically opposite to each other.
These points are called as Ascending Node or Rahu and
Descending Node or Ketu.
2. Rahu and Ketu being only two points of intersection of Moon's
orbit and Ecliptic.. are called shadowy or invisible planets. They
have no body, shape or mass. They have no life and radiating
power by themselves. It is, however, an established fact that
Rahu and Ketu playa significant wle in analysing the nativity
of a person. Rahu and Ketu have been termed as the Karmic..,
planets in Astrology and their depositors have gained the
category of KanW~ controlling plan~ts. They don't own any
house. Like Ascendant they also represent the Signs and the
Stars they are in i.e. Rahu and Ketu represent the planets who
are the Lords of the Signs and the Stars in which they are in a
horoscope. Rahu and Ketu are considered more powehful than

the planets they represent.. Traditionalists believe that nature
ofRahu and Ketu. are like that of Saturn and Mars respectively.
Our Approach: Rahu and Ketu acts as three Planets and offer results
during their periods as follows:
1. Rahu (like any planet) as per its Stellar, Positional and Sub
statu. s.
2. Rahu as the lord of the Sign in whicll it is placed i.e. the results
which the Sign lord has to offer as per its steller and positional
status.
3. Rahu as Per its Star lord Le. the results whicll the Star lord has
to offer as per its steUer and positional status.
Rahu and Ketu as N akshatra Lord or Kalamsa
Lord:
Any planet in the Nakshatra or Kalamsa ruled by Rahu or Ketu
is as good as it is in the Nakshatra or Kalamsa of the planetswhicili Rahu or Ketu represents..., Let a planet X be in the Star or
Sub of Rahu or Ketu. Then the planet will give the result of the
house occupied by Rahu or Ketu. It will also give the result of the
house occupied (or even owned) by the Star lord of Rahu or Ketu
and the house occupied and owned by the planet in whose Sign
Rahu or Ketu is placed.
Let us say Sun is in Rahu Star. Rahu may be in Gemini Sign and
Mars Star. Then Sun in such a case will offer the following results:
1. Sun in Rahu Star: The house occupied and owned by Rahu.
Here Rahu is considered to own the same houses as owned by
Mercury.

Planets Behaviour in Kaiamsa Theory
2. Sun in Mars Star: The house occupied and owned by Mars.
3. Sun in Mercury Star - The house occupied and owned by
Mercury.
Now suppose Moon is in Mars Star and Rahu Sub. Then Moon
will be taken as in (a) Rahu Sub (b) Mars Sub and (c) Mercury
Sub.
The behaviour of Rahu and Ketu becomes very complex when in a
chart we fmd Rahu in Ketu Star and Ketu in Rahu Star. Let us
suppose that Rahu is in Sagittarius and is in Ketu Star: Ketu may be
in Gemini and Rahu Star. Then Rahu will offer results during its
period as follows:
1. Rahu in Ketu Star - As per the Bhava occupied and owned
by Ketu. And as per the cuspal positions in which Ketu. appears
as Star, Sub or Sub-Sub. (For Sub-Sub and cuspal Inter
linkages theory discussed in later chapters.). Since Rahu is in
Ketu Star, it will be considered in the Star of those planets
which Ketu represents i.e. in this case Rahu and Mercury.
Therefore Rahu as Rahu will also offer the following results:
Rahu in Rahu Star: As per the house occupied and owned
by Rahu. (And the cuspal positions where Rahu appears as
Star, Sub or Sub- Sub).
Rahu in Mercury Star: As per the house occupied and owned
by Mercury. (And the cuspal positions where Mercury appears
as Sign, Star, Sub or Sub-Sub).
2. Rahu as Jupiter will offer the results whkh Jupiter has to offer.
3. Rahu as Ketu will offer the results whkh Ketu has to offer.
This has to be analysed in the same manner as is explained
above for Rahu.

To sum up we may say that the PrinGiple ofNakshatralStellar
theory is based on the following fundamental. . concept&:
1. Each specific area of the Zodiac represents a specific energy
content represented by the static (in the natural zodiac) and
dynamic significations (in the concerned natal chart). Since
in stellar systems, Rahu and Ketu are treated as planets, so
they are also allotcd specific areas in the Zodiac. As far as
Zodiac areas are concerned, Rahu and Ketu only represent
themsdves, for static significations.
2. Planet offers result of the areas of the Zodiac as per their star
lord's position. House cusps are only divisions of space at the
backgrOlmd of the Zodiac.
3. Suppose a planet is in the star of Moon, it will only hit at the
cuspal positions where Moon appears. Now if in the chart
Moon is represented by Rahu or Ketu, the planet is not said to
be hitting the cuspal positions where Rahu or Ketu appears.
Suppose a Planet is in Taurus Sign and Moon Star. The Planet's
nature is modified by the influence of Venus and the influence
of Moon. Suppose Moon in the chart is represented by Rahu
or Ketu, the Planet cannot be said to be under the influence of
Rahu or Ketu. The influence on the Planet is as per its Zodiacal
position. The cuspal positions where Moon appears are the
mundane positions which indicate the areas where the
influence of the planet will be observed.
4. Rahu and Ketu are intersection points and are said to absorb
the energy contents (statiliias welLas dynamic) of the planets
that represent those intersection points by Sign and Star. Thus
any planet in RahWKetu Star is taken to be in the Star of the
planets that Rahl.JiKetu represent..

Planets Behaviour in Kalamsa Theory
Suppose a Planet is in Ketu Star. Let Ketu represent Moon.
The Planet is then under the influence of the sign lord and the
sub influence of Ketu. However the Planet will said to be
linked to the mundane positions where Ketu appears as well
as where the planets that Ketu represents appear.
Let us try to explain the mechanism of the Behaviour of a planet in
the light of the above discussion by an example Ref.. Fig. I
Let us see how and what results Sun will provide during its Dasa
periods. Sun for Leo Ascendant is the lord of Lagna. Let Sun be
placed in Gemini in the 11th house in the Star of Jupiter. Let Jupiter
be placed in the 7lh house.
Step I: The Planet Sun has to play the role: of source to provide
results during its period according to its own energy content and
through the signifi-tions of his house of lordship. Sun in Gemini
which is positive, airy and sattawiG.Sign enhances the capability of
Sun in respect of positivity principle i.e. outward expression, selfcenteredness and being airy and sattawk: tunes him to achieve what
ever he sets out to accomplish through his wisdom, learning
capacity. Being the lord of Ascendantit ensures that the native will
drive the results of the houses of which it becomes the Significator
through his self-efforts.
Step II: Sun has to give the results of houses as follows:

2fi
At Stellar Level: Since its Star Lord is in the 7th house it will cause
for the results as per the significations of the 7th house say marriage,
wife, partner, social interactions, break in journey etc. Sun will
also give the result of the houses 5 and 8 of which Jupiter has the
ownership especially if they are vacant.. 5 and 8 indi~te gain to the
partner or wife.
At Positional Level: If Sun enjoys the positional status i.e. no planet
is in any of the Nakshatra (star) ruled by Sun, then Sun will provide
the result of nth house, which it occupies and also the Ascendant..
Planet in its own Star:
A Planet in its own Star is as good as having a positional staus. We
may look at this in an other way. A Planet has to always offer the
result of the house occupied by its Star lord. There may be other
planets also in the Star of the same Planet.. Suppose Jupiter is in its
own Star in a horoscope. It will offer the result of the house occupied
by its Star lord Jupiter. Now if there is any other Planet in the Star
of Jupiter that Planet will also offer the result of the house occupied
by Jupiter
Note 1: When a Planet has: the positional status it will offer the
result&. of the houses it owns as well as its house of occupation.
The results; of these houses have to be declared as benific or
malefic. For this we can assume the Planet to be in its own Star
and its Sub lord will then qua.lify its results.
Combining the Stellar level and Positional level results of Sun, we
can say that Sun during its period will provide results of 1,5, 7,8
and ii houses. Various combinations of results are possible. For
example:
1. Combination 1 and 8 shows Accident..
2. Combination 1, 7 and 8 shows unnatural death.

Planets Behaviour in Kalamsa Theory
3. Combination 5, 7 and 11 shows mamage.
4. Combination 1,5 and 8 shows involvement in unsocial acts.
However, the nature of the above results stands to modification as
per the significations of the Kalamsa or Sub lord of Sun. Let Sun
be in the Sub of Moon lord of 12 in 11. Sub level status effect is
explained below.
Sub - Level significations:
A. If Moon has positional status, it will stand to qualify above
results as per its placement in the house 1 1 and its house of
lordship especially if it had been vacant.. That is, it will provide
favourable results relating to the houses of whili:h Sun has
become Significator. Even if the native meets with an accident,
it will not prove fatal..
B. If Moon has no positional status and it is in the Nakshatra of
a planet that is posited in 8, it will surdy prove a very
dangerous period regarding the Longevity of the native. This
can also mean that the native may involve in unsocial acts.
Sun in Gemini provides him the necessary courage for
committing himself to unnatural death or involving himself
to committing unsocial acts but with all intelligence at his
command.
The other way to look at the behaviour of the Kalamsa or Sub-lord
is that if Moon has the positional status and being in 11, the house
of fulfilment of desires, Sun's period provides the native success
and status (1 st House) in his achievements in arts and culture
(5th house), social interaction (7th house), unexpected gains (8th
house).

Chapter 3
Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of
Nirayana Chart
To cast a Nirayana chart we need the following data:
1. Date and Time of Birth.
2. Latitude and Longitude of the place of birth.
3. Ayanamsa.
The accuracy of the chart depends on the accuracy of the above
data. The chart is cast using Pladdius System. Here the lordship
of the house is decided by the actua.l degree rising on the cusp.
Similarly the placement of a planet in Bhava chart is decided as per
the longitude of the planet vis-a-vis the longitude of the cusp.
Example: Fig3.1 shows the Rashi chart and Fig 3.2 shows the
Bhava chart cast as per Placidius system. In Rashi chart Moon Sign
Cancer rises in the 41bhouse. Jupiter Signs Sagittarius and Pisces
rise in 9thand 1211houses. Saturn's Signs rise in latliand Ilibhouses.
However, in Bhava chart, we find Moon rules the 5thhouse; Jupiter
rule the 9th and 10th houses; and Saturn rules 11th and 12th
houses. Similarly if a planet's longitude is less than the longitude
of the cusp that rises in that Sign in which the planet is placed, it
will be shown in the previous Bhava. In the above example, if the
planet Jupiter's longitude has been less than 4° 46' 33" it would
have been shown in SibBhava. Readers may refer to fig. 3.4. In
Rashi chart Mercury is in 41bSign from the Ascendant Sign but in
Bhava chart we find that Mercury is in yd house. Similarly we may
notice

Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of Nirayana Chart
that Planets Sun, Venus and Ketu have shifted to 4th house though
in Rashi chart they are in the 5th Sign from the Ascendant Sign.
This is due to the fact that the longitude of these Planets are less
than the longitude of the 5th cusp.
Name : Fig 3.1
Place : lalandhar.
Date & Day : 07-09-1972 (Thursaday)
Lunar Nodes : True
Ayanamsa : 23-27-51 (D-M-S)
Tithi : Krishna Paksha Amavasya
Time
Geocentric Lat.
Time Zone
Sun Rise Time
Nakshatra
Poorva Phalguni-3 Qlr.
Lagna Chart

Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of Nirayana Chart
ShaY "Chalit"
Cusp Chart
LimitUiions of Pladdius System: This system is based on Time
Division System concept.. It is a system of tri-section of semi-arcs.
This system causes severe distortions above Polar Circle. It is said
that at present the Polar Circle known as Arctic circle in the northern
hemisphere and the Antarctic, circle in the Southern hemisphere is
currently at 66° 33' 39". Any place beyond this latitude causes the
chart to be completely distorted if we use the Pladdius system. "At
Latitudes above the Polar circle, there are times when the EcliptiG.
(the path of Sun) does not rise above the local horizon and at those
times, the MC is also below the horizon too. If the MC which is

also the loth house cusp then this begs the question - where is the
lO^house? Below the horizon?" says Neville Lang.
We, therefore, need to shift to some other house system for casting
horoscopes for places beyond the Polar Circle. The Topocentric
house system looks to provide a plausible solution. However, the
horoscopes cast as per Placidius system and Topocentric system
differs slightly. Experienced Astrologers will be able to ftx the
correct chart by the process of rectification whkh is explained in
my book "Your True Horoscope. "
Astracadabra software for Pocket pes and Pocket Phones
developed by Mr. Neville Lang (Australia) that uses the Swiss
Ephemeris for Planetary calculations and for house system
calculations provides accurate charts using Topocentric System.
TP Jyotish Software developed by Dr. Srikant Ojha of Jodhpur
and True Astrology Software developed by Mr. Mukesh Gupta.,
of ‘Tabalpur are other softwares that are very accurate.
Time of Birth: What time should be taken as the time of birth?
There is no consensus amongst the Astrologers. Some are of the
opinion that it should be the time of cutting the umbilical cord and
others thiJJk that it should be the ftrst cry. And some hold and
probably rightly that it should be the ftrst breath the child takes
aftercoming out of the mother's womb. Whkh doctor will note
this time with any degree of accuracy? Thus, more often than not,
the chart cast as per the noted time of birth needs rectification. It
may be pointed out here that one-second change in time is reflected
as a change of approximately 15 seconds in the degree rising on
the Ascendant.. Noted time is also used in the calculation of Mean
Solar Time correction at the rate of 9.8565 seconds per hour of the
time that has elapsed from Sunrise. Using correction as 10 seconds
or error in noted time will cause serious errors in arriving at the
correct degree of the Ascendant. .

Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of Nirayana Chart
Latitude and Longitude of the Place of Birth:
Both latitude and longitude of the place of birth play significant
role in the calculation of the Ascendant and other cuspal positions.
The latitude and longitude of the place of birth should thus be as
accurate as possible. Moreover, the Geo-centric latitude should be
used rather than geographic latitude. The Geographical. Latitudes
are calculated on the assumption that the emth is a perfect sphere.
But the earth is a spheroid or a sphere flattened at its two poles.
Geocentliic latitudes are those calculated to the real centre of the
spheroid earth. The Geocentnc Latitude is calculated as follows.
Let Geographic Latitude = A and Geocentnc Latitude = B
Then Tan A = Tan B x 0.99330546.
In casting horoscope we apply longitudinal correction at the rate
of2/3 seconds per degree change in longitude. More over Longitude
of the place detennines the Local Mean Time of the place. One
minute change in longitude is equivalant to a difference of four'
seconds of Local Mean Time. Now one second change in time
results in approximately a change of 15 seconds of longitude of the
Ascendant.. Thus any error in longitude will reflect in the degree
rising on the Ascendant..
The Latitude of the place controls the time taken by a degree rising
in the eastern horizon and thus the degree rising on the Ascendant
and correspondingly the other cuspal positions are dependant on
the Latitude of the place. Any error in Latitude may result in getting
incorrect position of Ascendant and other cuspal positions.
Ayanamsa: The Nirayana chart is cast by deducting the Ayanamsa
from the Sayana cuspal and planetary positions. Even a small
difference of Ayanamsa sometimes amounts to a change in the amsa
position of planets and cusps. In the Kalamsa or Sub Theory, we

use the Placidius System of house formation and using what is
popularly known as KP. (Refined or New) Ayanamsa.
Note: Prior to 2003, some Astrology softwares had option K.P.
(New or Refined) Ayanamsa. The Value of this Ayanamsa is
generally calculated by the following formula:
AyanKP = (50.2388475/3600) * <(YR - 292) + (261/365) + <(MN - l)*30+DY)/365)
YR stands for Year
MN stands for Months
DY stands for Day
I use the Ayanamsa as calculated by this formula. -In 2003 some
Astrology softwares have provided the option KP. (New) Ayanam~a
where the value of Ayanamsa is calculated by some other formula.
This value of Ayanamsa differs from the value of Ayanamsa as
calculated above. Some software developers have started naming
the Ayanamsa calculated as per above formula as Khullar
Ayanamsa.
Outer Planets.; - Neptune, Pluto and Uranus: These planets do
not fall in the structure of stellar astrology. Outer planets do not
have the rulership of any Nakshatra (Star). These planets do not
have anything related to Vimsottaci Dasa which decide the execution
of results. They will always have the positional status. As such
they are expected to influence the results of the houses they are
posited as well as the houses they signify as per their stellar status.
Those who are interested in the use of these planets may do so for
delineating the influence of these planets on the promise of various
cusps. Similarly the transit position of these Planets at the time of
happening of an event may be considered in influencing the nature
of the event..

Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of Nirayana Chart
Analysis of The Horoscope
General Study
Timing specific event
1. Physical & mentaL characteristics,
health, vitality and vigour, habit of
thinking, success or failure in
attempts, longevity, general, social,
financial, administrative status.
2. Money matters, fortune & favours,
capability to express, vision & right
eye, voice & tongue, nose, teeth,
cheeks &jaws.
, I Communication, wntnigs,
documents & agreements, courage,
fairness, short travel, accounting,
mathematics, telephone,
journalism, change of residence,
contracts.
4. Mother, education, property,
inheri tance, vehicle, domestic
environment, rare articles.
5. Progeny, intelligence, sports, game,
fine arts, drawing, creative pursuit,
gambling, lottery; shares.
6. Service, servants, pet animals,
loans, debts, success, disease.
7. Marriage, business partners,
socialization, litigation, opponents,
divorce, reputation & influence in
foreign nations.
Contd on next page

Katanas a_ //( ~
SimgfjfjedaD]^ En/gjged,
Contd.. from previous page
8. Mode of death, delays, accidents, false
allegation, unexpected gain/loss,
unearthed money, dejections, sorrow &
strife etc.
9. Fortune, law andjustiGe, father, higher
education, second marriage, long
Journey.
lO. Status and prestige through profession,
honour, dignity and public, esteem, name
& fame, authority.
11. Wealth, fortune, influence, society,
accumulation of money, fulfillment of
desires, litigation, speculation.
12. Loss and impediments, research,
foreign travel, inv~stments,
imprisonment, deception, secrecy, ]] End
secret enemies.
Analysis of the Horoscope:
A horoscope is analysed to determine the following:
1. What the native is destined for? That is, what is promised to
the native for all aspects of human life?
2. Tiuung the specific events.
This is shown in the diagram (fig. 3,3).
As per the moment of birth a pajtisiLac degree rises in the Eastern
Horizon at the place of birth, of the native. This degree indicates the
Sign, the Nakshatra and Kalamsa (Sub) that rises on the 1st house

(Ascendant). Alan Leo says, "This degree, the Ascendant, is thus
the key stone of the whole nativity, for in it is synthesized the whollL
of the multifarious elements of the natal chart, of which there is no
exact duplicate for ages afterwards. "
Corresponding to this degree of Ascendant, other houses are formed.
Each house rises in a particular Sign, Nakshatra (Star) and Kalamsa
(Sub). In Kalamsa Theory, like Navamsa Theory, the study of
the horoscope is basically the study of the Kalamsa lo\:d. That
is the potential and promise of each cusp is dependent upon the
significations of the Ka-amsa lords of 12 cusps. The study of
the cusp is basically the study of the destiny of the individual. . It
may, however, be remembered that each cusp has two types of
significations viz.
1. Directly related to the Ascendant and
2. Indirectly related to the Ascendant..
For example, the significations of the 9th house are higher education,
long journey, father etc. The potential of the 9th cusp thus on one
hand will indicate whether the native will undergo the process of
higher learning or not, and on the other hand may indicate about
the health and longevity of father. The potential of the cusp may
appear favourable for father but may not be favourable for higher
education of the native. It may be the reverse case also. For example,
if the Kalamsa lord of the 9th house is the Significmtor of 2nd house,
it may indicate gain to the native through higher education or long
journeys or export business but 2nd being 6th to 9th may cause the
native worries due to father's ill health.
Procedure for Analysing a Cusp:
The general methodology adopted to analyse a cusp can be stated
as follows:

Step I. Analyse the Sign, Star and Sub rising on the cusp. Here a
word of caution is needed. There are books written by great scholars,
whiGh provide the significations of each cusp for all the 249
Kalamsas or Subs rising on a cusp. The study of these significations
clearly reveal that they have been written taking into consideration
the natural significations of the Sign lord. Star lord and Sub lord
and the houses they rule in the Natural Zodiac. I call these
significations as Static significations. These should not be taken
as con~usive or specific significations for all horoscopes. Each
planet behaves in a particular_ way in a partkular_ horoscope. We
should, therefore, try to synthesize the significations of the planets
co-ruling the cusp as per their strengths and significations in the
horoscope. Strength of the planet means the modification of its
behaviour by the Zodiacal degree in which the planet is placed in
the horoscope. I call these significations as Dynami- significations.
Step II. Analyse the significations of the Kalamsa (Sub) lord of the
cusp as per its Sign position in which it is placed in the horoscope.
Step ill. Analyse the Nakshatra lord of the Kalamsa (Sub) lord of
the cusp as a planet, the Sign in which it is placed, the house that it
occupies, and the houses of its lordship.
Step IV. Any planet that is the Significator of the house under study
will influence the significations of the house as per its nature and
significations of its houses of lordship.

Step V. Potential ofthe house is indicated by the house significations
of the Kalamsa lord. Favourable houses are taken as 1,3, 5, 9 and
11. blouses 2, 6, and 10 form the Materialistic Triplililiy and cause
for hard labour to achieve success; houses 4, 7,8, and 12 are called
unfavourable houses.
Analysing the First House or Ascendant:
The physk.al and mental characteristics of the native, his state of
health, longevity isjudged from the Kalamsa lord of the first house.
The study of the Kalamsa lord of the Ascendant will indi~te
a. Whether the person is destined to enjoy good health or the
native is prone to sickness, accident, mental agony, etc.
b. Whether the native is destined short, medium or long life.
c. Whether the native is destined to achieve success in life, name
and fame, fulfil his ambitions, mamage, education, property,
settling abroad, or achieve high ranks in profession.
d. Physical and mental characteristics of the native.
In short, the study of the Ascendant in fact is the study of the whok
horoscope. Ascendant is the epitome of the whole horoscope. The
potential of the Ascendant fixes the ultimate limit to which a
person can rise in any walk oflife. Let us try to study the Ascendant

Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplffied and Enlarged
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit"
Cusp Chart

Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of Nirayana Chart
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Step I
Here the Ascendant rises in Scorpio 2 deg. 35 min. This is co-ruled
by Mars, Jupiter and Rahu as Sign, Star, and Sub lord respectivilly.
Mars is lord of 1 and 6, Jupiter lord of2 and 5, and Rahu representing
Mercury (lord of 8, 11) and Sun lord of 10. Thus the mental setup
of the native will be the sum total of the statk and dynamic
significations of Mars, Jupiter, Rahu, Mercury and Sun and the
Sign Scorpio, which is fixed, female and watery. The native is born
in the fourth Pada ofVishakha Nakshatra which is ruled by Jupiter.
Such persons are said to posse~s single - minded devotion to attain
their final goal and have little peace of mind. Vishakha natives fall
prey to excesses in regards to sex and alchol.. The turmoiL in their
life takes place on emotionaL level.. This part oNishaJdul Nakshatra
is ruled by Mars and Jupiter. This makes the person authoritative
with administrative skills, honest, over liberal, very competitive,
love for sports, pragmatiu" but Scorpio being a vioLent Sign indicates
harsh and unscrupulous approach. The Sub lord of the Ascendant
is Rahu who represents Mercury and Sun. The influence of Mercury
provides sharp' intellect and memory power and being lord of 8 and
11 may provide sudden rise in life. Sun accounts for leadership,
autocracy, royalty, magnanimity, dictatorship, vanity, boastfulness,
pride, arrogance, contempt, etc. As per static significations this part
of the Zodiac is most volatile and dangerous being the 8th Sign of
the Zodiac and ruled by Mars. However we need to pay importance
to the dynamio.. significations of the Planets co-ruling the exact
degree rising on the Ascendant.. Mars and Jupiter etc may possess
different significations in different horoscopes.
Mars in this horoscope has positional status and is placed in 2nd
house and is lord of 1 and 6. Mars is in Uttarashada Nakshatra
ruled by Sun who occupies 4th house and rules over 10. Thus Mars
signifies 1,2, 4, 6 and 10 houses. Mars is in its own Sub. Thus the
Sub lord of Mars supports its stellar and positional significations.
Now Mars a male and fiery planet with Rajask Guna is in fiery,
dual and Sattwic Sign Sagittacius. This indicates excess of fiery

element in the body of the native. Mars is symbolic of drive,
detenllination, initiative, ambition and impulsive nature. But as per
dynallli.&signification Mars being significator of houses 1, 6 and
10 indiQltes that the native will love to compete, work hard to
achieve status and excellence in profession. Significations of 2, 6
and 10 indicates love for family, oratorical skills of authority, may
earn through servke. Significations of 1 and 6 indiQltes that the
native may suffer sickness due to excess of fiery element..
Significations of the 4th house indiQltes love for education, mother,
property and vehicle.
Jupiter in this horoscope is lord of 2 and 5 and is placed in 6th
house. It has no positional status. It is in Aries and in Bharani Star
ruled by Venus who is placed in 4th house. Venus rules over 7 and
12. Jupiter is in the Sub of Saturn who is placed in 6 but does not
have positional status. But Saturn is also in Venus Star. Thus the
Sub lord supports the stellar significations. Jupiter is a planet of
expansion, wisdom, abundance and growth. It loves status,
education, socia.! and public life, mamage, research and foreign
travel etc.
Note: If the Ascendant has risen in Anuradha Nakshatra, the native
would lack in confidence, may have to work hard to compete
because its ruler Saturn, rules the 3rd house and is placed in the 6th
house. He will possess organizational skills because Mars is
authority and Satum is calculative and methodical, detelilllined and
tries to achieve success against all odds. This is how we need to
synthesize the attributes of the planets co-ruling the cusp.
Step II
The Kalamasa lord of the Ascendant is Rahu who is placed in Virgo
in Uttar Pha.lguni Star ruled by Sun lord of 10 in the horoscope.
Sun is in Pisces and in the 5th Sign from the Ascendant..

Rahu appearing as the Kalamsa lord of the Ascendant represents
the qualities of arrogance, over interest in sexuaJ contacts, large
organs in the body.
Rahu in Virgo represents Mercury. Rahu will then also impart the
qualities of Mercury in the native. That is pleasing and comiw
speech, sharp and bright mind, memory power, lean body, social to
others.
Rahu is in Sun's Star and as such it will also offer the charactecistics
of Sun. That is status through profession, administrative capacity
etc.
Rahu in Virgo a femal— earthy and common Sign makes the person
authoritative, intellectual, and broadminded and faithful, writer,
loving friends and relatives, holds responsible position in public
bodies.
Step III
Rahu in Sun Star: It indicates status, leadership, power and
autholiity, Government, well-built body, strong bones.
Rahu in Uttara Phalguni Star: Makes the person intelligent, of
sensuous nature, humanitarian.
Possess mystical and intuitive powers, writer, and astrologer.
Sun in Pisces - a negative, watery and common Sign. This is
indicative of native's possessing grasping capacity, honest,
outspoken, helpful and humane, short stature, but muscular body,
soft hair.
Sun in 4th house: Represents love for education, mother, property,
vehides.
Sun as lord of 10: It indi~tes the native will achieve name and
fame and occupy a dignified profession.

Step IV
Mars, the lord of the Ascendant alone is the Significator of the 1st
house. Its effect has been explained above.
StepV
Potential of the Ascendant: Rahu is the Significator of 4 and 10
because its Star lord is placed in 4, and it rules over 10th house,
which is occupied by Rahu (in Bhava Chan).
Rahu has no positional status because Mercury is in its StaL
However, in this horoscope Rahu being in Virgo represents Mercury.
Thus, we may say that Rahu also signifies houses 3,8, 10 and 11.
(Mercury has positional status). Rahu also represents Sun whkh is
Significator of 6 being in Saturn's Star- Thus the Kalamsa or Sub
of the Ascendant is Significator of 3, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 11 at Stellar
and Positional status leveL
Rahu is in the Sub of Venus who is Significator of 6 because Venus
has no positional status and it is in the Nakshatra of Jupiter placed
in 6 and lord of2 & 5. Houses 3,6,10 and 11 indicates a very good
potential but significations of the 8th house indicates the hurdles
and mental agony the native will have to face in his life. But it also
promises long life.
Status of Health: Sixth house in the natal chart is called the house
of sickness, 8th is the house of serious siclawss, fatal disease, danger
and accident.. 12th house is the house of self-undoing, defect and
hospitalization. If the Kalamsa or Sub lord of the Ascendant
maintains a relationship with these houses or we may say that
if the Kalamsa lord becomes the Significator of these houses
then the native is prone to sickness. The Ascendant represents
the quantum of life force and it is called Deham. The Kalamsa lord
and its Nakshatra lord and the Signs in which they are placed will
indicate, in general, the parts that have least resistance to disease.
The true nature of the disease, however, is studied from the 6th/8th

house. In the above example the Sub lord of the Ascendant is Rahu
who represents Mercury and Sun. Mercury has positional status
and is lord of 8. Sun being in Saturn's Star is significator of 6th
house. This indi~tes that the native is prone to general and serious
sicktJess.
Longevity: To detetmine the span of life of a native is one of the
most impotiant but complex topi- of Astrology. The Ascendant at
the moment of birth is fonned when Sun the life giving planet and
Moon that symbolizes our etheric aura occupies a parti-laL position
in the Zodiac. The Ascendant, thus, indicates the quantum of energy
apportioned to the native when the soul has incarnated. From the
Kalamsa or Sub that rules the Ascendant at the time of birth of the
native one deduces the quantum of life force with whkh a person
is born, while the 8th house shows Longevity. This is supported by
the principle of seven stages. Seventh stage is called the terminating
stage. Thus the 8th house whicll follows the 7th house indi-tes the
span of life.
According to the principle of Bhavat - Bhavam i.e. whatever you
study from a Bhava with respect to Ascendant you should also
study the same from the Bhava which is as far ahead of Bhava as
the Bhava is ahead of the Ascendant.. Thus if we study the 8th house
for any aspect of native's life, we need to study the 8th from the 8th
that is the 3 rd house also for that aspect of native's life. The twelfth
house to any house shows its negation, dissolution. The twelfth
house in the natal chart stands for the end of life, dissolution of the
life - essence contained in the first house. Therefore, the houses 1,
3 and 8 are the houses of Longevity, and the houses twelfth to these
houses will be the houses of dissolution of life. Therefore, houses
2, 7 and 12 are called M~a houses. It is also supported by another
principle, the rule that the seventh phase shows the [mal culmination
of any aspect of life. Thus seventh from Ascendant (i.e. 7"' house)
and 7th from the 8th house (i.e. 2nd house) will show the end oflife.

The study of Nadi literature clearly reveals that the Navamsa lord
of the Ascendant and 8th house plays a very significant role in
deciding the Longevity of the Native. There is emphasis on the
64th Navamsa from the Navamsa Ascendant in causing death and
even indicating the nature of death. It is, therefore, pertinent to
believe that the span of life has to be calculated by analyzing the
relationship, which the Kalamsa lords of 1,3 and 8 houses make
with the Manum or other houses in the chart. Other than Manum
houses 2 and 7, our ancients have suggested that Badhakasthana
plays a very important role in deciding Longevity of the native.
Some are, even of the opinion that no death takes place without the
role of Badhakasthana lord.
For Ascendants that rise with a Moveable Sign, nth1 house is taken
as Badhakasthana.
For Fixed Signs rising on the Ascendant, 9th house is taken as
Badhakasthana.
For Common Signs rising on the Ascendant, 7th1 house is taken as
both Maraka and Badhakasthana.
Short, medium or long life of the native is declared by analyzing
the relationship which the 1 , 3 and 8 houses Kalamsa lords make
with Maraka and Badhakasthana. The span of life is taken as 100
years. The division into short, medium and long is arbitrary.
Short Life (i.e. up to 33 Years): If the Kalamsa lords of 1,3 and 8
houses become the fruitful significators of 2nd and 7tllJ and Badhaka
house the life of the native is short.
Long Life (beyond 66 Years): If the Kalamsa lords of 1,3 and 8
houses become significators of 1, 3, 5, 8, 9 (not for fixed
Ascendants), and 1 1 (not for Moveable Ascendants), the native is
destined to live long.

Medium Span of Life (i.e. between 33 to 66 years): IftheKalamsa
lords of I, 3 and 8 houses become significators of both Maraka
houses as well as houses of Longevity, the native is destined to
have medium span of life.
Mode of Death: Span of life is indicated as stated above by the
significations of I, 3 and 8 houses. Eighth house represents the
hidden aspects of one's life. It is the storehouse of expansive energy
latent in the microcosm. It is the house that determines the span of
life and also the house that accounts for the cause of death. In Jatak
Parijata and Hora-Shastra there are a number of verses, which
indicate the cause of death. For example, one of the verses says; if
the lord of the 64th Navamsa from the Ascendant Navamsa (i.e.
Navamsa lord of 8th house) occupies a Dushthana (i.e. 6, 8 or 12th
house) and is in conjunction with.
l. Saturn, the native will die of swallowing poison,
ii. Either Rahu or Ketu, his death will be by hanging.
Thus for deciding about the cause of death we need to fmd out the
relationships which the Kalamsa lord of the 8th house establishes
with other houses and Planets etc. The procedure is illustrated below:
1. The Nature of the planet ruling Kalamsa or Sub in the 8th
Cusp.

Jupiter Due to fever, damaged liver, pleasant death, over
production of fat.
Venus Due to indigestion, kidney failure.
RahulKetu Due to poison, respiration problems, death in jail,
degenerative and nervous system disorders, neuro
muscular disorders, Mass catastrophes.
2. As per the significations of the Sign occupied by the S ub lord
of the 8th Cusp. For example,
Fiery Signs cause violent deaths. - Failure of FleanlBrain
Airy Signs through travel in air. - Shock
Watery Signs through drowning, cold, pneumonia etc. -
Emotional shock
Earthy Signs through engines, machines, earthquakes,
demolition of buildings etc.
3. As per the significations of the Star Lord of the Sub Lord of
the 8th Cusp.
4. The Sign and house occupied by the Star Lord.
Flouse
Nature and Place of Death
1,4,10 Generally the death takes place at
residence. It may indicate due to selfefforts i.e. suicide. lOmay indicate at the
work place also.
3 Duringjourney or at a nearby place.
6,8,12 Sickness, accident, operation, poison.
12th may indicate in hospital or far off
place.
9 Long journey or unknown place.

S,IL
2, 7, Badhakasthana
May be during a ceremony.
Natural death.
Unnatural Death: For unnatural death the following conditions
should exist in the chart.
1. 8th Cusp Kalamsa or Sub lord should be Significator of 8th
and 12th house.
2. 8th Cusp Sub lord and its Star lord should be in cardinal and
violent Signs Aries, Taurus, Scorpio, Leo, Sagittarius or
Capricorn.
3. Ascendant Sub Lord should also be connected with 8 and 12
houses to promise unnatural death.
Timing Death: A critical and deep study of the N adi literature points
out that Death generally takes place in the Dasa of a planet, which
is simultaneously connectad with Ascendant and 8th house. It has
also been observed that the Dasa lord who appears as a co-ruling
planet in the 8th cusp and involves the MarakaiBadhaka houses
and commits to Ascendant or 8th cusp also cause for the death of
the native. Bhukti, Antara, Sookshma lords may be fixed with
respect to the following:
1. Bhukti and Antara periods will invariably be the strong
significators of Maraka and Badhaksthana. If these
significators happen to be the Sign, Star, Sub lord or the Star
lord of the Sub lord of the 8th Cusp, then these are surely the
killer planets.
2. The Cuspal joint rulers of the Ascendant or the 8th Cusp
(viz. Sign, Star, Sub) if they are the significators of Maraka
and Badhakasthana, their joint period is very critical for life.
3. Sookshma and Prana periods should be decided taking into
consideration the cause or mode of death and transit of Sun

and Moon. For example, fatal accidents and unnatural deaths
are caused during thejoint period of the signifi<mtors of 8 and
12 or the cuspaijoint rulers of 8 and 12.
We should remember that the Transit of Dasa period lords,
,,-Satumand the luminaLies Sun and Moon should agree i.e. in
transit also they should be significators of death inflicting
houses.
Analysing Second House: This house represents self-acquired
financial status, oratorical skills or speaking power, eating habits,
right eye, gems etc. The potential, or the proJaaisein respect of above
significations is indicated by the Kalamsa or Sub lord of the second
house as per its own nature as a planet, the Sign it occupies, its Star
and Star lord and the Sign and the house occupied by its Star lord.
The person will enjoy a high fmanGial status if the Kalamsa lord of
the 2nd house is connected or is the Significator of favourable houses
1.3, 5, 9, 1 1 from 2nd house. However, the quantum offman~al
status will be limited by the potential of the Ascendant.. The 5th,
8th, 9th and Ascdt house (from Ascendant) signification of the Sub
lord of the 2nd Cusp indi'llltes fmanGiaLcrisis that the native has to
face.
The oratorical skills of the native will be dependent on the nature
of the Sub lord and its Star lord as modified by the Signs in whi~
they are placed. For example, if Mars is the Sub lord of the 2nd
CDSpand is in the Star of Sun in Aries, the native will be forceful,
authoritative, egocentric, dignified in his speech. This may, however,
irritate others due to his arrogance and self-opinionism, and
argumentative nature.
Saturn, on the other hand, as the Sub lord or the Star lord of the Sub
lord may represent the native's economical and stead fastJress.
Sun is the Kara.ka for right eye and Venus is the Kanaka for vision.
If the Sub lord of the 2nd CDSpis Sun or Venus and it becomes the
Significator of 6 or 8 or 12 this will show problem in right eye.

Example: Refer fig 3.4. The 2nd house rises in Sagittarius Sign
ruled by Jupiter and Mula Nakshatra ruled by Ketu. Sagittarius is a
fiery and common Sign. This, in general, reveals that the native
will tend to be forceful, witty in his speech and may tend to modulate
his voice. Mula Nakshatra native loves to be straight, direct, and
does not like to beat about the bush. It has lot to do wiili investigation
into things unseen or uni cLlDwnlt is a powerful asterism whkh can
give dominion and lordship. This can sometimes breed ego, vanity
and arrogance. The Sub lord of the 2nd cusp is Venus who is placed
in watery, dual and sattavic.. Sign Pisces. Venus is a Planet of
compromise, peace, delicacy, softness, and aesthetic beauty. It is
placed in Purvabhadrapada Nakshatra who is known for sincerity
and honesty. It is tilllth loving, takes interest in science, astrology,
literature, and possesses the knack to extract work from others.
This is how we detail the static significations of the 2nd cusp.
The dynamic., significations of the cusp are the sum total of the
significations of the Planets co-ruling the 2nd cusp. Here the 2nd
cusp is ruled by Jupiter, Ketu and Venus.
In this chart Jupiter has no positional status. It is in Venus Star and
Saturn Sub. Thus Jupiter is Significator of houses 4, 7 and 12. These
houses are favourable with respect to 2nd cusp. Both Jupiter and
Venus are significators of money.
The Star lord of 2nd cusp is Ketu who has positional status. It is
placed in 4 and is lord of 2 and 5 (being in Pisces Sign ruled by
Jupiter). Ketu is in Saturn Star and Venus Sub. Saturn is placed in
6 and is lord of 3 and 4. Venus its Sub lord is significator of 6 being
in Jupiter Star. Ketu also has to provide the results of Jupiter and
Saturn which it represents. Saturn also is significator of 4,7 and 12
being in Venus Star.
Thus we see that both the Sign lord Jupiter and Star lord of 2nd
cusp have positive potential for 2nd cusp. However the specific
promise of the cusp is revealed by the Sub lord of the cusp. Here
the Sub lord is Venus who is in Jupiter Star. Jupiter is placed in 6th

house and is lord of 2 and 5. Venus is in the Sub of Moon who has
the positional status. Moon is placed in 2“' house and is lord of 9.
Thus the Sub lord is significator of 1,4 and 5 from 2"a CUSp.Its
Sub lord is significator of 1 and 8 from 2nd CUSp.This type of
signification of the 2nd CUSfSub lord reveals that the fman~al status
of the native will be good but the native may have to face occasional
financial womes.
Analysing the Third House: This house Signifies mind, younger
co-born, courage, confidence, short -journeys, mentaL inclinations
and ability, memory, communication skills, writing capability,
change of residence, sale of propetty, rumours etc.
The analysis of the Kalamsa or Sub lord will reveal the potential
and promise of the third house and its significations. If the Sub
lord of the 3rd house is Significator offavourable houses with respect
to itself and the Ascendant, the native will possess courage,
confidence, writing skills of high quality and success in appeals.
The nature of these attributes, however, will depend upon the nature
of the planet that appears as the Sub lord of the 3rd Cusp and its
Star lord. For example if Mars or Sun or Jupiter is the Sub lord of
the third Cusp who is also the Significator of the first house, the
native will possess a very high level of confidence and will be a
daring person. If the Sub lord of the 3rd Cusp is a Significator of 6
and 11 houses, the person will gain success in litigations.
Signifi~tion of 3rd Cusp Sub lord of 3, 9 and 11 houses indicate
gain through agreement.. LiJJkage of the third Cusp Sub lord with
6, 8, and 12 indicates diseases of ears etc. Writing skills of the
native and the subjects on whkh the native will love to write will
depend upon the nature of the Sub lord, the Sign it occupies, its
Star lord and the Sign and the house occupied by the Star lord. The
writing capability of the native should also be seen in consonance
with the native's natural inclination as shown by the Ascendant
Kalamsa lord. Those planets and their houses of lordship that are
significators of the 3rd house in the horoscope will also influence

it. For example, if the Sub lord of the 8th house is the Significator
of the 3rd house, depending upon the nature of the planet and the
Sign in which it is placed, the native may write on one or more
subjects which are as per the significations of the 8th house viz.
accidents, unso~al acts, rapes, crisis management, tax collection,
punishments etc.
Example:Refer fig 3.4. Let us study the static significations of the
3rd cusp. Here the cusp rises in Capncom ruled by Saturn and in
Uttarashadha Nakshatra ruled by Sun. CapJcicomis moveable and
earthly Sign. This indicates that the native will have a pragmatic.,
approach and his communication skills, courage and confidence
will grow with the passage of time. Its ruler Saturn is slow to act
but is very cakulative and methodical.. Uttarashadha Nakshatra
signifies penetrating mental insight and the ability to enter new
fields of endeavour- It also conveys a certa. in sense of fearlessness
and a go ahead spirit.. It provides a talent for commencing new
ventures and seeing them through to completion. The Sub lord of
the 3rd cusp is Mercury. It signifies intelligence, reasoning and
information seeking habit.. It believes in versatility, flexibility and
mobility. It is restless and is the agent of tourism, hitch - hiking,
trekking, pilglcitnage and travel.. It has excellent argumentative and
analytical power.
The dynamic significations of the 3rd cusp are the sum total of the
significations of the planets co-ruling the 3rd cusp. Here the 3rd
cusp is co-ruled by Saturn, Sun and Mercury. Saturn is in Bharani
Star who makes the mind so strong that nothing holds the native
back for long. Bharani makes the person to work in extremes. It,
however also causes confusion in the mind and the person may
often be in a dilemma "To be or not to be". Saturn being in Venus
Star becomes the significator of 4, 7 and 12 houses i.e. houses 2, 5
and 10 from 3rd cusp. All these cusps are favourable from the 3rd
cusp.

The Star lord of the 3rd cusp is Sun who is in Uttatrabhadrapadau
Nakshatra. The key word for this Nakshatra is wisdom. Sun under
the influence of this Nakshatra_ causes the native to act according
to the need of the moment rather from any instinctual archtype. It
makes the native very detelilllined to achieve set goals. The native
will take interest in subjects like astrology, numerology, meditation,
communiaation and divination. Sun is in the Star of Saturn who is
placed in 6th house and is lord of 3 and 4. All these houses are
favourable to 3rd cusp. No doubt 6th house is 4th from 3rd house but
this is the house that indicates victory over others. Thus the native
will use the significations of the 3rd house to win over others.
Mercury the Sub lord of the 3rd cusp has the positional status and
as such becomes the significator of 3, 8 and 11 cusps Le. 1,6 and 9
from 3rd cusp. Mercury is in Rahu Star who is placed in 10 and is
lord of 8 and 11 being in Mercury Sign Virgo. Thus Mercury
becomes significator of 6, 8 and 9 from 3rd cusp. Mercury in Rahu
Star will also be considered in Sun Star that Rahu represents. Sun
is in 4 and is the lord of 10. Thus in totality Mercury becomes the
significator of 3,4, 8, 10 and 11 houses Le. houses 1,2, 6, 8 and 9
from the 3rd house. Signification of the Sub lord of the 3rd cusp of
8th cusp from the Ascendant invariably causes depression or
problems due to significations of the 3rd house. It also indicates
that the 3rd house parts may offer serious health problems.
Signification of the 10th house indicates that the native may carry
out his professional activities using the 3rd house significations. It
may also mean that the native may get honour or award for his
courage or valour or writing capability.
Analysing Fourth House: The main significations of the fourth
house are bask education, mother, and private life, transport, landed
property, house, domestill. happiness, old age, and seclusion.
The potential and the promise of the 4th house are decided by the
significations of the 4th kalamsa lord. If this Kalamsa lord is

connected to favourable houses with respect to itself as well as to
houses which are favourable to the Ascendant, the native will be
able to enjoy better results pertaining to the significations of this
house that are meant for the native. The prospects for the native to
join a school or college for education will be indicated if the 4th
Cusp Sub lord is connected with 9 or 11. The connections or
significations of the 4th Cusp with 3 or 8 are detrimental to education.
Example: Refer fig 3.4. The fourth cusp rises in Aquarius ruled by
Saturn and in Shatabhisha Nakashatra ruled by Rahu. Aquarius is
an airy and fixed Sign. Airy Signs are intellectual Signs. Aquarius
being ruled by Saturn, makes the native interested in the fields of
science and mathematics, geology, labour law, electonics
engineering, petrochemical_ engineering, etc. The native has to make
strenuous efforts to achieve success in education. Saturn being the
lord of the yd house also does indicate that the native may face
problems in completing his education. Shatabhisha tries to gain
access to whatever is hidden but is not always ready to share the
hidden secrets. The Sub lord of the 4th cusp is Saturn whose fields
of education are: Geology, electronic engineering, civil engineering,
petrochemical engineering, sanitary engineering, labour law, mining
and industrial engineering. Thus the Sub lord and the Sign lord of
the 4th cusp jointly hint that the native will in all probability love to
study the subjects related to the planet Saturn.
The dynamic signification of 4th cusp is the sum total of the
signifiaations of the planets co-ruling the 4th cusp. Here the 4th
cusp is co - rulrd by Saturn, Rahu and Saturn. Saturn being in Venus
Star is significator of 4, 7 and 12 cusps i.e. 1,4 and 9 houses from
4th cusp. Rahu is in Sun Star and thus becomes significator of 4 and
10 i.e. 1 and 7 from 4th cusp. Rahu has also to provide the results of
Mercury and Sun which it represents. Mercury as seen above is
signifiGator of 3,4,8, lOand 1 1 i.e. 12, 1,5, 7 and 8 from 4th cusp.
Sun is significator of 3,4 and 6 i.e. 12, 1 and 3 from 4th cusp. This
type of significations clearly reveal that the native will have to face
problems in his bask, education.

Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of Nirayana Chart
The nature of subjects that the native may like to study will also be
influenced by the significations of that cusp whose Sub lord is the
significator of 4th house. For example in the example chart fig 3.4
the Sub lord of the 6th cusp is Saturn who is in Venus Star and such
becomes the significator of 4th house. 6th , house indicates subjects
like chemistry, law, biology, drugs, medi~es etc. The native may
like to study any of these subjects.
Analysing Fifth House: Fifth house stands for wisdom, religion,
traditional laws, intelligence, intuitive perception of the future,
socially accepted forms of courtship Le. romantic affairs, progeny,
sports and cultural activities, artistic- and creative pursuits,
speculation and attitude of the native.
The Kalamsa lord of the fifth Cusp, the Sign in whkh it is placed,
its Star lord and the Sign and house occupied and ruled by its Star
lord will reflect whether the native is capable to procreate, or gain
from speculation, sports and cultural activities, and his intellectual
capability. For example, if the Sub lord of the 5th Cusp is connected
to houses 2 and 11 the native is promised to get a chiW; connection
with 5, 7 and 11 may indicate success in love affair that will result
in marriage. Significations of 4, 6 and 12 indicates delay in getting
a child or possible abortion or miscamage. These significations
also indicate failure in love affairs. It is said that if the Kalamsa
lord of the fifth Cusp is in the Kalamsa of a planet that is placed in
male Sign, the person will get first male child. It is, however, not a
fool proof rule. The detailed analysis of 5th cusp is done in chapter
Example: Refer fig 3.4. Fifth cusp rises in watery and dual Sign
Pisces which is the 12th Sign in the natural zodiac. This is the Sign
of secrecy. The native tends to keep his love affairs in great secrecy.
It is the Sign of loss. The native often meets with failures in love
affairs. Watery Sign makes the native emotional.. The native excels
in arts and theology but always fall shot of perfection because Pisces
is a dual Sign. This Sign is ruled by Jupiter the planet of wisdom,

growth, optiinisin and abundance. The 5th cusp rises in
Uttarabhadrapada - the apex of Saturnian energy. Wisdom!
rationality is the key word for this Nakshatra. The person acts
according to the need of the moment rather from instinctual
archtype. This Nakshatra provides room for many qualities, natures
and expression. The native likes to do every thing in a controlled
fashion with care and restraint.. Flexibility here is a means to an
end. The Sub lord of the 5th cusp is Mars who is known for heroism,
passion, aggression, manliness, love of sports, stamina and
toughness. It laccepts no weakness, panic, delay and is straight
forward. It is, however, impulsive and impatient.. It has strong sexual
feelings.
The dynamic significations of 5th cusp are studied from the
significations of the planets co-ruling the 5th cusp. Here the 5th
cusp is ruled by Jupiter, Saturn and Mars. Bolli Jupiter and Saturn
are in Bharani Star. This makes the native's attitude to achieve his
goal at all costs i.e. nothing can hold him back for long. Both the
planets are significators of 4, 7 and 12 i.e. 12, 3 and 8 from 5th
cusp. This indicates multipliaity of the 5th house significations that
may also meet with failures and delay. The Sub lord of the 5th cusp
is Mars who has the positional status. It is, therefore, the significator
of 1, 2, 5 and 6 at the positional level.. Mars is in Uttarashada
Nakshatra ruled by Sun who is placed in 4 and rules over l'O.Thus
Mars becomes the significator of 1,2,4, 5, 6 and l'Oi.e. 9, 10, 12,
1,2 and 6 from the 5th. cusp. Since Mars is in its own Sub. Therefore
the Sub lord supports the above significations. Thus the 5th cusp
indicates that the native is procreative, will shine in sports etc. Mars
being under the influence of Uttatt:ashada provides the native with:
1. Positive, introspective and enduring aspect
2. Love to take new projects and see them through successfully
3. Respect for traditional values, righteousness, confidence and
expansiveness
4. Enables the native to have faith in his ability, knowledge and
understanding.

This dynamiG- energy content is channelised through the houses
signified by the Sub lord of the 5th cusp.
Analysing the Sixth Cusp: The main significations of the sixth
house are:
Difficulties, enemies, employment and service, separation from
partner, pet animals, maternal relatives, loans, debts and sickress.
Since it is 12th house to the 7th house that represents others with
whom the native is expected to deal in life it indicates the capacity
of the native to win over others. Thus for winning in elections ,
competitions e. 1. c the 6th house should be strong. In other words
the Sub lord of the 6th cusp should be significator of favourable
cusps with respect to 6th cusp as well as with respect to the
Ascendant.. This house is also studied to fmd out the possibilities
of getting loans. If the Sub lord of the 6th cusp is significator of 2nd
cusp directly or indirectly then it indicates that the native possesses
the capability to obtain loans or earn by providing servke to others.
Direct signification means that the Sub lord of the 6th1 cusp is
significator of the 2nd cusp either due to its positional status or
stellar status. Indirect significations means that the Sub lord of the
6th cusp is the significator of the iith cusp either due to its positional,
status or as per its stellar status and becomes the significator of the
2nd cusp as per its Sub lord. However the most important
signification of the 6th house is that it reveals the nature of sickJaess
a person is likely to suffer in hislher life. We will discuss in detail
the analysis of the sixth house pertaining to the aspect of sickJaess.
Theories of Diseases and Astrology:
1. Theory- of Elements:c. Our body is composed of five elements
viz. Fire, Earth, Air, Water and Ether (sometimes called Akash).
For nonnal health, these elements are in defined proportion
called equilibrium. When ever this equilibrium is disturbed

Kalamsa & ~
Interlinks
Simplified aDJi. Enlarged
due to excess or deficiency of an element, the health of a person
suffers. In other words, we can say the person is subjected to
disease, the nature of which will be corresponding to the nature
of the element responsible for disturbing the equilibrium.
The element fire rules the body heat and digestion. Disturbance to
the element fire upsets lungs, thirst, sleep and the general
constitution of the body. Excess fire can make a person angry,
hot - tempered, violent and aggressive. It may cause heartburn,
liver problems such as hepatitis, stomach problems such as
ulcers, gallbladder problems, inflammations and fevers. Lack
of fire causes poor circulation with cold extremities, poor
musGle tone, low vitality, indigestion, lack of courage and
confidence.
When the element earth is disturbed, it results in causing the disease
offlesh, teeth, skin,joints, nails, bones, tendons, mus~s, and hairs.
It may also manifest as sluggishness and depression.
Disturbance of air element brings about difficulties in the
movements of the limbs. The air element governs the respiratory
ktd nervous system. An excess of airy element can make a person
restless, anxious and jittery. Stiffness of joints as in arthritis,
flatulence, asthma and nervous disorders usually manifest when
there is excess of airy element.. Lack of air element may lead to
difficulties in perception, tiredDess, shortness of breath, and lethargic
movement. .
Water rules the lymphatic., system and all the fluids in the body,
such as blood and various secretions. The excited element water
brings about disorders in blood, urine, perspiration, semen,
lymphatic., congestion and saliva. Persons with lack of water element
often suffer from thirst and dehydr.ation.
Loss of equilibrium due to ether causes anger, sexuality, fear, and
signs of old age.

In Astrology, each Sign, each house and each planet corresponds
to a particular element.. The placement of a planet in a Sign and in
a house in the horoscope indicates whether the planet has acquired
excess or deficiency in the element that it represents. The planets,
the Signs and the houses and the elements they represent are
indicated below:
The planet or planets, causing disturbance in the equilibrium of a
particular- element will thus dete:mline the nature of diseases. And
the part of the body where the disease will appear- corresponds to
the house, which receives the reaction of the planet or planets,
causing the disturbance in the equilibrium.
Planets, and the Part of the body they Rule: Sun rules the heart
or cardiovascular system whicll gives life to the rest of the cells in
the body. Moon rules the fluids, the secretions of the glands and
digestive jukes, and the mucous membranes. Mercury rules the
nervous system, whicll sends impulses to every cell of the body.
Mercury also rules the respiratory system and the functions of
speech and hearing. Venus rules the tlrnoat and thyroid gland,
kidneys, and bladder. Mars rules the blood, muscles, and adrenal
glands. Conditions arising from overheating, such as fevers,
infections, and redness, are under the rulership of Mars. Jupiter

rules the liver and pancreas and the sciatic nerve. Conditions of
excess growth like tumours and obesity are also ruled by Jupiter.
Saturn governs the body structure, the backbone, the teeth, bones,
joints, nails and skin. Rahu causes respiratory troubles, sharp acute
pain, lung trouble and cancerous diseases. Ketu causes diseases
due to acidity, enlargement of spleen, cataract, and hydroceles.
Outer Planets:.. Uranus is said to operate as a higher octave of
Mercury. It is related to the nervous system;it governs the electrical
force that flows through the nerve channels. Spasm, cramps, and
irregular heartbeat are all ruled by Uranus. Neptune rules the
cerebrospinal fluid, the pineal gland and the lymphatic system. It
operates as the higher octave of Venus and governs the obscure
diseases that are difficult to diagnose, as well as alcoholism,
addiction, hallu<llilations, schizophrenia and other psychoses. Pluto
is considered to be the higher octave of Mars. It rules the
reproductive system and the excretory system, including the colon
and anus. It relates to hidden cell changes and destruction of tissue.
2. The Three Humour Theory: It is believed that our body is
composed of three basic substances called humours (sometimes
referred to as fluids). In Ayurveda - the science of living based on
ancient Indian philosophy; it is called tridosha. These humours or
doshas are called Vata (Wind), Pita (Bile) and Kapha (phlegm).
For normal health, these humours have to be in a particular state of
equilibrium. Any excess or deficiency of a humour causes disease
or disability corresponding to the nature of the humour disturbing
the equilibrium. These humours are spread out in the entire body.
They have, however, specific region where the influence is more
prominent. .
Vatll. is a force conceptually made up of the elements Air and Ether.
Vata rules the portion below navaL. The factors responsible for
movement and sensation in a single cell, whole body are the
representatives of Vata. The primary seat or location of the Vata in
the body is the colon. It also resides in the hips, thighs, ears, bones,

Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of Nirayana Chart
large intestine, pelvic cavity, and skin. Vata governs breathing,
blinking of the eyelids, movements in the mus~es and tissues,
pulsations in the heart. Vata also governs such feelings and emotions
as nervousness, fear, anxiety, pain, tremors, and spasms. Too much
Vata can result in nerve irritation, high blood pressure, gas and
confusion. Too little Vata can result in nerve loss, congestion,
constipation and thoughtlessness.
Pita is a force created by the dynami(l; interplay of Water and Fire.
Pita rules the portion between the heart and the naval.. It controls
digestion, absorption, assimilation, nutliition, intelligence and
understanding, metabolism and energy in the body. It rules over
the digestive organs. Pita controls the enzymes that digest our food
and the harmones that regulate our metabolism. Psychologicall)"
Pita arouses anger, hate, andjealously. The small intestine, stomach,
sweatglands, blood, fat, eyes and skin are the seats of Pita. Too
much of Pita can result in ulcers, hormonal imbalance, irritated
skin (acne) and anger. Too little of Pita can result, in indigestion,
inability to understand and sluggish metabolism.
Kapha is the conceptual equilibrium of Water and Earth. Kapha
rules the breasts and the lungs. It controls the strengtJ:wning of the
stomach and the joints, firmness to the limbs and represents the
sense organs. Kapha is structure and lubrication. It is present in the
chest, throat, head, nose, mouth, joints, cytoplasm, plasma and in
the liquid secretions of the body such as mucus. Psychologically:,
Kapha is responsible for the emotions of attachment, greed, and
envy. Too much of Kapha can' result, in mucous build - up in the
sinus and nasal passages, the lungs, and colon. In the mind it creates
a rigidity, a fixation of thought, inflexibility. Too little of Kapha
can result in burning stomach, a dry respiratol } ' tract and inability
to concentrate.
Corresponding to this theory of Three Humours, in Astrology the
planets, Signs and houses are divided under the Law of Mode of
action or gunas as Rajasic, Tamasic, and Sattawic. The planets and

the nature of humour they control are indicated below:
Humour Controlling Planets.
Vata (Wind) Moon, Mercury, Venus, Saturn
Pita (Bile) Sun, Mars, (Sat, Jupiter, Mercury)
Kapha (phlegm) Jupiter, (Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun)
The planets and the houses they affect while causing disturbance
in any humour will indicate nature of the disease and the parts of
the body affected.
Metaphysicists- may say that many of the imbalances in the
physical body are a result of inharmonious conditions existing
in the higher vehides - the emotional, mental and causal bodies.
Each human being is unique and takes birth at a particulaL moment
on a particular- day. The Ascendent rising at the place of birth
i ndi 1 i :atcsthe energy content that has been apportioned to the native.
Corresponding to the specific longitude of the Ascendent, the sixth
cusp is fonned. The nature of potentiaL imbaJances is deteNined by
the static and dynamic significations of the SigniStaLrising on the
6th cusp and the planets co-ruling the 6th cusp.
Analysis of the Sixth Cusp for detemlining the nature of disease a
person is likely to suffer from is done as follows:
Step I. Analyse the Ascendant to dete:mlinethe native's proneness
to siclawss and the weak part of the body.
Step II. Analyse the Sign, Star and Kalamsa lord rising on the 6th
Cusp; synthesize the effects of the Sign lord, Star lord and Sub lord
for causing diseases, as per their characteristics and energy content
in the horoscope.

Step III. Analyse the Sub lord of the 6th Cusp and the Sign in which
it is placed, its Star lord and the Sign and the house in whkh it is
placed. The Sub lord and the Sign in which it is placed indi~tes
the nature of the disease as per the significations of the planet as
modified by the sign. If the planet and the sign both represent the
same element then the nature of the disease will be due to excess of
that element.. The Star lord, the Sign and the house in which it is
placed indicates the part of the body.
If the Sub lord of the 6th Cusp is the Significator of 6 or 8 or 12 and
connected with l,the native may suffer from disease, during the
Sub period of the cuspal Sub Lord of 6.
Any planet can cause sickness during its peliiod if it is the
Significator of 1 and 6. If the Sub lord of the 6th cusp or the planet
causing the disease is connected with Saturn, disease becomes
chronic; if with Mars disease is acute, sudden and painful, and may
cause operations; if with Mercury disease gets complicated; and if
with Rahu or Ketu, disease more often than not, remains
undiagonosed.
Similarly, if the Sub Lord of the 8th or the 12th cusp be the
Signifi~tor of 6 or 8 or 12 and connected with 1, the native suffers
from serious illness or chroniG. disease or the disease, which might
bring some permanent defect..
Timing Disease and Cure: Disease is caused during the period of
a planet that is the Significator of 6 and 1. Cure is possible in the
joint period of the Significator of 1,5 and 11. It may, however, be
remembered that if a person falls sick in the beginning of the Bhukti
of the planet which is strongly connected with 6 and 1 in the nata.L
chart, the cure will not be possible during the Antara of any planet,
however strongly it may be connected with 1,5 and 11. The cure
will be possible only in the next Bhukti whose lord is connected
with 1,5 and 11. The same principle applies to the Antara periods.

M Kalamsa ft, ~ Interlinks ~ SirnnUfied.m.Ui ’ Fataraed
Let us take an example^-to show the application of the principles of
deteimlining diseases.
Example^ Ref. fig. 3.5. This is the horoscope of a person whose
foot was injured in a minor accident by a motorcar. He was operated
for piles & appendix. He suffers from gastric trouble, swelling of
the body due to blood disorder, rheumatism and enlargement of
Lagna Chart Shav "Chalit"
Cusp Chart
Fig 3.5

Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of Nirayana Chart
Planetary Position
Nirayana Cusps

Step 1: Analyse the Ascendant: Sub lord of the Ascendant is Saturn.
It is in the Star of Jupiter, lord of 6. Since the 6th house is vacant, it
becomes a strong signi~tor of 6. Saturn is in the Sub of Sun that
is in the 8th house. Sun has its positional^ status. Thus the Sub lord
of the Ascendant Sub lord not only promotes the significations of
the planet Saturn at the Stellar level but also being the signifi~tor
of the 8th cusp speaks volume about the health hazards the native is
destined to face.
Step 2: Analyse the Sign, the Star and Sub rising on the 6th cusp.
The 6th cusp rises in Pisces in Uttarabhadra Nakshatra and Sub of
Jup.
Jupiter is lord of the 6lh house and is placed in Scorpio. It indi~tes
the following diseases:
Appendicitis, liver complaints, piles, gastric troubles, blood
disorders, indigestion.
Utlarabhadra Star rising on the 6th cusp indicates the following
diseases:
Foot fracture, flatulence, T.B., indigestion, rheumatic pains.
Step 3: The Sub lord of the 6th cusp is Jupiter and is placed in
Scorpio. The nature of the diseases, the native will suffer has already
been indicated in step 2.
The Star lord of Jupiter is Mercury who is placed in 8th house in
Taurus Sign.
Diseases due to Mercury in Taurus Sign are:
Speech impediments, hoarseness, parathyroid imbalance, nervous
disturbance of the genito-urinary function.

Mercury in the 8th house indicates diseases as neuralgi- pain in the
bladder and genitals, bowel disorders, piles. Mercury as lord of 9th
house, which is vacant, indicates problems in left side of the stomach
and as lord of 12"1 house and Sign Virgo may give dysentery,
appendicitis, gastric ulcers, and nerve debility.
Role of Outer Planets, for diseases of the native can be taken into
consideration. Both Uranus and Neptune are in the Star of Venus
who is placed in the 8th house. These planets will, therefore, cause
the person to suffer diseases as per their nature as modified by the
signs in which they are placed. Pluto is in the Star of Jupiter who is
the lord of the 6th house and as such will account for the native to
suffer diseases as per the nature of Pluto and the sign Cancer in
which it is placed. Cancer rules the stomach and the fluids in the
body and Pluto the excretory system.
The above analysis clearly justifies the diseases the native suffered.
Analysing The Seventh House - Marriage and
Married Life:
Seventh house stands for partners and associates whose interests
are blended with those of the native whether in love or hate. It is
known as Kalatra Sthanam the place of spouse, sexual union,
semen, genitals and secret pleasures arising from sexua.l union. It
also Signifies, trade, private business, social relationships,
international relationships, break injoumey, mauiage, divorce. We
will limit our discussion to the analysis of the 7th house to the
delineation of the nativity with respect to his mamage and mauied
life.
Indians regarded mauiage in the ancient past as a sacred institution,
which provides legal, moral and social sanctity to the native to

enjoy sexua.lpleasures. The purpose, of course, was procreation.
With the crumbling of the moral values, mamage today is regarded
by many as if it is nothing more than legalized prostitution.
Ma.mage, in fact, has different connotations in different societies
in the world. People enjoy sexual pleasures living under the same
roof with mutual consent and even produce a child and yet they are
not ready to use the word marriage to describe their relationship.
Such questions pose serious problems to the Astrologer when he is
asked upon to analyse the horoscope to answer a volley of questions
by the native or hislher parents.
Analysing the horoscope for marriage calls upon the Astrologer to
look for answers to the two most important questions:
1. Is the native promised man:iage?
2. When the mamage will take place, if it is promised.
There is, of course, a long list of supplementary questions relating
to Ma.mage viz.
A_ Will it be love or arranged mauiage?
B. Will there be delay and impediments in mamage?
C. What will be the physiGal and mental characteristics of
the partner?
D. What wm be the financial status and career profile of
the partner?
E. Will the pa.rtJwrenjoy long and healthy life?
F. From whkh direction and locality thepa.rtJwiwill come?
G. What will be the quality and longevity of manied life?
H. Is there any chance of separation or second marriage?
L Is the partner capable to penomL sexual act?
J. Is the partner capable to procreate?

Houses that need to be analysed for Marriage:
Like the Vedic Astrologers, we also consider here the 7lh house as
the Primary' house for Mamage. The other relevant houses are taken
as:
Second House: It is the house of family. Mamage is taken as an
addition in the family. Here, I would like to suggest to the reader to
ponder a little bit. The marriage may be an addition in the family if
the marriage partner joins the family. Moreover, the 2nd house is,
infact, a house of danger and death to the 7th house.
Fifth House: It is the house of magnetic... attractions, socially
accepted forms of courtship, romantic.., affairs and progeny.
Eleventh House: It is the house of fulfillment of one's desires and
personal needs. It is also the fifth house from the 711' House.
Promise or Denial of Marriage: It is decided as follows:
Step 1. Analyse the Kalamsa lord of the Ascendant and look for its
significations. If it is Significator of 5 or 7 or 11 marriage is
promised.
Step 2: Analyse the ? cusp Kalamsa lord. If it is Significator of 5
or 7 or Hit confums that the native is destined to enjoy the pleasures
of sex or marriage.
Step 3 : If the Kalamsa lord of the Ascendant and the Kalamsa lord
of the 7th- cusp are significators of 4,6, 10, 12 without any connection
with 5 or 7 or 11, the person is denied of married life.
Marriage Promised but Delayed: Mamage is delayed if the
following conditions exist in the horoscope:

1. It is believed by some that marriage is delayed if Saturn is
placed in I, 3, 5, 7, and 10 due to Saturn's aspect on the relevant
houses ofmamage. 1 have serious doubts about Aspect Theory.
2. Again marriage is believed to be delayed and beset with
problems if there is a connection between Saturn and Moon
either by
i) Conjunction or aspect..
ii) Moon in the Sign or Star or Sub of Saturn.
iii) Saturn in the Sig~, Star or Sub of Moon.
The philosophy behind this relationship (called Punerphoo by
Traditionalists) is that Moon which is the Signifiuator of our desires,
longing, ovulation, lust, etc. under the influence of Saturn the planet
of cons lJiiction who has forsaken sentimentalism and passions do
not allow the native to satisfy his/ her sexual desires.
3. Similarly it is believed that aspect of Saturn on Venus and
lord of 7 delays marriage.
4. Also Mars in the 8th house from the Ascendant can aspect the
2nd house (addition of family) and the 3 rd house (the house for
negotiations) and thus cause delay.
1 would suggest that the delay in marriage should be judged
from the significations or the potential of the ?th cusp as per the
Kalamsa lord of the 7th cusp.
If the ?th cusp Sub lord is Significator of houses 2, 4, 6, 10, and
12jointly or independently along with its Signification of 5 or 7
or 11, the marriage will be delayed. Suppose the Sub lord of 7th
cusp is significator of 2, 6 and also 5 or 7 or 11 we may say that
the native is promised delayed mamage.

Timing Marriage: MaJiliiagetakes place in the conjoint period of
the fruitful significators of the houses 5,7, 1 1 and also when Transit
of Dasa period lords and transit of Sun and Moon agrees. 1 have
serious doubt about the use of 2nd house for marriage because
it is the 8th house to the seventh house. More over 1 all- convinced
that marriage of a person takes place only in a Bhukti which is
fruitful significator of 7th cusp directly or indirectly. For more
details refer to chapter 14.
Extra-Marital Relationships or Plurality of Sexual
Relationship:
Will a person involve in sexual intrigues or sexua. 1 relationships
with persons other than his or her legally or socially accepted partner
can be judged from the analysis of the Ascendant and the 7th house
as follows:
1. Ascendant indicates the mental set-up of the native. If planets
that are negatively excited influence the Ascendant, they will
force the native to involve in unso'kiaL acts. If these planets
simultaneously fonn relationship with the 7th house and the
9th house (3rd from 7th and as such is the house of
multiplications of 7th house signifiGations), the person may
involve in sexual intrigues. If the Ascendant Sub lord is under
the influence of Mars, Saturn or negatively excited Moon or
Venus, and it establishes a link with 7th and 9th house the native
may involve in extra marital relationships.
2. 7th house is the house of sexual relationships. If the Sub lord
of the 7th cusp establishes relationship with 9th house i.e.
becomes the significator of 9th cusp, it indicates plurality of
sexual relationship. These are necessary conditions. But
presence of these conditions, however, is not a gurantee for

plurality of sexual relations because this relationship means
many other things also, for example this will indicate the
subject of higher study for the native.
Physical and Mental Characteristics of the
Partner:
Take the 7th house as the Ascendant of the partner to indicate these.
The characteristics will depend upon the following:
1. The Sign/Star rising on the 7th house.
2. The Sub lord, the Sign occupied by it, its Star lord and the
Sign and the house occupied by it. That is as if we are analyzing
the Ascendant..
Profession and Finandal Status of the Partner:
.profession is indicated by the lath house, and the financial status
by the 2nd house. However, the potential of any house is limited by
the potential of the Ascendant.. Therefore, to assess profession of
the partner we have to analyse 4th house noth' from 7th) and 8th
house (2nd to 7th) in consonance with the seventh house.
Age difference between the Partners:
This is studied through the Sub lord of the 7th house and its Star
lord. Saturn's influence is indicative of elde:clypartner, or a partner
who looks elder than hislher age. Jupiter, Sun and Venus denote

proper age difference. Moon, Mars, and Mercury indicate young
partners i.e. age difference may be small. However, it should be
remembered that the planet's own nature is itself conditioned by
the Sign in which it is placed. Mars, for example" in Saturn's Sign
may cause for more age difference.
Direction and Locality of the Partner:
Each planet, each house and each Sign has been assigned the ruler
- ship over a direction. To detemllne the direction of the partner
means the direction of the birth place of the partner with respect to
the place of birth of the native, Locality means the living place of
the partner with respect to the living place of the native. The Sub
lord of the 7th house and its Star lord determine direction. For
example, if the Sub lord of the 7th house establishes linkage with
10th house the partner may be from South direction; with the
Ascendant it may be East; witil 3rd may be North - East; with 5th
may be North-West etc. Locality of the partner should strictly be
judged from the Sub lord of the 10th house, because 10th is fourth
from the 7th If the 10th Sub lord is the Significator of 4th or
establishes a strong relationship with the 4th house, the partner may
be living in the same locality or town, with 9th house, the partner
may be living at a far - off place; 12th house, the partner may be
from overseas.
Nature of Marriage:
How the marriage will take place is indicated by the planet and its
houses of lordship that maintains a strong connection with 7th house.
It is indicated below:

LORD OF
HOUSE
NATURE OF MARRIAGE

Matching the Horoscope:
Often an Astrologer is asked to match the horoscopes of a male
and a fema. 1 ewho want to marry and thus become life partners. The
psychology behind this request from the clients is the belief that
the destiny of an individual undergoes a transformation due to this
alliance. This belief has gained strength because of the statistical
analysis of the mamed life of couples that face health, fman~al
status and life hazards or who have gained in socia.L& fmanciaL
status and general level of prosperity. This belief, however, is
basically in contradiGtion to the philosophy of Astrology. A native
is destined to bear the fruits of his own Karma. His longevity, hea.lth,
prosperity and social status are governed by hislher nativity. If the
native is destined to have setbacks only after mamage, no amount
of matching the horoscopes is going to prevent it. If he is destined
to get promotion in his professional career after maroage, he will
get it irrespective of the quality of matching of horoscopes arrived
by Astrologers. Therefore, the matching of the horoscope should
be resorted to detailed analysis of each individual's chart for health,
longevity, potency, professional and fman~al status etc. The two
natives will marry only if the Dasa periods of one at the time of
marriage are the ruling planets (Ascendant lord, rising Star lord.
Moon Sign lord. Moon's Star lord) of the partner at the time of
birth and vice - versa. Invariably the Sign and the rising Star lord
of the 7th cusp will indicate the ruling planets of the partner in each
horoscope.
Matching should be resorted to allow the two persons to achieve
the targets of their lives smoothly by establishing a harmonious
relationship. The Astrologer has thus to answer basically the two
questions. First, should the two marry? And second, can the two
marry?The procedure for matching two horoscopes (say Mr. A &
Miss B) for matrimonial alliance should thus be done as follows:

Two persons A & B will marry only if the ruling planets
(Ascendant lord, Ascendant Star lord, Moon Sign lord, Moon
Star lord) of Mr. A are the significators of 5, 7 and 1 1 of Miss
B and vice-a-versa.
If the ruling planets of Mr. A are the signifi~tors of 4, 6, 10 of
Miss B, no marriage between the two can take place. For mixed
significations, consider other factors also.
2. Ascendant Sub lord of Mr: A should not be the Significator of
4, 6, 10, 12, houses of Miss Band vice-a-versa.
3. 7th cuspal Sub lord of Mr. A should reveal the Moon position
of Band vice-a-versa.
4. Planets co-ruling the 7th cusp of Mr. A or the planets in the
Star or Sub of these planets in Mr. A's horoscope should reveal
the Ascendant of Miss Band vice-a-versa.
5. Potency of the partners should be judged from the 5th cusp in
each horoscope.
6. Health, Longevity, financial status and progeny should be
analysed from the respected houses cuspal lords in each
horoscope.
7. Estimated date of marriage in the two horoscopes should agree.
Example: Let us try to see the applications of above principles
through an example. Fig 3.6 is the chart of Miss. B and fig 3. 7 is
the chart of Mr. A

Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of Nirayana Chart
Miss B: Date of Bkth: 9.9.1981
Time of Birth: 04.25 AM.
Place of Birth: Lat. 30 N 48; Long. 75 E 20
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit"
Fig 3.6
Chart of Miss B,

Planet- Position
Nirayana Cusps
Fig. 3.6 Miss B

Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of Nirayana Chart
Mr. A: Date of Birth: 21.8.1976
Time of Birth: 0633.55 AM.
Place of Birth: Lat. 30 N 42; Long. 76 E 48
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit"
Cusp Chart
Chart of Mr. A
Fig 3.7

Planetary Position
Nirayana Cusps

Step 1. Let us see if marriage is promised for Mr. A and Miss B.
Miss B: The Sub lord of the Ascendant as well as that of the 7th
cusp is Saturn. Saturn is lord of the 7th house but it has no positional
status. Saturn is in the Star of Moon, which is placed in the 5th
house. Mauiage is thus promised.
Mr. A: The Ascendant Sub lord is Mercury. It has the positional
status and is thus the Significator of the 11th and 2nd house, whkh
are vacant.. This promises maroage.
The Sub lord of the 7th cusp is Saturn who is in its own Star. Saturn
is lord of the 71^ house. Saturn is also in the Sub of Jupiter, lord of
the 5th house. This confirms the promise of maJiriJlge.
Step 2. Let us list out the significators of houses 5, 7, and 1 1 in the
horoscopes of Mr. A & Miss B.
Step 3: The ruling planets of Mr: A and Miss B are listed below:
Mr. A: Sun, Ketu (Mars), Mercury, Rahu (Venus)
Miss B: Moon, Mercury, Saturn and Rahu
Step 4: Matching of the Two Horoscopes.
1. Whether the two can marry: The ruling planets of Mr. A should
be the significators of houses 5, 7 and 1 1 of Miss Band vicea- versa.
Mr. A's ruling planets Sun, Ketu and Mercury are the
significators of 5, 7 and 11 houses of Miss B.

Miss B's ruling planets Moon, Mercury, and Saturn are the
significators Df7 and 1 1 houses of Mr. A
2. Ascendant Sub lord of Mr. A is Mercury. It is the Signi:ficator
of 5th in Miss B's horoscope.
Ascendant Sub lord of Miss B is Saturn.. It is the Signi:ficator
of 7th house in Mr. Ns horoscope.
3. 7th cusp Sub lord of Mr. Ais Saturn. Venus in Mr. A's horoscope
is in the Sub of Saturn. Venus is the Moon's Star of Miss B.
4. Planets co-ruling the 7lh cusp of Mr. A are Saturn - Rahu -
Saturn - Jupiter. The Ascendant of Miss B is Moon - Mercury
- Sat - Rahu. Now in Mr. Ns horoscope Moon is in Rahu Star
and Mercury is in the Sub of Jupiter. Thus the planets coruling the Ascendant of Miss B are the planets co-ruling the
7th cusp of Mr A or are the planets that are in the Star or Sub
of planets co-ruling the 7lb cusp of Mr. A.
Planets co-ruling the 7th cusp of Miss B are Saturn - Mars -
Saturn - Rahu. The Ascendant of Mr. A is co-ruled by planets
Sun - Ketu - Mercury - Rahu. In Miss B's horoscope Sun is in
the Sub of Saturn and Ketu represents Saturn. The Sub-Sub
lord of Ascendant of Miss B is Rahu that represents Moon.
Thus we can take that the Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant is Moon.
Now Mercury is in Moon Star. Hence Mercury can come as a
planet in the Ascendant of Mr. A. Thus the planets co-ruling
the 7th cusp of Miss B clearly reveal the planets co-ruling the
Ascendant of Mr. A.
5. Potency and Procreation power of the Partners:
Mr. A. Sub lord of 5th cusp is Mercury. Mercury has its
positional status. It is lord of 2 and 11. Thus the native is
capable to produce a child.

Miss B: 5th cusp Sub lord is Saturn who is in Moon Star and
in its own Sub. Moon is in the 5th house. Miss B is therefore
capable to produce the child.
6. Health, longevity, etc. should be analysed as we have stated
in earlier chapters.
7. The two natives can therfore, marry.
Analysing Eighth House:
The Eighth house represents the hidden aspects of one's life, serious
diseases, unexpected gains or losses, conceakd wealth, knowledge
of the hidden laws of nature, psychological afflictions or mental
sufferings, death, longevity, storehouse of expansive energy latent
in microcosm, rectum, accidents, quarrels, false allegation, damage
in reputation, unearned income, surgery, slaughter house, rapes,
gift cheques, earth quakes, incurring losses, insurance claims,
hurdles injoumey.
The potential and promise of the gth cusp will be analysed through
its Sub-lord. If the Sub lord is Significator of 1,5, 9 (not for Fixed
Signs Ascendants), and ll(not for Movable Sign Ascendants) it
indicates long life to the native. Significations ofMaraka orBadhaka
house shorten the span of life. The gth Sub lord will also indi'late
the Mode of Death. This we have discussed in earlier paragraphs,
gth house is also the house for unexpected gains or losses. If the
Sub lord of the gth cusp is the Signiflu:ator of 1 and 6, it will cause
for sudden sickness. Suppose the gtll cusp is the SigLtifiGatorof 2, 6
and 1 1 the native may get unexQected gains either by way of loans
or legacies or unearned money. Significations of gth cusp Sub lord,
of 4 and g, means the native may have to face litigations that would
arise from properties. The native may be kidnapped if the Sub lord
of the gth cusp becomes the SignifiGator of 1,3, g and 12.

Example:Refer fig 3.4. The 8lb cusp rises in Gemini which is an
airy, dual and sattavic Sign ruled by Mercury. The planet Mercury
signifies diseases: chest, nerves, mental disorders, abortions,
neurological disorder, defects in speech, skin diseases, vertigo,
leucoderma, ear, nose and throat, impotence. Mrigshira Nakashatra
rises on 8lb cusp which indicates diseases like inflamed tonsils,
pimples, throat pain, goiter, adenoids, diphtheria and Ear trouble.
Mrigshira provides the native with an intellect which is a more
conscious force and governs over the largely unconsGious mind.
Mercury and Mars being fast moving planets the worries of the
native will not be of permanent nature.
The dynami(l, significations of the 8lb cusp are the sum total of the
planets Mercury, Mars and Ketu whidl rules the 8lb cusp. The
specific signifilllitions of the 8lb cusp are studied from its Sub lord.
Here the Sub lord is Ketu who has the positional status. Ketu thus
becomes the significator of 4, 2, 5 and 8(Ketu in Pisces ruled by
Jupiter). Ketu is in Saturn Star who is placed in 6 and rules 3 and 4.
Signification of Ketu of 6lb cusp indicates unexpected rise in service.
2 and 6 significations indicates unexpected financial gains.
Significations of 2,4, 5, 6 and 8 indicates sudden death at home.
Analysing Ninth House:
The Ninth house, known as Bhagya Sthanam, operates under the
influence of the principle of Mutability and Fire and thus shows
introspections, aspirations towards future and the possibilities of
the higher mind. It represents religion, philosophy, austerity, worship
and Poorva Puniya or the accumulation of auspicllilus Karma from
past lives, divine wisdom, spiritual disciplines, mys~ initiations,
enlightenment, higher education, long journey, legal disciplines,
internal and external communications, long distance
communications, Extra-Marital relationships, second marriage.

Let us see how the prospects of higher education are studied. A
person will be able to undergo learning process at the higher level
that is Post Graduation etc. if the following conditions exist in the
horoscope.
1 . Analysis of the cusp should promise basiG-education. This
is possible if the Sub lord of the 4 ^ cusp is a Significator of
favourable houses with respect to the 4th1 cusp as well as with
respect to the Ascendant..
2. 4tU cusp Sub lord should be connected to 9l^€usp i.e. it should
be significator of 9^ cusp directly or through llthcusp.
3. 9t^1pusp Sub lord should be connected with favourable. -houses
with respect to itself and also with respect to the Ascendant-.
4. ll.thcusp Sub lord if connected with 9th1 it promises fulfilment
of the native's desire through higher education.
Subjects~of Study: It will be indicated by the nature of the planets
and the Signs in whkh they are placed and the houses they own in
the horoscope, who become significator of the 9th'house. This is
indicated below:
Planet
establishing link
with 9^ house
Moon
Sun
Mars
Subjects_ of Study
Textiles, chemi_Galengineering, psychology,
water engineering, hydraulics, music
marketing, violin, veena.
MediGines, chemis-; astrology, geography.
Mechanical & civil engineering, surgery,
structural design, physics, martial arts,
military science.

Mercury
Venus
Jupiter
SaturlL
Rahil & Ketu
House Sub lords
who maintain
relationship with
9th house
1st house
2nd house
3rd house
4th house
Mathematics, engineering, astrology, purank
studies, logic, journalism, advertisement,
public speaking.
ChemistkY., electrotllcs, computer, agriculture,
veterinary, chemical engineering, textiles,
naval science, poetry, music, foreign
literature, sexology, nephrology,
ophthalmology.
Law, medicine, military science,
administration, instructional techniques,
philosophy, religion, politiGS, international
law, business management, banking,
astrology.
SubjectSJ of Study
Brain, head, psychiatry, yoga
Sound engg, linguistics, economics,
mathematics, dental and ophthalmology.
Electrical, electronics, communication,
computer science, printing technology,
physiGS, ENT, neurology, journalism.
Aguiculture engineering, automobile_
engineering, mechanical engineering,
machinery, civil engineering, geography,
home - science, cardiology, industrial
engineering.

Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of Nirayana Chari
Analysing Tenth House:
The Tenth house represents profession, honour, rewards, and the
quality of leadership, karma of the soul, government service,
administrative jobs, and achievement in the material, world. In this
chapter we will discuss how to analyse the lOthhouse to detemline
the native's profession.
When we analyse the horoscope to study the profession of a person,
we need to answer the following two sets of questions.
Set L Here the main questions are:

a. Will the person do a paid job or carry out his independent or
pa.rtJwrship business or live without a professional status?
b. Will he attain any status (fman~l 11, admi nistrative, or social)
through profession?
c. Will he continue the same job lbusiness throughout his life or
does it promise diversifications, development etc?
d. When will he start earning through service or business?
e; Will the native be able to carry out his professional activities
smoothly or face set - backs?
Set 2. Here the main questions are:
1. In which organisation (viz; the education department, health
deptt, railways, communication deptt, banking and financial
institutions etc.) the native will serve?
2. Will he be an industrialist, manufacturer, a trader, commission
agent, cloth merchant, a hotelier, a shipping magnate, a
publisher, street merchant, etc. ?
In short we need to find out the organisation in which the person
will have his professional activities to penorm, the nature of the
products he will deal etc.
In addition to the above two sets of questions, there are other
supplementary questions, relating service/ business that we need
to answer. For example, questions relating service matters include
transfer, pmmotion, suspension, termination, retirement,
reinstatement, change of service profiles etc. Similarly questions
relating business may include, products that will fetch more gains,
change of business place etc.

Houses that need to be analysed for Profession:
To provide answers to the bask two sets of questions we need to
analyse the following houses.
1. Ascendant: Natural inclination of the native need to match
with the potential of the lOthcusp. If the Ascendant Sub lord
establishes strong relationship with 6^ and the lOthhouse, the
person is more likely to be a servke person. If the Ascendant
Sub lord is strongly connected with 7lh and the lOthhouse, he
is likely to adopt business as his profession. Strong connection
with 5^ and 9^ without having any connection willi 6, 7, and
10, indicates that the native is likely to live his life without
any professional status. For the success in servke or business
the Ascendant Sub lord should be strong, as the potential of
any house is subordinate to the potential of the Ascendant. .
2. Tenth House: It is the principk house for analysing profession.
It forms the apex of the materialistic triplicity. The other two
houses being second and sixth. Strong connection of 1 O^'housc
with 6*^ indicates servke as profession and with 7^ as private
business.
3. Second House: The house of wealth or it indicates the earning
capacity of the native.
4. Sixth House: This is the house of service, labour; loans,
impediments and oppositions; it is also called the house of
gain being 12^to the 7^, which represents competitors.
5. Seventh House: It is generally considered as the house to
represent private business, trade and social relationships.
6. Eleventh House: The strength of this house and its lord and
its connection with Ascendant and lOthhouse represents the

success of the native in his profession.
7. Fourth and Ninth House: This helps to detennine the
education of the native.
Procedure to Determine Profession: While analysing profession
we need to know:
A) Whether the person is going to achieve financial and
administrative status or not?
B) Does the horoscope show development, diversification, and
change in profession?
C) Awards, punishments, ups and downs in professional career.
To detc:mllnc the Profession of the native, the following procedure
should be followed:
Step 1 : Analyse the potential of the Ascendant..
Step 2: Analyse the 5th house for intellectual capabilities and
attitude.
Step 3: Detelillline the educational status and nature of education.
Step 4: Analyse the Sign, Star, and Sub rising on the tenth house.
Step 5: Detennine the significations of the Sub lord of the Tenth
cusp. If the loth cusp is a Significator of 6th, it indicates that the
native will prefer service as a profession. If the 10th cusp is a
Significator of 7th house, it indi~tes the native may prefer private
or partnership business. If the 10th cusp is the Significator of 1st or
10th, the native may have his own dignified profession, i.e. selfentrepreneur-

Kalamsa Theory and Analysis of Nirayana Chart
Step 6: Detennine the potential of2, 6, 7 and 11 houses to detemline
the earning capacity and rise in the profession.
Step 7: Determine the planets and their lordships that are
significators of Tenth house.
Example: let us try to apply the above prin-ples to anlyse the
chart of figure3.8. This is the chart of an advocate:
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit”
Cusp Chart

Plane 1 Position
Nirayana Cusps

Step 1: Potential of the Ascendant: Sub lord of Ascendant is
Jupiter. It is in the Star of Mercury; lord of 6 and 9 in 11. Jupiter is
in the Sub of Saturn who is the Significator of 10th house. The
Signification of 6, l'O and 11 indicates dignified profession and
probably in legal profession because of Jupiter, Mercury' and 6th
house.
Step 2: Intellectual Capability: Sun is the Sub lord of the fifth
cusp. It is in Mercury's Star. Thus the Sub lord of the 5th cusp is
also SignifiGator of 6, 9 and 11. This indicates that the attitude of
the native is focussed on the significations of 6th and 9th house.
Both these houses relate to legal profession.
Step 3: Educational Status: Moon is the Sub lord of the 4th cusp
and is placed in 9th house. Moon has the Positional Status. Moon is
in Rahu's Star. Ralm represents Jupiter and Saturn. Thus the native
has enough potential for higher education. The Sub lord of the 9th
cusp is Jupiter and it is in Mercury Star. Thus Jupiter makes
connection with 11th house and also with 7fu house (Jupiter in 7)
indicates that he will do exceptionally well in higher education in
the subject of law.
Step 4: Tenth cusp rises in Venus - Jupiter - Venus, the planets that
rule the legal profession. In the horoscope both Jupiter and Venus
are significators of 6th house, (Venus in ketu Star is as good as in
Mercury's Star).
Step 5: Venus the Sub lord of the 10th cusp is in SagittaJiius Sign.
Venus is in Ketu's Star. Ketu is placed in 8th house (House of
criminality). This means the area of concentration of professionaL
activities may be court dealing with criminal cases. Ketu represents
Mercury' in Virgo. Mercury' itself is in SagittaJiius and lord of 6, 9
and placed in 11.
Step 6: Sub lord of the 2nd will indicate the financial status. Sub
lord of the 2nd is Saturn. It is in Sun Star, which is in 10th house.

Step 7: 6^ cusp Sub lord is Venus. Venus has the positional status
and is Significator of 6 and 11. These significations of 2nd and 6^
cusp promise a high finan~al status.
All the above factors clearly justify the native's adopting a dignified
profession and also show that he must be doing extremely well in
his profession.
Analysing the Eleventh House:
This house is traditionally known as the house of fulfilment of
one's desires, gain or profit, political status, friends, elder co-born,
satisfaction of personal needs, hopes.
The Kalamsa lord of this Cusp, the Sign in which it is placed; its
Nakshatra lord, the Sign and the house occupied by the Nakshatra
lord would detail how the desires of the native would be fulfilled.
Potential of the Eleventh House: We generally consider that the
house has excellent potential, if it is the Significator of houses 1,3,
5,9 and 11, and very weak if it establishes relationship with 4, 7, 8
and 12 houses from its own house. While considering the strength
of the lltlhouse with respect to the Ascendant we should remember
that llthhouse becoming Significator of 6^ house, which is to
lllh, would indicate success to the native in competitions,
significations of lath house, which is 12^to 11th, would enable to
gain name and fame, rewards etc. If the Kalamsa lord of the 11th
cusp is a Significator of 1 and 8, it may indicate the fulfilment of
desire of the native in committing suicide. signifiGlltions of the
Kalamsa lord of9, 1 1 and 12houses indicate the fulfilment of desires
of the native in the field of research or settling abroad.
Analysing the behaviour of the Eleventh house indicates that to
fulfill one's ambitions, the KaJamsa or Sub lord of the Eleventh

Cusp should have the positional status or in other words it should
be the Significatol'_of the 11th house. If it is also the Significator of
1 and 10, the native will in general achieve success, name and fame.
The quantum and quality of results in the fields in which the
significations of the nth Cusp Kalamsa lord ensures success is
dependent on the principle cusp of the relev. anf aspect of life and
the potential of the Ascendant.. For example, sometimes we fmd
that the Kalamsa lord of the nth cusp is Significator of l, 6 and 11.
We jump to the conclusion that the native will achieve unique
success in the fields of sports/games or competitions. It will be
nothing short of a far - fetched fantasy. To gain unique success in
the fields of sports, arts and culture etc. it is imperative that the
potential of the 5th house and the Ascendant should be excellent.. In
other words, the significations of the 11th cusp are only indicative
of the fulfilment of desires of the native with regard to the
signiflfations of the house of whidl the Kalamsa lord of the nth
cusp becomes the Significator. How much the person will achieve
is to bejudged from the potential of the Ascendant and the relevant
cusps. However, if the 11th cusp does not attain the significations
of a cusp and also is not the Significator of the 1 1th cusp, it would
indicate that the efforts of the native would go in vain. Many a
times persons who possess courage, confidence, a high level of
intellectual power, holds a number of degrees but no success in the
profession or no success in earning money. Look into the Kalamsa
lord of the Eleventh cusp; you will get answer to this.
Analysing the Twelfth House:
This house represents the end of all activities of one's life, death,
expenditures, foreign travel, imprisonment, hospitalization,
renunciation, the pleasures of bed, and all kinds of misfortune. It
also signifies how the individual will discharge his debt. It is known
as the house of secret activities and enemies.

Often the Astrologers frighten their clients, when they fmd a number
of planets in the 12th house or s* house either in the Natal chart or
in Transit.. Unfortunately in some cases the native do experience
bad results and this makes peopk to believe in their predktions.
Whether a person wilL lose, or be imprisoned or succeed in
discovering hitherto unknown should be seen by analysing the
Kalamsa lord of the 12th cusp for its detailed significations i.e.
everything for whkh the 12lh house stands for, will depend upon:
1. Sign, Nakshatra and Kalamsa lord rising on the 12th cusp.
How the planets co-ruling the cusp are declaring their results
in the parti(;;lllarhoroscope. For example, if the 12th cusp is
rising in Sagittarius 11 degree 56 minutes IS seconds, Jupiter,
Ketu and Mercuqr will rule it. Let Jupiter be in Libra and in
the Star of Mars ruler of 4 and 11 in the horoscope; Ketu in
Taurus be in the Star of Moon in the s* house and Mercuqr in
Capricorn in the Star of Moon in the s* house. This may
indicate that the planets co-ruling are under the influence of
Venus and Saturn as Sign Lords and their strong connection
to s* house would force the native to succeed in his activities
of occult sciences whi~ he will use for the benefit of the
public since Moon will rule the 7th house.
2. The Kalamsa lord as a planet, the Sign it occupies; its Star
lord as a planet, the Sign and the house occupied by the Star
lord would indicate the potential of the 12th house in detail..
The significations of the 12th Kalamsa lord would indicate the ways
by which the person will lose or gain. If the Sub lord of the 12th
cusp is a Significator of 2nd or 11th house in a horoscope, it ensures
that the native may not lose his money to others or the native may
gain from overseas or through research works. Strong significations
of the 12th cusp Sub lord with 3rd house may indicate the person
leaving his home place and if it is at the same time connected to the
11th house, it would detail for benefit.. If the Kalamsa lord of the

12th house has the positional status and is also the Significator of 3
and 8, it may lead to his:
i. Imprisonment or
ii. Research in the field of occult sciences.
Which will happen, has to be seen in consonance with the potential
of the Ascendant and other cusps. For a person to suffer
imprisonment and thus damage in reputation, 10th cuspal Sub lord
should establish connections with 8 or 12. For gaining name and
fame in the field of research, the 12th house needs to establish
connection willi land 10.
To con-ude, we may say that we need to analyse and find out
the significations of each cusp but the results- should always be
de— ared by synthesizing the potential of the relevant cusps and
most importantly the potential of the Ascendant, the potential
of the Dasa pehiods and Transit..
Timing Events.:. The Kalamsa or Sub Theory has tremendously
increased the predktive efficacy of the Astrologers in timing event..
This is because:
1. It expects the Astrologer to decide categorically the Primary
house and other relevant houses that need to take part in
enacting an event..
2. The promise of the event is clearly shown by the significations
of the Primary cusp. If the Sub lord of the Primary Cusp is
the Significator ofthat cusp or any of the supporting cusps,
then the event is promised.
3. The astrologer is able to assess the expected period in whkh
the event if promised, is likely to happen from the
significations of the Primary cusp. For exampla; for timing

death, the expected period is based on the assessment of span
of life.
4. Depending upon the estimated period, the Astrologer is able
to decide the joint periods of the planets, which are fruitful
significators of the relevant cusps. (Fruitful significators means
those significators who are in the Sub of a planet who Signifies
supporting houses). Suppose a planet A is in the Star of B
who is placed in 7. Let it be in the Sub of C who is placed in
6. Now if C has the positional status (C in its own Star is as
good as having positional status) then A will not be a fruitful
Significator for maniage but will be a fruitful Signiflli:atorfor
divorce. But if C though placed- in 6 but does not have the
positional status and its Star lord, let it be D, is placed in 5 or
...7 or 11 then it will be considered as a fruitful Significator for
marriage but not for divorce. It should, however, be
remembered that a Bhukti cannot provide the result of a
house unless the Dasa lord allows it. Similarly the Antara
cannot provide what Bhukti does not allow. In other words,
the joint period rulers provide results, of the houses for
which they are the common significators or at least the
Dasa period or the Bhukti period should not be the
Signiticator of detrimental houses for which the Antara
period has to give the reswt.
5. If the transit of thejoint period rulers and luminaries, Sun and
Moon agrees, the Astrologer is able to specifically fix the Date,
Month and Year in whkh the event will take place.
Philosophy behind Grouping of Houses for
Various Events:
Each house refers to apartkulaL aspect of native's life. For example;
5th house stands for magnetic attractions, romantic affairs, sports

activities, art & culture, creative pursuits, childbirth or procreation.
Now if we want to examine whether the native is capable to
procreate or not we look to the significations of the kalamsa or Sub
lord of the 5th house. The fifth house is then said to be the Primarycusp for childbi:t:th. If the kalamsa or Sub lord of the fifth house is
a Signifiaator of 2nd house (addition in family) or 11th house
(fulfilment of desire through procreation) or the houses, which are
favourable to the 5th house, we declare that the native is potent to
produce a child. The houses 2 and 11, therefore, become the
supporting houses. Based on this philosophy, the grouping of houses
is done for various events. This is shown below for some imponant
events.
House significators: In Kalamsa Theory, how a planet behaves
has already been explained in the chapter, "Kalamsa Theory and
Planets Behaviour". Each planet thus becomes SignifiGator of a
house or houses as per its Stellar, Positional and Sub - level status.
House significators can thus be listed as follows:

1. The planets in the Nakshatra or Star of the planets positioned
in the house.
2. Occupants of the house if they have Positional status.
3. Planets in the Star of the lord of the house.
4. Lord of the house if no planet is placed in the house and no
planet is in the Star of the Lord of the house.
5. If the Sub-lord of a cusp has the Positional status, it becomes
a strong Significator of that cusp.
Example: Refer Fig 3.4. Suppose we want to find the significators
of 2nd house. Moon and Mars are the occupants of the 2nd house.
Check if there is any Planet in the Star of Moon or in the Star of
Mars. We fmd that there is no Planet in the Star of Moon or Mars.
This means that bofu Moon and Mars have the positional status.
Thus Moon and Mars have the potential to give the results of 2nd
house. They, therefore, are said to be the significators of 2nd house.
Now Jupiter is the lord of the 2nd house and Venus is in the Star of
Jupiter. Thus Venus also becomes the significator of 2nd house. But
as Jupiter has no positional status it will not become the significator
of 2nd house though it is the lord of the 2nd house. However in this
particular exampla. -Jupiter is in Venus star and Venus is in Jupiter
star. Thus Jupiter will be said to have positional status as such it
will also become the significator of 2nd house.
Suppose we want to fmd out the significators of a house which is
vacant.. Then first we have to check if there is any Planet in the Star
of the lord of the house or not- For example in fig 3.4 we fmd that
7th house is vacant.. Its lord is Venus. Now Jupiter is in the Star of
Venus. Thus Jupiter becomes the Signifili:ator of 7th house. In this
parti<dllar exampla. -Jupiter & Venus are in the stars of each other.
So Venus attains positional status becomes the significator of 7th
house. If there were no Planet in the Star of the lord of the house
then the lord of the house would have become the significator of
the house.

Let us take the case of 5th house which is vacant.. Its lord is Jupiter.
Since Venus is in the Star of Jupiter it becomes the significator of
5th house. Now Mars is the Sub lord of 5th cusp. Since Mars has the
positional status Mars will also become the significator of the 5th
house.

Chapter 4
Philosophy Behind
Cuspal Interlinks Theory
The concept of Cuspal Inte:rlinks is the concept of our ancient Nadi
Astrology. The deep and critical analysis of various verses ofNadi
Astrology —early reveals that to declare, what is promised for the
native in the various aspects of life the Nadi Astrologers used the
Ascendant and other cusps Nadiamsa or Navamsa positions and
their links with the Nadiamsa or Navamsa positions rising on other
houses. (Nadiamsa is the 150th part of the Sign; Navamsa is the 9th
p- of a Sign). Similarly the behaviour of a planet and its results in
Vimsottari Dasa periods were announced on the basis of the
Nadiamsa or Navamsa in whkh a planet is placed and the links the
planets Nadiamsa or Navamsa establishes with cuspal Nadiamsa
or Navamsa. The planetary positions played a secondary and
sometimes an in signifilllintrole.
There is even a perfect correspondence between the concept of
Chandra-kala Nadi and the Shodas Verga of Parasam. The very
word "Chandra-kala" represents its Sankhya (number) '16'. If one
prepares a table of Shodas Vergas of a Sign, the total number of
Sub-divisions will be 150. It is a different matter that due to
cons-ous or unconscious errors, the application of Sub-divisions
in the hands of modem Astrologers looks to be little unscientific.
Sub-divisions of the Sign, Nakshatra or even Kalamsa do not
create a division or a part or a separation but only define the
position of the planet or a cusp as accurately as possible. The
smaller the division, the greater is its impact in delineating the

nativity in more specific terms. Creation of separate Verga
charts.. *is a dichotomy and an illusion. The chart needs, however,
to show the positions ofplaT.letilUldcusps indicating the very nature
of their placement along with the Sub-divisions to allow .the
Astrologer to look into the details of the linkages they establish.
Need to Switch Over to Sub-Sub and Cuspal
Interlink Theory:
While declaning results on the basis of Navamsa concept, the
promoters of thd Navamsa Theory themselves felt that Navamsa
divisiorl needs further divisions. We have'now two sets of results,
one pertaining to the first half of the Navamsa and the other
pertaining to the second half of the Nav;amsa. And these two sets
sometimes show almost diametrically opposite results.
In Kalamsa or Sub Theory the Sub lord of the cusp and the Sub
lord of the planet are considered Supremo. The result, for example;
the physical and mental characteristics of the native, his health and
longevity are announced as per their Stellar and Positional status,
the Sign occupied by the Sub lord, the Sign and house occupied by
the Star lord. Now the arc of the Sub lords of the Ascendant can
vary between 40 minutes to 2 deg. 13 min. 20 secs. These amounts
to a time range of say 3 minutes to 9 minutes. This means:
a) All the persons born between this time intervals will and should
have the same physiw and mental charactecistic.s, health status
and even longevity. This is because within this range of time,
the Sub lord of the Ascendant will in most cases rema.in in the
same Sign and same Star. Similarly its Star lord will continue
to be in the same Sign and even in the same house. The
significations of the Sub lord based on its stellar and positional
status are not going to change in almost all the cases.

b) We know that the Sub lord is nothing but the 9th part of a
Nakshatra. Each Sign contains 2 and a Quarter of aNakshatra.
Thus, for the same Ascendant there are more than two
possibilities of a planet to come as the Sub lord of the
Ascendant.. Since the planetary significations of the Sub lord
are not going to show a significant change, it means that all
those born with the same Sub lord in the same Ascendant will
have the same health and longevity status.
c) The promise of any cusp in the horoscope is analysed through
the planetary significations of the Sub lord. It again means
that the persons born with the same Sub lord, say, of the 10th
house will have the same type of profession.
d) Results of Dasa pehiods are declared using the planetary
significations i.e. as per the planets Stellar, Positional and Sub
level status. Many a time the Astrologers find that
i A planet that is a Significator of the 6th house gives
marriage or unites the couple after separation,
ii. A planet that is the Significator of 1 and 8 in place of
giving a fatal accident provide results like rise in
professional status.
in A planet Significator of 5 and 9 provide the service or
job to the native rather than he losing hisjob.
Strangely to justify such results, some learned Astrologers have
put forward a Theory under the title "Sub lord diverts Dasa lord".
The crux of this Theory is that the Sub lord of the cusp does not
allow the Dasa lord to provide results as per its Stellar or Positional
status because the Sub lord is not the Significator of that cusp; and
being the Significator of other cusps forces the Dasa lord to give
contrary results. Just think for a moment, if the 8th cuspal Sub
lord is not allowing any planet to give results, of the 8th house,
will the man ever die? The theory of diversion, I think, cannot

be collaborated by any stretch of imagination. Sub of a cusp is
only defining a particular space in the mundane sphere, the lordship
of which is allotted to the planet by the principle of correspondence
between the energy content of the Zodiacal degrees and the
concerned planet..
There is no Theory that suggests the Zodiacal degrees or their lords
have the capability of diverting the influence of other planets. I am
reminded of the great metaphysical poet Dryden, who said,
"Whatever betides, by destiny it is done:
And better bear like men than vainly seek to shun. "
We, no doubt, have to account for categorically and specifically
the behaviour of planets and their close relationship with the destiny
of an individual, who is unique and thus his horoscope has to be
unique.
In Nadi Astrology each Sign is divided into 150Amsas. Each Amsa
is then divided into two parts called Purva (former) Bhagya & Dttara
(later) Bhagya. The Purva and Dttara Bhagyas of the same Amsas
produce entirely different types of results. These 150 parts of a
Sign called Nadiamsas are of unequal areas. The smallest Nadiamsa
is of 0 deg. lmin. 40 sees. And the largest Nadiamsa is of 0 deg. 30
min. Taking into consideration that the Zodiac is divided on the
basis of three principles Le. Law of Polarity, Law of Tattwa and
Law of Mode of Action; they gave a scheme for deciding whidl
Nadiamsa will rise in apartkular Sign. Starting with 0 degree Aries,
which is a positive and moveable Sign they said the counting, should
be from lto 150. Since Taurus is a negative and fixed Sign, it thus
forms the counter part of Aries - the male Sign, the counting should
be from 150 to l.The third Sign Gemini is a positive but common.
In other words it is like the child who forms a bridge between father
and mother. The counting should start from 76 to 150 (giving
preference to father) and then from 1 to 75 (giving the right to

mother). It may also correspond to the Principle ofHora, in which
the first Hora in male Sign is that of Sun and the 2nd Hora is that of
Moon. The Signification of each Nadiamsa that rises on the
Ascendant was declared clearly emphasizing the principle that the
study of the Ascendant in fact is the study of the whole, horoscope.
All the above factors clearly establish that we need to have a
horoscope, whicll should represent as closely as possible a
particular individual.. The behaviour of planets, and division of
the Sign that rises on the Ascendant and other cusps should be
linked with the destiny ofthe individual. Planetary positions in
the Rashi or Bhava chart cannot be said to reveal the destiny of
the individual which is clothed in the Amsa divisions like
Nakshatra, Kalamsa and Sub-Sub that rise on the Ascendant
and other houses. We therefore, need to devise an Astrological
system to take the above into consideration. This we call as
Sub-Sub a~d Cuspal Interlinks Theory.
Sub-Sub Division of the Zodiac:
We have already discussed in earlier chapter "Development of
Nakshatra and Kalamsa Theory", how the arc of Nakshatra i.e. 13
deg. 20 min. is divided into 9 unequal parts. Each part is allotted
the ruler ship of a planet in the order, which is followed in Vimsottari
Dasa. The arc allotted to each part is in propo:t:tionto the number of
years allotted to its lord in Vimsottari Dasa. This part we said is
called Kalamsa or Sub and its ruler is called Kalamsa lord or Sub
lord. The smallest arc in this division is of 40 min. and the largest
is 2 deg. 13 min. 20 secs.
To approach to the Nadi concept of division i.e. Nadiamsa we need
to divide each Sub further into 9 parts. Each part being allotted the
arc in proportion to the number of years allotted to its lord in
Vimsottari Dasa. This Sub division of the Sub is called Sub-Sub

Philosophy Behind Cuspal Interlinks Theory
and its lord is called the Sub-Sub lord.
Calculation of Sub-Sub in each Sub:
it is based on the following fonnula:
No. of years allotted to a planet
Sub-Sub Area = x Sub Area
For exampla; suppose we want to calculate the Sub-Sub area of
Sun in Sun Sub, it will be done as follows:
Sub-Sub of Sun in Sun Sub = x 40'
Similarly,
Sub- Sub of Venus in Venus Sub
sees.
= 22.2 minutes.
Appendix II provides the details of each Sub-Sub in various- -Subs.

Now, see the smallest Nadiamsa is of I min 40 secs and the largest
is of 30 minutes. Here in our division into Sub-Sub, the smallest
Sub-Sub is of Sun Sub-Sub in Sun Sub, that is of 2 mins, and the
largest Sub-Sub is of Venus Sub-Sub in Venus Sub that is 22.2
minutes. These divisions have thus brought us very close to the
Nadiamsa concept and should probably help to delineate the
nativity more accurately and specifically. The only danger is
that we need to have a very accurate horoscope. The smallest
arc being of 2 minutes indicate that the birth time in many
cases need to be accurate with in 8 secs of time. (Because the
Ascendant degrees rising in the eastern horizon or the sidereal
time changes by approximately 1 5 seconds for every 1 second
change of time).
Taking clue from Nadiamsa theory, we can also Sub divide the.
Sub-Sub arc into two parts to account for male and female births.
For male births, the Sub-Sub arc should rise in first half if the
Ascendant rises in male Sign and in 2nd half if the Ascendant
dses in female Sign. Similarly, for female bitths, the Sub-Sub
arc should rise in first half if the Ascendant rises in female Sign
and in 2nd half if the Ascendant rises in male Sign. Thus this
enables us to reduce the time gap between individual births to be
between approximately 4 seconds to about 45 seconds. This time
gap itself gets off set by the fact that the other cuspal positions
change within this time gap itself and thus almost accounts for
uniqueness of birth time of the individual.
Note: For detailed discussion on sex of the native please refer
to chapter 12.
This advantage of reduction in time gap between births would be
lost if we do continue to use planetary significations to delineate
the promise of a cusp or the results of Dasa period lords. For this
we need to switch over to the concept of cuspal significations.

Nadiamsa and Navamsa theory was based on the prin~ple that
planets give results as per the Nakshatra in which they are placed
and the house results of the planet depends upon its Nakshatra rising
in houses. The qualification and specification of the result was
studied from its Navamsa which would be rising in some house
positions. From this the theory of cuspal Interlinks is developed.
This theory envisages that the promise of a cusp is de~ared as
per its.planetaLy and cuspal significations. Similarly the planet
offers resultsuas per its.planetaLy and cuspal. significations. This
is explained in next chapter.

Chapter 5
Cuspal Interlinks
and their Application
Cuspal Inteclinks Theory enables an Astrologer to analyse a
horoscope by making it to look unique and linked with destiny of
the native. The quantum and quality of results of any house is limited
and specified as per the linkages established by the cuspal co-rulers
of a cusp with other cusps. Each cusp rises in a Sign, Star, Sub and
Sub-Sub. Their lords are called the co-rulers of the cusp.
The Star, Sub and Sub-Sub arc have defined rulers. The Sub-Sub
arc ruler is called the Sub-Sub lord. This Sub-Sub lord is a planet
and as per its longitude at the time of birth will be in a Star, Sub and
Sub-Sub. The Star lord, Sub lord and Sub-Sub lord ofthe planet
may appear in some cuspal positions as Sign, Star or Sub or
Sub-Sub say 1, 9 and 10 cusps. The planet is then said to have
established links with those cusps. We also take the occupied
position of the Star lord whether it has positional status or not.
The Sub and Sub-Sub lord's occupied positions are taken only
if they have positional status. The planet itself may be appearing
in any cuspal position say 3. We say that the 3rd cusp has established
relationship with cusps 1, 9 and 10 or with those cusps where the
Star; Sub or Sub-Sub lords of the planet appear in the Bhava chart.
This is what we mean by cuspallinks.
The analysis of a horoscope in Cuspal Interlinks Theory is based
on the following:

1. The Potential aqd Promise of a cusp is detennined thrqugh
the links that tHe Sub-Sub lord of a cusp establishes through
its Star lord. Sub lord or Sub-Sub lord wit- other cusps.
2. Planets behaviour is analysed as follows:
A. Each house rises in a Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub. The
planet will offer the results of the houses, with whose
Sign, Star, Sub or Sub-Sub; the planet has established
links, through its Star lord. The Sub lord of the Planet
will qualify the result of the houses linked by the Planet
through its Star lord. The end result stands qualified by
the Sub-Sub lord of the Planet.. This is called the Dasa
Potential of the planet..
B. The planet whose behaviour is under study may appear
as Sign or Star, or Sub or Sub-Sub lord in a cusp. This
planet will influence the significations of other cusps with
whose Sign, Star, Sub or Sub-Sub it has established links
through its Star lord. The influence on other cusps will
be in accordance with the nature of the Planet as modified
by the Sign in whidl it is placed as well as the Sign that
rises on the cusp where this Planet has appeared as Sign
or Star or Sub or Sub-Sub lord.
C. The planets behaviour is considered to be Individualistic..
That is the nature of the planet is subject to modifiGation
only by the actual Zodiacal degree in whidl the planet is
placed at the time of birth or an event and also during its
Transit in subsequent period. Retrogression, Combustion
or Aspects are not considered to influence the behaviour_
of the planet..
D. If a planet has the positional status, its house position
may be considered along with its appearance in cuspal

positions. The planet will offer the result of these houses
also along with the results of the houses whkh it has to
offer as per its linkages through its Star lord.
A Planet who has positional status may be regarded
as if it is in its. own Star. The Sub lord of the Planet
will then qualify the results- of the houses signified by
virtue of the positional status of the Planet.
Example: Suppose Jup has positional status in a
horoscope. Let Jup be placed in 10lb Bhava. Let it be the
Sign lord of 2 and 5, Sub lord of 7 and Sub-Sub lord of
1L Thus Jup becomes the significator of 2,5, 7, 10 and
11 by virtue of its positional status. Now let Jup be in the
Sub of Sat who appears in 4,5, 6, 9, 10. The results of
houses 2, 5, 7, 10 and 11 will be qualified by 4, 5, 6, 9,
Suppose we are analysing the horoscope for timing
marnage. Since Jup is significator of 5, 7 and 11 at Star
level it should give us a feeling that Jup is very good
planet for marnage. But see Jup's Sub appears in 4, 6
and 10 whidl negate the significations of 5, 7 and 1L
Yes Sat does also appear in 5 whkh is a favourable
position for houses 5,7 and 11 in the context ofmaniage.
So even if marriage takes place it is beset with the
impending danger of separation.
Now Jup is significator of 2, 10 and 11 at star level and
6 and 10 at Sub level.. This should pro— e to be a good
period for profession. But then Sat also appears in 5 and
9 whidl are 8th and 12th from loth house. Thus the native
will enjoy the mixed results of the loth house.

However what we need to remember is that if the Sub
lord appears in the cuspal position which is one of the
cusps which will take part in enacting the event then it
will not be said to negate the Star lord position. For
example suppose a Planet who has the positional status
appears in 7th cusp. Let its Sub lord be in 2nd cusp which
is 8th house from 7th cusp. Now if we are looking for the
events like death of partner or the birth of the 2nd child
then this will allow the events to happen. No negation.
But if we are looking for the enactment of mauiage this
planet will not cause the event to happen.
For example, let Jup who has the positional status be
lord of the 11th cusp. As such it is supposed to provide
the result of the 11th cusp. Its sub lord's appearance in
lath cusp will cause for the negation of the 11th cusp that
is fulfilment of ambitions. But if we are looking for the
promotion in profession then this type of linkage has to
be read as fulfilment of ambition by way of profession.
Sub lord's appearance in cuspal positions which favour
as well as which are unfavourable will provide results
with added probl<iUlls
Note: In Stellar Astrology the qualification of the result,
is the prerogative ofthe Sub lord only. If a planet is linked
to , say, through its Star lord to cusps 6 as well as 7th it
does not mean that this planet is not favourable for the
events of the 7th cusp. It only in<fu:atesthat the planet is
capable to provide the results of both the 6th as well as
the 7th house. The results of these houses will be qualified
by its Sub lord's position with respect to the 6th cusp and
7th cusp. Suppose the Sub lord appears in 5th cusp then it
will favour the events like marriage but is detrimental to
service prospects.

E. The behaviour of Rahu and Ketu has been discussed in
chapter "Planets Behaviour in Kalamsa Theory". Rahu
or Ketu in Cuspal Intelilink theory offers results during
its period as follows:
1 . Rahu in the Star of a planet will offer the results of
the house occupied by its Star lord and also of the
houses where its Star lord appears as Sign, Star,
Sub or Sub-Sub lord.
2. Rahu as per its Sign lord will offer the results of the
houses where its Sign lord's Star lord is posited and
also the houses where the Star lord of its Sign lord
appears as Sign, Star, Sub or Sub-Sub.
3. Rahu as per its Star lord will offer the results of the
houses where its Star lord's Star lord is posited and
also of the houses where the Star lord's Star lord
appears as Sign, Star, Sub or Sub-Sub.
4. If RahWK.etuhas positional status it will offer the
results of the houses where RahulKetu appears as
Star or Sub or Sub-Sub lord and also the House
occupied by RahlJlKetu.
Similarly any planet in the Star of Rahu or Ketti!
will be considered as if it is in (a) Rahu or Ketu
Star (b) Star of Sign lord of Rahu or Ketu and (c)
Star of Star lord of Rhau and Ketu.
Note: PriJlciple of Nakshatral. Stellar theory is based on
the following fundamental concepts:
1. Each speciflG.area of the Zodiac represents a specific
energy content represented by the static (in the natural
zodiac) and dynamic., significations (in the concerned
natal chart). Since in stellar systems, Rahu and Ketu are

treated as planets, so they are also alloted specif!- areas
in the Zodiac. As far as Zodiac areas are concerned, Rahu
and Ketu only represent themselY_es, for static
significations.
2. Planet offers result of the areas of the Zodiac as per their
star lords' position. House cusps are only divisions of
space at the background of the Zo— e.
3. Suppose a planet is in the star of Moon, it will only hit at
the cuspat positions where Moon appears. Now if in the
chart Moon is represented by Rahu or Ketu, the planpt is
not said to be hitting the cuspal positions where Rahu or
Ketu appears.
Suppose a Planet is in Tauras Sign and Moon Star.
The Planet's nature is modified by the influence of
Venus and the sub influence ofMoon. Suppose Moon
in the chart is represented by Rahu or Ketu, the Planet
cannot be said to be under the influence of Rahu or
Ketu. The influence on the Planet is as per its Zodiacal
position. The cuspaJ positions where Moon appears
are the mundane positions which indicate the areas
where the influence of the planet will be observed.
4. Rahu and Ketu are intersection points and are said to
absorb the energy contents (static, as well as dynamic) of
the planets that represent those intersection points by Sign
and Star. Thus any planet in RahWKetu Star is taken to
be in the Star of the planets that RallJu Ketu represent..
Suppose a Planet is in Ketu Star. Let Ketu represent
Moon. The Planet is then under the influence of the
sign lord in which the Planet is placed and the sub
influence of Ketu. However the Planet will be said to
be linked to the mundane positions where Ketu

appears as well as where the planets that Ketu
represents appear.
Potential of a Cusp:
it has two meanings:
1. It represents the quantum of energy content apportioned to
the Cusp as per the moment of Birth or an event.. It is measured
by synthesizing the attributes of the planets co-ruling the SubSub arc of the Cusp. The Sub-Sub arc rising ob. the Ascendant
in a partili: lllar Sign, Star and Sub detennines the overall static
Potential of the native. This is based on his past Karmas. Based
on this potential, the other cuspal positions are formed which
rise in a partkular Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub. The static
potential of all other cusps is thus subordinate to the potential
of the Ascendant..
2. The dynamic potential of a cusp is indicated by the
significations of planets co-ruling the cusp at the time of birth.
3. The Sub-Sub arc lord will establish links with other cuspal
positions through its Star or Sub or Sub-Sub. These linkages
indicate how the native is going to channelise his energy for
outward expression or development during his lifetime. In
other words it represents the capacity of the native to enjoy or
suffer through the significations of the houses with which it
has established links. Favourable. ..houses are taken as 1,3, 5,
9, and 11 from a cusp under consideration. House 2, 6 and l'O
are taken as neutral houses, and houses 4, 7, 8 and 12 are
taken as an adverse houses.
If the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord fails to establish any link with a
cusp, it means the nature has in general prohibited the native to

enjoy the significations of that house or we may say the potential
of the Ascendant with respect to that cusp is very weak.
Promise of a Cusp:
The horoscope of a native is a complete portrait that reveals the
native's unalterable past, present, and its probable future. The native
is born off a Father and a Mother; two very specific individuals.
The native's horoscope has thus to clearly indi'late his/her lineage
and heredita:qr. Thus the fourthLninth houses of the native should
indicate the Ascendants and Moon positions of Mother and Father
respectively. Similarly in future if he/she is destined to marry and
have a child, the 7th and 5th houses of the chart should reveal the
Ascendants and Moon positions of the partner and the first child
respectively. In fact, each Cusp of the horoscope has been formed
as per degree rising on the Ascendant at the moment of birth and
reveals not only what directly relates to the Ascendant but also
what for each cusp stands for the native's relations or other aspects.
The analysis of a cusp to detemline what it promises has to be done
keeping in mind the principle "What for we are analysing the cusp.
" Let us try to expla.in this through an example;
Suppose, we are to analyse the 5th cusp in the horoscope to fmd
answers to the following questions:
1. Can the Native produce a child?
2. Will the Native get a child?
3. Will the Native achieve success in arts & culture or sports?
Suppose, the Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp has established links
with 1, 3, 7 and 9th houses through its Star lord. This linkage is
favourable for the fifth cusp and thus details for the native's
capability to procreate. But will the native get a child? To get a

child it is essential that the 5th cusp should be linked to second
house (addition in family) or nth cusp (fulfilment of desire through
the birth of a child). However if the Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp
involves the n jh house through its Star lord and commits to 2nd
cusp through its Sub lord then the native will possess the procreative
power. The native, of course, can takepan in sports, if the Ascendant
Sub-Sub lord also maintains some links with 5th cusp.
The fifth cusp appears to have a strong potential.. But it promises
impediments to the Native's professional career because 5th house
is 8th to the 10th and its Signification of 9th further cause
complications being 12th to 10th
In other words we may say that the promise of a cusp is analysed as
follows:
The Star lord linkages of the Sub-Sub lord of a cusp indicate the
promise. Linkages with cuspalfBhava positions 4,7, 8 and 12 from
the cusp under study indi<mte adverse potentiaL. This principle
should, however, be not applied to the study of the Ascendant
because Ascendant has special meanings for houses 4, 7, 8 and 12.
This point will be clarified in Subsequent chapters.
The Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the cusp as per its cuspal
positionslBhava signifi<mtions will qualify or specify the promise
in respect of each aspect of the cusp.
The Sub-Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the cusp indicates the end
result in respect of the promise for the particular_aspect of the cusp.
The Sub-Sub lord's position is to be taken with respect to the Star
lord position to reveal the positiveness or negativeness of the result
in the end.
To conclude we may say, the promise of a cusp has always to be
studied with respect to a parti<mlar aspect.. The above potential of
the 5th cusp promises an excellent life pattern of the first child; it
promises excellent potency of the native but does not promise child
if it is not linked with 2nd cusp through its Sub lord.

Nature & Significance of Cuspal Links:
In order to understand the nature and Significance of Cuspal Links,
we need to explain the following terms:
1. Linking Planet: A planet may establish a link with a cusp
through its Star, Sub or Sub-Sub lords. The planet is then said
to be the linking planet for that cusp. The strength of the
linking planet depends upon its own nature and its position in
a Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub in the horoscope. The Zodiacal
positions of the planets indi'kate, with what capabilities or
charactemstios our soul has incarnated.
2. Linking Cusp: As per the degree rising on the Ascendant at
the time of birth, other Cuspal positions are formed. These
CuspaJ positions thus bear direct linkage to our Destiny. Each
Cuspal position will indi'kate Sign, Star, Sub or Sub-Sub lords.
Any of these lords may appear as the linking planet for a cusp.
The cusp is then called the linking cusp. The significations
of the Linking Cusp will derive or influence the significations
of the Linked Cusp through the Linking Planet.. That is, the
Linking Planet acts as a doer or agent who operates as per its
energy content under the direction of the Linking Cusp's
significations and the Sign/StaJ: etc. rising on the LiDking Cusp.
3. Linked Cusp: Any planet, whose Star or Sub or Sub-Sub lord
appears in a cusp, then that cusp is called the linked cusp for
that planet.. The nature of results, which the native will
expeliience in life, will be as per the Linked Cusp, the Linking
Planet and Linking Cusp.
Nature of Links:
A planet can establish link with a cusp as follows:

1 . through its Star lord.
2. through its Sub lord.
3. through its Sub-Sub lord.
4. The planet may itself appear as the Sign or Star or Sub,
or Sub-Sub lord of more than one cusp. The planet is
then said to be linked to all these cusps if it has the
positional status.
Significance of Linkage through Star Lord: It indicates the area
of concentration of linking planets behaviour- Linking planet has
to penorm the following roles:
a. To provide results during its Dasa periods.
b. To influence the significations of the Linked Cusp.
c. To decide the Potential and Promise of the Linking Cusp.
The role, the planet plays during Dasa periods is called its Dasa
Potential. This linkage indicates that the planet during its period
will concentrate its effect on the Linked Cusp. In other words, the
linking planet as per its own energy content and through the
significations of the Linking Cusp, in which the planet appears,
will indicate the nature of results as per the Linked Cusp. The nature
of results will be as per the significations of the Linked Cusp, which,
however, is subjected to the role - played by the Sub lord and SubSub lord of the Linking Planet as per their links in the horoscope.
The role - played by the planet as specified above in 'h' and 'c' are
ofpermanent nature. Linking Planet's influence on the Linked Cusp
helps us to answer the questions like:
1. How marriage will take place - Linked Cusp 7.
2. What Subjects for higher study one will choose? - Linked
Cusp 9.

3. Sources of income - Linked Cusp 2.
4. Service or business. - Linked Cusps 6, 7 - Linking Cusp 10
5. Mode of death - Linking Cusp 8 and the mode of death will
be as per Linked Cusps.
6. Profession as per education - Linked Cusp 6, 7 or 10 - Linking
Cusp 4 or 9.
The role under 'c' indicates the capacity of the native to enjoy the
directly or indirectly related significations of the Linking Cusp.
Significance of the Linkage through Sub Lord: The Sub lord of
the linking planet (means linking planet will be in a particulac Star
& Sub) will appear in some Cuspal positions either as Sign lord or
Star lord or Sub lord or Sub-Sub lord. If it does not appear in any
CuspaJ position, then we have to take its residential position if it
has the positional status. If it does not have the positional status
then we have to take the house occupied by its star lord in the
Bhava Chart. The role played by the Sub lord is of dual nature.
1. It qualifies the nature of the result of the Linking Planet.. It
may according to its cuspal positions with respect to the
Linking Planet's Star lord cuspal position, support the
Signification of the Star lord or cause for its dissolution. The
concept of favourable and unfavourable results needs to be
applied cautiously. It is a subjective matter. A planet linked
through its Star lord with 7th cusp and Sub lord with 6th cusp,
may be considered favourable. -for divorce and unfavorable
for malDage.
2. It specifies the Nature of Result of the Linking Planet.. In the
above example; the Sub lord's position in the 6th cusp may
indicate that the specific area of operation of the nature of
result, i.e. 7th house signification will shift to the 6th house
signification. Suppose the linking cusp is 1st house, whicll
indicate the body of the native. Then during the Dasa periods

of the Linking planet, whkh appears in 1st cuspal position,
will, develop diseases pertaining to the parts of the body
indicated by the 7th cusp. The nature of the disease will be as
per the energy content of the Linking planet.. What I want to
emphasize here is that, the Sub lord's position being 12th to
the Star lord's position should not always mean negation of
the significations of the Star lord's cuspal position. The nature
of the result, will always be as per the Star lord. If we are
analysing the promise of the Ascendant with respect to health
of the native, link of the Sub lord of the 1st cusp Sub-Sub lord
with 12th cusp may amount to poor status of health. But the
same position of Sub Lord is considered good for foreign
travel.. The native with the assistance of wife or others can
travel abroad.
Significance of Linkage through Sub-Sub: It indicates the End
Result, whilili the Linking planet will provide dming its Dasa
periods. This can be explained using an example; suppose, a planet
in the yd cuspal position is in the Star, whkh appears in the 7th
cusp. If the Sub lord of the Linking Planet appears in the 6th cusp,
this will mean that during its Dasa periods say Antara or Sookshma
period, the native goes for a short journey and thus suffers a
separation from his wife or partner. If the Sub-Sub lord is in eleventh
cusp, this indicates, the two will join after seperation. But if the
Sub-Sub lord appears in the 12th, it may result, in permanent
sepration. In this case, not the shortjourney but litigations will
bring the result..
To sum up, we may say that the Potential of a cusp indicates
the capacity of the Native to enjoy the significations of the
Linked Cusps irrespective ofthe nature of the linkages. Promise
of the cusp is with respect to a particular aspect represented by
the cusp. It is dependent on the nature of linkages. Linkage

through Star lord indicates it's Promise with respect to that
aspect and its. Sub lord and Sub-Sub lord will qualify or speGify
the Promise. The Potential of a planet has to be considered in
respec.t of its. Dasa Potential, and its. mtluence on other cusps.
For Dasa Potential, the planet will always give the results- of
the houses with which it is lUlked through its. Star lord. Its. Sub
lord will either qualify or speGifY the nature of the reswt. For
example, let us say Mercury in a horoscope is in RallU Star that
appears in 11th house cuspal position. If it is in the Sub of Jupiter
that appears in 7th cusp, it indicates that the Native's desire of
marriage will be fulfilled during Mercury Bhukti.. In other words,
Mercury during it's Bhukti has to concentrate on 11th house i.e. the
Nature of results will be as per the significations of the 11th house
i.e. fulfillment of desire. Sub of Mercury will specify the area
through which the desire will be fulfilled. Similarly, if we are trying
to analyse the influence of the planet on other cusps it has to be
remembered that the planet will influence those cusps, with which
it establishes link through its Star lord. The Sub will specify the
nature of its influence. For example; let us say that the Sub-Sub
lord of the Ascendant is linked through its Star lord to the 6th cusp.
This means the native is prone to sickress. Sub lord of the Sub-Sub
lord of the Ascendant will specifY the part of the body that will be
subjected to sickress; Sub-Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant will indicate the end result.. If the Sub-Sub lord is
appearing in 1,5 or lithe native will recover from the sickress but
ifit appears in 8th or 12th it indicates damage or defect to that part.
Relative Strength of Planets:. Suppose two Planets are linked to
cusp 6 through their Star lords. The Star lord of one may appear as
the Sub-Sub lord of the 6th cusp and in the case of the other Planet
its Star lord may appear as the Sub or Star or Sign lord of the 6th
cusp. The first Planet will be considered to be strongly linked with
6th cusp as compared with the second one.

Kalamtsa I!., Cltanallntadinks
Simplified. aDJf Fniamed
I would like to clarify the concepts of linking planet, linking cusp,
linked cusp and how to use them with the help of the Fig 5.1
Lagna Chart
ShaY "Chalit"
Cusp Chart
Fig 5.1

Cuspal Interlinks and their Application
PlanetatM Posi±ion
Cuspai Position

Linking Planet: Suppose we want to study the behaviour of the
planet Mars in this chart. Then Mars is called the linking planet or
source that will provide results during its period (Dasa or Bhukti or
Antara etc). This planet's nature stands modified as per the Sign in
whiliiliit is placed. Here Mars natural significations stand modified
by Leo. This linking planet will use the significations of linking
cusps to cause for the result during its period.
Linking cusps: Mars appears in cusps 1, 8 as Signlord, and in 3
and 11 as Star lord and in 5 and 11 as Sub lord of the cusps and
Mars appears in cusp 12 as Sub-Sub lord. Cusps 1,3, 5, 8, Hand
12 are called linking cusps whose significations will be used by
Mars to cause for the results. All the cusps where the planet under
consideration appears, may be as Sign lord or Star or Sub or SubSub lord will be called linking cusps.
Let us take the case of the planet Moon.
Linked cusps through Star lord: Moon is in Venus Star. Venus
appears in 2, 3, 4, 7 and 12 either as Sign or Star or Sub or Sub-Sub
(or the house occupied). These cusps are called linked cusps through
Star lord. Moon is expected to offer results of these houses during
its periods.
Qualification of Results.:. Moon is in the Sub of Jupiter. Jupiter
appears in 2, 4, 7, 9, 10 and 12. These cusps are said to be linked
cusps through Sub lord. The results of houses 2, 3,4, 7 and 12 will
be favourable or unfavourable as per the position of Jupiter vis-avis these houses. For example, the results of 2nd house are, in genera J,
very favourable. .because Jupiter being in 2, 3, 10 and 11 which are
favourable to cusp linked through Star lord. However since Jupiter
also appears in 9 which is eighth house from 2, the native may also
face financial crisis.
End result qualifications: Moon is in the Sub-Sub of Saturn. Saturn
appears in 1, 8, 10, 11 and 12. these positions with respect to the

Cuspallnterlinks and their Application
Star positions of Moon will indicate the end result for each of the
house for which Moon is expected to give the result..
Some authors don't differentiate between the linked cusps
through Star, Sub and Sub-Sub. I am of the firm belief that in
Stellar Astrology nature of result is only as per the houses linked
through Star lord and qualification is by the linked cusps
through Sub lord.
Let us try to explain the above concepts through another example.
Let Fig 5.2 represents the chart of a native's horoscope.
Lagna Chart
ShaY "Chalit"
Fig 5,2

Planet
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Suppose we want to study the planet Venus's behaviour i.e. what
and how it will offer the results during its Dasa periods. Venus is
thus termed as the linking planet.. Now Venus appears as the Sub
lord of the 2nd cusp, the Sign lord of the 7*^ and 12^ cusps and the
Sub-Sub lord of the 9^ cusp. The cusps 2, 7, 9 and 12 are called
Linking cusps. Planet Venus will offer the results of the houses
linked through its Star lord as per its own nature as modified by the
Sign in which it is placed in the horoscope (Pisces in this example)
and using the signifi-tions of the cusps 2, 7, 9 and 12.
Venus is in the Star of Jupiter. Now Jupiter appears as Star lord of
1 stcusp, Sign lord of 2 and 5, posited in 6, Sub lord of 7 and SubSub lord of the 11th cusp. Thus Venus is said to be linked to cusps
1,2, 5, 6, 7 and 11 through its Star lord and will offer results of
these houses during its Dasa periods.
Venus is in Moon Sub. Moon has the positional status. It is placed
in 2nd Bhava, is the Sub-Sub lord of 3rd and 7^ cusps and Star lord
of ll^cusp. It is lord of 9^ cusp. Thus cusps 2, 3, 7, 9 and 11
linked through Sub lord ofVenus will qualifY and specifY the results
of houses 1,2, 5, 6, 7 and 11 which Venus is expected to pro¥ide
during its Dasa periods.
Venus is in the Sub-Sub of Venus that appears in 2, 7, 9 and 12.
These cuspal positions will qualifY and specifY the end result of
If we want to know which cuspal positions are going to influence
the significations say of 9*^ house - the house of higher education?
We need to look at the Sub-Sub lords of those cusps who are linked
to 9*h cusp through their Star lords. In the example chart, Ketu is
the Sub-Sub lord of the 1st and 12^ cusp. Ketu is in Saturn Star
who appears as the Star lord of the 9*^ cusp. Ketu becomes the
linking planet and cusps 1 and 12 become the linking cusps and 9^
is the linked cusp. Higher education of the native will be influenced
by the significations of Ketu as modified by the Sign Pisces, and

the significations of 1st and 12th cusps i.e. Subjects like psychology,
yoga, foreign languages, research, secret activities etc. Similarly
we fmd that Saturn who appears as the SSL of 4th. 5th and 6th cusp
is in the Star of Venus who is the Sub-Sub lord of the 9th cusp. Thus
the higher education of the native will also be influenced by the
subjects represented by the Planet Saturn and 4th, 5th and 6th house
significations regarding subjects.

Chapter 6
All about Ascendant
The Ascendant stands for one's individuality, personality,
temperament, physi-l structure, state of health, longevity, name
and fame, virtues, capacity to face struggles of life, direction and
aspects of life, in whkh the native will channelise his energies;
proneness to accidents or untoward happenings. Ascendant, in other
words, reflects the quality and quantum of energy apportioned to
the native according to which he executes the Karma or bears the
fruits of the Karma. Planets- play the role of actors according to
the sc:ript written by the Supreme Intelligence and under the
direction of the divinity within him. The innate quality of these
actors i.e. Planets is defined by their Sign positions and the
nature of their role is as per their house position. Study of the
Ascendant, therefore, is the study of the whole Horoscope in brevity.
Potential of the Ascendant: The Sub-Sub Are, which rises at the
Ascendant at the time of birth of a native, indicates the quantum of
energy, which has been apportioned to the native when the soul has
incarnated. This energy content is reflected by synthesing the
attributes of the planets co-ruling this Ascendant as Sign, Star; Sub,
and Sub-Sub lords. More specifically, it is dete:cmined as follows:
L Through the significations of the Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant as modified by its placement in a Sign, Star, Sub,
and Sub-Sub in the horoscope in Cuspal positions.

2. Through the significations of the Star lord. Sub lord and SubSub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant and the Signs
in whkh they are placed.
3. Tluough the linkages which the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant
establish tluough its Star, Sub and Sub-Sub.
The word potential used here should not be taken as synonym of
strength. It only indicates the native's ability to enjoy the
significations of the cusps, with which the Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant has established links. No wonder, the Sub-Sub lord is
linked to all the twelve houses. A nonnal human being is expected
to enjoy all for what the twelve houses stand for.
What the Ascendant Promises. Each vusp stands for specific
significations that have direct relationship with the Ascendant.. The
Ascendant, for example, stands for specific signifiGations like,
general success and status, health, and longevity of the native. We
need to detennine what the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord promises for
those significations. But the study of the Ascendant is the study of
the whole horoscope. This statement means the Sub-Sub lord of
the Ascendant should clearly reveal through its linkages, how the
native is going to channelise his energy content.. In other words,
whether the native's Ascendant promises, education, love of sports
and cultural activities, marriage, divorce, profession, service,
business, sickooss, accident, purchase of property, overseas travel,
etc. or not.
Promise of the Ascendant has to be studied with respect to each
aspect of life. It is indicated by the linkages, which the Sub-Sub
lord of the Ascendant establishes tluough its Star lord or being the
Star or Sub or Sub-Sub of other cusps when it has positional status.
Linkage tluough Sub and Sub-Sub lord will qualify or specify the
promise in respect of each aspect.. The promise of the Ascendant in

All about Ascendant
respect of each cusp may be called as the strength of the Ascendant
in respect of each Signification of the cusp.
General Success and Status: The houses that stand for status, name
and fame and success are 1, 10 and 11. If the Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant is linked to these cusps through its Star lord, it ensures
success, in all his efforts, name and fame, and dignified profession
Subject to the condition that the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant
does not simultaneously establish links with cusps 5, 8 and 12
through its Sub lord or Sub-Sub lord. Linkages of the Sub-Sub lord
of the Ascendant through its Star lord with cusps 5, 8 and 12 only
indicate that the native is promised only to spoil his name and may
even involve himself in unsocial or secret criminal activities. To
occupy higher posts with status, the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant
should be linked through its Star lord with houses 1,6, 10 and the
Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant should not negate these
positions. Linkages with 6 and llensures the native to lead a
successful life if the Sub lord linkages support these houses.
Health of the Native: Sixth house in the natal chart is called the
house of general sickness, 8th is the house of serious sickness, fatal
disease, danger and accident.. Twelfth house is the house of selfundoing, defect and hospitalization. If the Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant through its Star lord, links itself with 6 or 8 or 12 cusp, it
indicates that the native is prone to sickness. Simultaneous links
with 6, 8 or 6, 8, 12 are indicative of the fact that he is destined to
suffer serious sickness, accidents and hospitalization. If the SubSub lord of the Ascendant also establishes relations with Marakas
and Badhakasthana through its Sub or Sub-Sub lords the disease
may ultimatdy prove fatal.
The part of the body, whkh is prone to siclGwss, is indicated by the
linkages of the Sub lord of the Sub- Sub lord of the Ascendant as
indicated below:

Detailed analysis of the nature of diseases a native will suffer is
done from the 6th and 8th cusps.
Longevity: Please refer the paragraphs under Longevity in the
chapter "Kalamas Theory and Analysis ofNirayana Chart. "

The linkages of the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant with other cusps
through its Star lord and as qualified by Sub lord and Sub-Sub lord
indicate the span of life promised for the native.
Short life: If the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is linked through
its Star lord to cusps 2, 7, 12, and Badhaka house, the life of the
native will be short Subject to the condition that its Sub lord does
not make links to the houses that will negate its Star lord linkages.
Long life: If the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is linked to cusps
1,3, 5, 8, 9 (not for fIXed Sign Ascendants) and Il(not for moveable
Sign Ascendants) the native is promised long life, Subject to the
condition that the Sub lord of the Sub- Sub lord of the Ascendant
does not form links with the cusps that negate the significations of
the Star lord.
Medium life: If the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is linked to
cusps 1,4,6, 10, or houses which stand for Maraka or Badhaka as
well as houses of longevity then the native will enjoy medium span
of life.
Mode of Death: Span of life is indi~ted by the significations of I,
3 and 8 houses. Eighth house represents the hidden aspects of one's
life. It is the storehouse of expansive energy, latent in the microcosm.
It is the house of life and also the house of death. In Jatak Parijita
and Hora - Sastra, there are a number of verses, which indicate the
cause of death. For example, one of the verses says, if the lord of
the 64th Navamsa from the Ascendant Navamsa (i.e. Navamsa lord
of 8th house) occupies a Dushthana (i.e. 6, 8 or 12th house) and is in
conjunction with:
i. Saturn, the Native will die of swallowing poison.
ii. Either Rahu or Ketu, his death will be by hanging.
Thus for deciding about the cause of death we need to fmd out the

relationships which the Sub- Sub lord of the 8th house establishes
with other houses. The proce dure is illustrated below:
1. The Nature of the plane t ruling Sub-Sub in the 8th Cusp.
2. As per the signifi~tion s of the Sign rising on the 8th Cusp.
For example;
Fiery Signs cause violent deaths.
Airy Signs through travel in air.
Watery Signs through drowning, cold, pneumonia etc.
Earthy Signs through engines, machines, earthquakes,
demolition of buildings etc.
3. As per the signification s of the Star lord of the Sub-Sub lord
of the 8th Cusp as modi fied by the Signs rising on the cusps
where the Star lord appears in the cuspal positions.

4. The house significations where the Star lord of the Sub-Sub
lord appears.
House
Nature and Place of Death.
1,4, 10 Generally the death takes place at
residence. It may indicate due to selfefforts i.e. suicide. 10 may indicate at
the work place also.
3 Dilling journey or at a nearby place.
6,8,12 Sickness, accident, operation, poison.
12th may indicate in hospital or far off
place.
9 Long journey or llllkrown place.
5,11 May be dilling a ceremony.
2, 7, Badhakasthana Natural death.
Unnatural Death: For unnatural death the following conditions
should exist in the chart.:
1. 8th Cusp Sub-Sub lord should be linked to 8th" and 12th house.
2. 8th Cusp Sub-Sub lord and its Star lord should be in cardinal
and violent Signs i.e. Aries, Taurus, Scorpio, Leo, SagittaLius
or Capiricom.
3. Ascendant Sub-Sub lord should also be connected with 8 and
12 houses to promise unnatural death.

Physkal And Mental Characteristics: The Physiw and mental
characteristics are determined using the Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant in the same manner as explained in steps I to 4 in the
chapter "Kalamsa Theory And Analysis of Nirayana Chart" under
the Sub - title Ana. lysing the first House.
What the Ascendant Promises for the Second
House:
The second house stands for wealth, eyesight, gems,jewds and
death. If the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is linked to the 2nd cusp
through its Star lord, then it indi~tes that the native has been
promised to enjoy the significations of the second cusp. The Sub
lord and the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord as per the
links they establish will qualify or specify the nature of the promise
in respect of each significations of the second cusp.
Promise of Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant should not be
confused with the Dasa potential of the planet that appears as
the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant. The difference between the
two can be understood by keeping the following points in mind:
1. Promise is with respect to each Signification and is
independent of the Sub-Sub lord's appearance in other cuspal
positions. Dasa potential of the planet that appears as the SubSub lord of the Ascendant is dependant on its appearance in
other cuspal positions.
2. Dasa potential is dependant on the transit ofthe planet.. Promise
is independent of the transit and is of permanent nature.
Let us try to explain, what the Ascendant promises for the various
signifi-tions of 2nd cusp when its Sub-Sub lord is linked to 2nd
cusp through its Star lord and linked to 1st cusp through its Sublord, Remember, 1st house stands for the dissolution of the

All about Ascendant
significations of the 2nd house but it is also the house of health,
longevity and status.
If the Sub lord of the Sub- Sub lord of Ascendant is linked to 6th
house then it will indi'late that it promises the native to suffer health
problems in the parts indicated by 2nd cusp and the generation of
wealth through loans, services and hard labour.
Absence of linkage of the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant willi the
2nd cusp through its Star lord reflects poor promise for the 2nd cusp.
To be rich and prospemus the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord should be
linked with 2 and 11, and Sub lord and Sub- Sub lord of the
Ascendant Sub-Sub lord should support. Here, the appearance of
the Sub lord of the Ascendant Sub- Sub lord in the cusp 6 and 10
willi be supportive because they form the part of Materialistic"
Triangle. The linkages of the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant through
its Star lord with 2 and 11 and through Sub lord with 5, 8 and 12 do
not promise any richness.

What the Ascendant Promises for Third House:
The third house in the horoscope stands for mind, younger co-born,
courage, confidence, fairness, short -journeys, mental inclinations,
memory, communication skills, change of residence, writing
capability and rumours.
If the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord is linked through its Star lord with
the third cusp, it promises the native all that, what for the third
house stands for. However, the linkages of the Sub lord and the
Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant's Sub-Sub lord will qualify or
spe~fy the promise in respect of each Signification. For example,
if the Sub lord establishes link with the second cusp it may mean
that the native is promised earning through writing,
communications, travds etc. but cause separation from the younger
co-born and the native may not like change of residence. This
linkage also promises use of mental strength, courage, confidence
that will reflect in the native's speech and oratorical skills. If the
Sub lord is linked to 8th cusp, the native may use his courage,
bolduess and confidence to commit himself to unsocial acts. This
is how we have to analyse the nature of promise in respect of each
Signification of the third cusp.
Absence of the linkage of the yd cusp through the Star lord of the
Ascendant Sub-Sub lord in specific terms indicates the lack of
providential assistance to draw upon the signifi-tions of the 3rd
cusp. However, we should remember that the Sub-Sub arc of the
Ascendant is also co-ruled by its Sub lord. If the Sub lord of the
Ascendant also fails to establish links with the third cusp through
its Star lord, then certaitlJythe native will lack in confidence, courage
etc. In such cases, the native will have to depend upon the promise
of the third cusp in respect of the third house significations and the
Dasa potential of those planets which link with the third cusp and
commits the Ascendant for drawing the significations of the 3rd
cusp.

All about Ascendant
Ascendant and What it Promises For the Fourth
House:
The fourth house stands for mother, education, home, and private
life, transport, landed property, domestic happiness, and old age.
If the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is linked to the 4th house
through its Star lord it promises the native all that, what for the 4th
house stands for. However, the promise in respect of each aspect of
4th house depends upon the nature of links, the Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant establish through its Sub and Sub-Sub lords. For
example; the 3rd house linkage of the Sub lord may indi~te possible
separation from mother, change of residence, loss of property, but
for education it may indi~te the native's concentrating on the
Subjects of study as indicated by third house.
Similarly the eleventh house linkage of the Sub Lord may promise
gain in property, but danger to mother's life or the vehicle's accident..
If the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord does not establish link through its
Star Lord with the 4th house and also the Sub lord of the Ascendant
does not link itself to the fourth house, then it is indicative of the
fact that the Nature has not promised the native to enjoy the
signi:fi~tions of the 4th cusp. However, we need to analyse the
horoscope for each aspect of life from various angles. Let us take
an example, suppose, we are to analyse the promise of the Ascendant
for the educational prospects of the native. If the Ascendant SubSub lord establishes a link through its Star lord with the 9th house
and at Sub lord level it is linked to 11th house. This is an excellent
promise for higher education. The question is, if the basic education
is not promised, can the native achieve higher education? We should
look into the following aspects when we come across such cases,
where the native is holding many degrees and it appears as if it is
contrary to the Ascendant's promise.
1. The Ascendant Sub-lord should have established link with
the 4th cusp.

Kalamsa it. ~
Interliaks
Simplified aDJi. Enlarged
2. The 4th cusp Sub-Sub lord should have established link with
9th cusp.
3. The Ascendant Sub-Sub lord is linked to IIJ:h cusp through
Star lord and to 4th house thlough Sub or Sub-Sub lord. This
indioates the fulfilment of native's desire to enjoy the
signifKmtions of the 4th cusp.
In the absence of these linkages, higher education is not possible
and if the native possesses higher education, we need to check
accuracy of the horoscope.
Ascendant and what it Promises for the Fifth
House:
The fifth house stands for the native's intelligence, intuitive
perception of the future, socially accepted forms of courtship,
magnetic attractions, progeny, sports, and culture, lactivities, creative
pursuits, speculation etc.
If the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord is linked to the fifth house through
its Star lord, it promises the native to enjoy the significations of the
fifth house Subject to its qualification by the links which the Sub
lord and the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord makes
with the various cuspal positions. For example, if the Sub lord links
itself with the 7th cusp, it promises love mmiage, but if the Sub
lord links itself with 11th, it promises only satisfaction of the
romantic life without ending it in mmiage. It should, however,
be kept in mind that what the Ascendant promises for an aspect
of life, it has to be collaborated by the linkages of the Pmnary
cusp for that aspect.. For example, in the case of mauiage, linkages
of the 7th Sub-Sub lord with the 5th and 11th cusps should confirm
love maniage.

All about Ascendant
What the Ascendant Promises for the Sixth House:
The sixth house in the natal chart is essentially a house of difficulties,
struggle, and opposition of various kinds, painful incidents, and
separation from partner. It is also called the house of gain and victory
because it is 12lhto the 7th house. Loss of others is the gain of the
native. Defeat of others is the victory of the native.
The linkage of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord through its Star lord
indicates that the native is prone to siclawss, will generate enemies,
oppositions; will have to work hard in his life. The promise for
each aspect has to be determined by taking into consideration the
links that, the Sub lord of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord establishes
with the cuspal positions. For example; if the Sub lord links with
the 5th house, it indicates that the native is prone to heart: disease,
but may not generate enemies. The point, whkh needs attention, is
that the influence of the Sub lord should always be seen with respect
to the aspect.. Its presence merely in the 12th-house to the Star lord
position should not always mean the negation of the Signification
for what the Star lord linkage stands for.
What the Ascendant Promises for the Seventh
House:
The seventh house is known as Kalatra - Sthana the place of wife.
Speciflli :ally it signifies spouse, sexual union, the winning of one's
object or desire, semen, genitals and all secret pleasures arising
from sexual union. It also stands for trade, private business, foreign
places, social relationships and break injourney.
If the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord establishes a link with the seventh
house through its Star lord, it promises the native to enjoy the
significations of the 7th house. However, we should examine the

Kalawsa & CusoaUnlerliaks
SirnpImed.aDIJ. Enlarged
promise of each significations of the 7th house with respect to the
links, which the Sub-Sub lord establishes with other cusps. For
example; let us say that the Sub lord is linked to the 6th cusp and
Sub-Sub lord to the 11th cusp. In this case it indicates that the native
is promised to suffer physical separation or have difference of
opittion with wife or partner but will always remain united. The
Sub-Sub lord's link with 4 or 10 or 12 may further cause problems
to the native in his disturbed mamed life. The Sub lord's link may
also be used to specify the nature of marriage or with whom the
mamage may take place. For example; link with 6th may indicate
mamage with a servant or Subordinate. Absence of the link of the
Ascendant with the 7th cusp, however, should not mean that
the native is denied marriage and the significations of the 7th
house. Strange are the ways of God. He has his own ways to
unfold the destiny of the Individual. • If the Ascendant Sub-Sub
lord is linked through its: Star lord with the 11th house and with
the 7th house through its. Sub lord or Sub-Sub lord, the native's
desire of marriage or the enjoyment of all that for what the 7th
house stands for will be achieved. This can be applied to all
aspects.. .of life.
Ascendant and What it Promises for the Eighth
House:
The Eighth house represents the hidden aspects of one's life, serious
diseases, unexpected gains or losses, concealed weaJth, knowledge
of the hidden laws of nature, psychological applications or mental
sufferings, death, longevity, storehouse of expansive energy latent
in microeosm, rectum, accidents, quarrels, false allegation, damage
in reputation, unearned income, surgery, slaughter house, rapes,
gift cheques, earth quakes, incurring losses, insurance claims,
hurdles in journey.

All about Ascendant
The linkage of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord through its Star lord
with the 8th house promises all that what the 8tllJ house stands for.
Promise of each aspect of the 8tllJ house, however, will be as per the
links that the Sub lord and the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant SubSub lord establish in the horoscope. The native will be prone to
accidents, serious diseases, and mental agony. The part of the body
that will be Subjected to siclaJess will be indicated by the links of
the Sub and Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord.
Ascendant & What it Promises for the Ninth
House:
The Ninth house, known as Bhagyasthanam, operates under the
influence of the principle of Mutability and Fire and thus shows
introspections, aspirations towards future and the possibilities of
the higher mind. It represents religion, philosophy, austerity, worship
and poorvapuniya or the accumulation of auspiGious karma from
past lives, divine wisdom, spiritual disciplines, my stiG. -initiations,
enlightenment, higher education, long journey, legal disciplines,
internal and external communications, long distance
communications, extra marital relationships, second mauiage.
To draw the significations of the 9t[l' house the Ascendant Sub-Sub
lord should link with the ninth house through its Star lord. The
links of the Sub lord and Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant Sub-Sub
lord will qualify and specify the promise for each aspect of the
ninth cusp. For example, Sub lord linkage with 6tllJ cusp would
promise native higher education in the fields of mediGine, law and
chemistiy. Here we should note that if the Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant is simultaneously linked to cusps 5 & 9 through its Star
lord, it indicates a veiy poor promise for the professional activities
of the native because 5th is not only 8111 to the house of profession
but is also the 12th* to the house of service and 911'1 is also 12th to the

Kalamsa ~ Cuseallnferlinks IliISQIJL. Simplified SI.ISI Enlarged
house of profession and 4^to the house of service. However, this
linkage indicates the native's love for religious activities if the Sub
lord and Sub-Sub lord links support Sthand 9*-^ house significations.
Ascendant and What it Promises for the Tenth
House:
The Tenth house Signifies the highest point of one's glory, the target
set for the soul in a spe~fic birth. It relates to the outward
development and expression of the inherent qualities of the
individual during his process of social interactions. Success in life
is determined on the basis of the 1 O^1 house. The Ascendant
represents the quantum and quality of energy at the disposal of the
individual.. If the Ascendant is powetful, we can expect that the
individual will attain his target.. But if the Ascendant is weak or is
not commensurate with the requirements of the lOthhouse, the life
of the individual may promise much but little success. The 10th
house represents profession, honour, and the quality of leadership,
Kanna of the soul, government service, administrative jobs, and
achievement in the material world.
To achieve success in one's profession, to earn name and fame,
rewards and hold dignifi&l positions in government, the Sub-Sub
lord of the Ascendant should establish link with the tenth house
through its Star lord. The Sub lord and the Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant Sub-Sub lord would specify the areas in which the native
will love to concentrate his professional activities. This is indicated
below:

All about Ascendant

Kalamsa fl.
Intediaks
SirnoUfied aaD. Enlarged
Ascendant and What it Promises for Eleventh
House:
The house is traditionally known as the house of fulfillment of
one's desires, gain or profit, political status, friends, elder co-bom,
satisfaction of personal needs and hopes.
Fortunate are those, who have their Ascendant Sub-Sub lord linked
with eleventh house through its Star lord. It ensures the fulfillment
of one's desires. The links established by the Sub lord and SubSub lord of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord will specify the house by
which the desires will be fulfilled.
Ascendant and What it Promises for the Twelfth
House:
This house represents the end of all activities of one's life, death,
expenditures, foreign travel, imprisonment, hospitalization,
renunciation, the pleasures of bed, and all kinds of misfortune. It
also Signifies how the individual will discharge his debt. It is known
as the house of secret activities and enemies.
The linkage of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord through its Star lord
with the 12th cusp promises that the native will draw upon the
significmtions of the 12th house like secret activities, travel abroad,
imprisonment, research etc. The Sub lord's and the Sub-Sub lord's
links will qrnilify and specify the promise in respect of each aspect.
For example, Sub lord's link with 8th may promise imprisonment
or research in the field of occult sciences.
To sum up, we may say that to determine, what the Ascendant
promises should be done taking each aspect individually.
Synthesising the promise of the Ascendant as reflected by the Star

All about Ascendant
lord linkages of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord without taking into
consideration the effect of Sub lord and Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant Sub-Sub lord links, may cause serious errors in
prediction.
Example: Refer chart: of figure 6.1 Let us analyse this chart ; to find
out what the Ascendant promises to the various aspects of life.
Lagna Chart
ShaY "Chalit”
figure 6, 1

152 Kalamsa & Cusgal Interlinks Theory: Simplified end Fnlamed
Planetary Position
Nisayana Cusps

All about Ascendant
Step I Physi~ and mental characteristics of the native is the sum
total of the attributes of the planets co-ruling the Sub-Sub arc that
rises at the Ascendant.. This has been expbiLinedthrough the example
chart in fig. 3.4 in the chapter "Kalamsa Theory and Anal~sis of
Nirayana Chart.." The veiy specific physical and mental
characteristic. s should be analysed as follows:
A. If the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord has the positional status, then
it contributes to the significations of the first cusp as per the
Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub that rise on other cusps where it
appears as Sign, or Star, or Sub, or Sub-Sub lord.
B. Find out the Star lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant..
The physicaL and mental characteristics of the native will be
the sum total of the following:
1. The significations of the Star lord as a planet..
2. The significations of the Sign - Star - Sub & Sub-Sub of
the cusps in which the Star lord appears Subject to the
condition that the Sub lord of the Ascendant Sub-Sub
lord does not negate the Star lord significations. If the
Star lord significations are negated, the native will then
possess physical and mental characteristics of the Sign -
Star-Sub & Sub-Sub where the Sub lord of the Ascendant
Sub-Sub lord appears.
3. If Rahu or Ketu appears as the Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant, we also need to examine throug,h. the planets
that Rahu or Ketu represents assuming as if they
themselves are the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant. .
C. Those planets that link with the Ascendant through their Star
lords also influence the characteristics of the native.

In the chart of fig 6.1 Mars is the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant..
The planets co-ruling the Ascendant are Mars - Sat - Moon and
Mars as Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub lord. The general
characteristics of the native will be the sum total of the attributes of
these planets. The specifi- characteristics will be analysed through
the Sub-Sub lord Mars. Here Mars does not have the positional
status because planets Jupiter, Saturn and Ketu are all in its star.
Mars is in the Star of Venus, a planet that is the epitome of delicacy,
diplomacy, love, devotion, adoration, fidelity, and kindness; believes
in brotherhood, fashion, pretty and artistic dresses. It knows how
to magnetise, fascinate and please others. It is sensuous.
Venus appears in the cuspal positions 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, 11 and 12.
Mars is in its own Sub and appears in cuspal positions 1,6 and 7.
The physicaL and mental characteristics of the native will be as per
the degree rising on 2,3,6, 7, 10, 11 and 12 cusps. Mars is in the
Sub-Sub of Mercury that appears in 2 and 5.
Potential of the Ascendant: It can be seen from the above
paragraphs that the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord has established links
through its Star, Sub and Sub-Sub with the houses 1,2, 3, 5, 6, 7,
10, 11 & 12. The Supreme Intelligence, therefore, provides the
native, the capa~ty to enjoy the significations of these cusps in
specific terms. His life pattern will be controlled by the significations
of these houses. However, it should be noted that for general
significations we might also look to the other important planet in
the cuspal position called the Sub lord. If the Sub lord also supports
the significations of the Sub-Sub lord, those houses significations
will appear in greater strength. Here Moon is the Sub lord of the
Ascendant.. It is in Venus Star, Jupiter Sub and Sun Sub-Sub. It is,
therefore, linked to houses 2, 3,4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11 and 12. Thus the
house significations of 2, 3,4, 5, 6, 7, l'O, 11 and 12 are going to
play Significant role in shaping the life of the individual..

All about Ascendant
Let us now analyse what the Ascendant promises for various aspects
of life.
General Success and Status: Ascendant Sub-Sub lord Mars has
linked itself with the houses 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, Hand 12 through its
Star lord, with houses 1, 6 and 7 through its Sub lord and with
houses 2 and 5 through its Sub-Sub lord. This linkage clearly reveals
that the native is destined to achieve success in all his efforts. He
will have a dignified profession. Linkages of the Sub lord and the
Sub-Sub lord of Mars with houses 7 and 5 indicate the native may
have partnership business.
Health of the Native: The Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant Mars as
well as the Sub lord of the Ascendant Moon maintains relationship
with the sixth cusp through their Star lords. The native is, thus,
prone to general siclawss. There is no linkage of these planets with
the 8th cusp. Since Mars is in its own Sub and it appears in the 1st,
6th and 7th house, the parts of the body prone to sickness will be as
per the significations of these houses. If we take Moon also into
consideration, then the Sub lord of Moon is Jupiter that appears in
2,4, 5, 6, 9 and 10 cuspal positions. So the person may in general
be said to have diseases related to houses 1,2, 4, 5, 6, 7,9, and 10.
The Sub-Sub lord of Mars is Mercury that appears in 2 and 5. The
ultimate areas where the diseases will be concentrating are as per
the houses 2 and 5.
Longevity of the Native: Since the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord has
not established successful relationship with Maraka and
Badhakasthana through its Star lord, the life of the native as per the
Ascendant Sub-Sub lord should be long. Link of the Second house
stands negated as well as supported by the Sub lord of Mars that
appears in 1,6, and 7. This longevity is fully supported by Venus
the Sub-Sub lord of 3rd cusp. However, if we analyse the span, of
life from the 8th cusp whose Slolb-Sub lord is Rahu, we may get
doubts. Rahu is in Ketu St~, Mars' ~ul?and Rahu Sub-Sub. Ketu is

in (Residential position), 2nd and 11th cuspal positions. Mars
appears in 1,6, and 7 cuspal positions. Thus Star lord of Rahu is
linked to Maraka houses and the Sub lord of Rahu supports as well
as negates the Maraka houses. Now Rahu represents Jupiter being
in Sagittarius, and in Ketu Star who in turn represents Mercury and
Mars. All these planets that represent the Sub-Sub lord thus
support the longevity of the native as derived from 1 stand }fd cuspal
positions.
Promise of Ascendant for Second house significations is excellent
because of the links of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord Mars through
its Star lord. Sub lord and Sub-Sub lord. The position of Sub lord
of Ascendant Sub-Sub lord in lsl.b^and 7t^1cuspal position indicates
that the native may use his accumulated wealth to enhance his own
and his partner's status. It also indi(;;lltesthe generation of money
through private business. Mars will also influence his speech, which
will be forceful but harsh. Mars the lord of the Sub-Sub Arc of the
Ascendant that rises in Scorpio, Anuradha Nakshatra and Kalamsa
of Moon indi(;;lltesthe native's inclination towards hard drinks.
The Ascendant Sub-Sub lord's establishing link with the third house
through its Star lord and being supported by the Sub lord and SubSub lord's links clearly reveal that the native will draw upon the
significations of the third house without any impediments. He will
possess confidence, courage, boldness and the communication
skills. Mars being the Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant may look to force
the native to be impulsive but as the Arc of the Sub-Sub of the
Ascendant rises in Anuradha Nakshatra ruled by Saturn, it makes
the native cautious, calculative and pragmatic.
Educational Prospects and the Promise of Ascendant: The
Ascendant Sub-Sub lord does not establish links with the 4t^1orthe
Chouse either through its Star lord or through its Sub or Sub-Sub
lord. However, the Sub lord of the Ascendant maintains relationship
with the 4th and 9th house through the llthhouse, the house of

fulfilment of desires. Jupiter the Sub lord of Moon appears in 4 and
9. As the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord Mars is linked to house 2, 3, 6, 7,
10 and 11 through its Star lord and supported by the links of Sub
and Sub-Sub lord, the native can succeed in all his efforts. Moreover
Moon appears as the Sub-Sub lord of the 4th cusp and as stated
above maintains relationship with 4th and 9th cusp through the llili
house. The native have, therefore, the ability to undergo the process
of learning and achieve excellent results.
Ascendants ~ and what it Promises for the 7th House: Mars the
Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant establish link with the 7th house
through the llthhouse as it is in its own Sub that appears as Sub
and Sub-Sub lord of the 7th cusp. The Sub-Sub lord of Mars is
Mercury that appears in the 5^ cusp. All this indicates that the native
will fulfill his desire through the significations of 7th and 5th cusps.
However, as Mars establishes link with 6th and 10th house through
its Star lord, the mauiage may be delayed.
Ascendant and What it Promises for the Profession of the
Native: The Ascendant Sub-Sub lord has establish&! relations with
2,3,6, 7, 10 and II cusps through its Star lord, and with cusps 1,6
and 7 through its Sub lord, and cusps 2 and 5 through its Sub-Sub
lord. All these linkages reveal that the native will succeed in all his
professional activities, which may concentrate on private business
or self-entrepreneurship. The linkages of 3 and 10 may indicate
towards native dealing with 3rd house significations like trading,
commission agents, liasoning or dealing with products related to
communications.
This is how we need to analyse the Ascendant to detennine what it
promises for all walks of life.
Example: Refer chart of fig. 6.2. This is the chart of a female who
died within 3 months of her birth. Let us see how the chart revea.ls
short Longevity.

Kalamsa
Infe/Jinks SiumMSiL. Ml SI. , Enlarged
m
Date of Birth: 19.09.1973 time of Birth: 07.48.50 hrs.
Place of Birth: LaL23N51, Long 75E10
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit"
Cusp Chart

All about Ascendant
Planetary Position

To detennine the span of life that is promised to the native, we
have to look for the links that the Sub-Sub lord of the cusps 1, 3
and 8 establish.
Links established by Mars the Sub-Sub Lord of Ascendant through
its star Venus are 1,2,4,S, 7,8, 11 and 12. The Sub lord of Mars is
Sun who is appealiing in 12^ cuspal position, which is also aMaraka
house. Houses 2, 7, and 12 are the Maraka houses and the house
Seven is also the Badhakasthana as the Ascendant rises in the
common Sign Virgo. The significations of these houses are fully
supported by the Sub lord Sun. Links of the Ascendant Sub-Sub
lord Mars with houses 1, S and 11 support life but unfortunately
the appearance of the Sub lord in 12^’ house being 8^ to Sth house
and 12^ to 1 undo the significations of the 1st and Sth house. The
appearance of Sun in the 2nd house to the 1 1th house supports the
signifi-tions of the 11th house but unfortunately it only reveals the
fulfillment of the native's life desire through the significations of
the 12^ house i.e. exit from the world. Thus Ascendant Sub-Sub
lord promises short life.
Sub-Sub lord of 3 and 8 cusps is Mercury that is in Moon star,
Jupiter Sub and Rahu Sub-Sub. Moon appears in cusps 1,2,S, 7
and 9. The Sub Lord of Mercury appealiing in 12^ house undoes
the significations of houses 1, S and 9. Thus cusps 3 and 8 also
promise only short life.
It should, howev6{, be remembered that when a child is born, the
noted time of his birth is always Subject to correction. It is not
possible to note the time of first breath correctly. It is a serious
problem for the astrologers to declare the longevity of the new
born. Ancients used to suggest that the horoscope of the native for
certain years is under the control of his parents etc. Probably, this
was to gain time to rectify the horoscope as per the events that the
child experiences. However, the astrologer can generally assess
the probable.., life span by the following principle:

All about Ascendant
If a child is bom in a Dasa, Bhukti, Antara, the lords of whicll are
the joint co-rulers of the Ascendant or the 8th cusp and are
simultaneously linked through their Star lords to Maraka and
Badhakasthna, their joint period is very critical for the life of the
native. The Sub lords of the Dasa periods should support their Star
lord significations. Here in this example, the child is born in Mars
Dasa, Rahu Bhukti and Saturn Antara. Both Mars and Rahu are the
co-rulers of the 8th cusp and are linked with Maraka and
Badhakasthana. They are supported by their Sub lords links. Thus,
Mars Dasa and Rahu Bhukti is critical for the native's life. Antara
lord Saturn being in its own Sub negates the Signification of its
Star lord Signifi<mtionand as such provides him life for its Antara
period. The native died on 10.12.1973 at about 20.30 hours in the
joint period of Mars - Rahu - Ketu - Mer - Mer.

Chapter 7
All about Second House
The Second House in the Horoscope stands for wealth, speech,
gems, ornaments, jewels, tongue, teeth, vision, right eye, family
etc. The analysis of the second house means detennining what the
Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub lord that rise on the 2nd CUSjpromises
in general for the native in respect of the significations of the second
house. The Star lord linkages of the Sub-Sub lord of the second
cusp specifically show what is prolilaised for the native for each
Signification of the second cusp as qualified and specified by its
Sub and Sub-Sub. Let us take the case of fman~al matters or wealth.
Finandal Matters:
When we analyse a horoscope to assess the finan~al status or the
capacity to earn or accumulating wealth, we look to the Sub-Sub
lord of the 2nd CUSpto detennine its potential.. The main questions
an Astrologer is expected to answer are:
1. Is the native promised self acquired financial status?
2. How much the native will be able to accumulate?
3. Will he or she face periods of financial crisis?
4. Is there a chance for the native to lose his or her money loaned
to others?
5. Has he or she the capa~ty to repay loans?
6. When he or she will have periods of gain?
7. Sources through which the native will be able to acquire
wealth.

All about Second House
Before we start analysing the second cusp, we need to analyse the
Ascendant because the promise of any cusp is subordinate to the
promise of the Ascendant.. The person will have the necessary
motivation to accumulate wealth if the Ascendant establishes a
relation with 2nd house. In addition the Ascendant needs to be
connected to 6, 10 and 11 houses to indicate prosperity.
Promise of 2nd CUSp:
Houses 4, 7, 8 and 12 to any house produce negative, opposite and
side effects to the concerned house. Therefore houses 1,5,8 and 9
from the Ascendant are the adverse houses for the 2nd house. Linkage
of the 2nd Cuspal Sub-Sub lord with these houses through its Star
lord indicates poor financial status. Linkage of the 2nd Cuspal SubSub lord with other houses espe(;jally 2, 4, 6, 10 and 11 speak of a
very good promise or earning capa(;jty.
The promise of the 2nd cusp, however, depends upon the following:
a. The nature of the linking planet i.e. the Sub-Sub lord of the
2nd cusp as modified by it's placement in a Sign, Star; Sub and
Sub-Sub in the cuspal positions.
b. The Sign, Star and Sub rising on the 2nd cusp.
c. The cusps linked through Star lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the
2nd cusp.
d. The cusps linked through Sub and Sub-Sub will qualify and
specify the significations of the cusps linked through Star lord .
What is promised when the second cusp Sub-Sub lord is linked
to other houses is indicated below:
1. When the Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd cusp is linked to the first
house through its Star it promises depletion of wealth because

lsthouse is 12 ^to the 2nd house and as such calls for the
dissolution of what for the 2M CUSpstand for. The native may
use his wealth to enhance his status or maintain health. This
is qualified by the Sub Lord linkages as follows:
Sub lord linked with
lsthouse: Use money to enhance status or maintain health.
3rd house: Spend on shortjourneys, or on younger co-born.
4 ' ^liouse: Use money to purchase property or spend on
5lbhouse
6 Molise
7lh house
Sibhouse
gib house
1 '01 house
lllh house
12^house
education.
Lose in gambling.
Spending money on sickness.
Spends to gain social status or on wife.
Serious sickJ.wss, accident, and unsocial acts.
Spending on extra marital relations.
To get rewards or political mileage.
Spend money on friends.
Hospitalisation, overseas traveL.
When the Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd cusp is linked to 2nd house
through its Star, it is a good linkage. The native will be able to
earn and accumulate wealth as per the significations of the
houses linked through Sub lord.
Sub lord linked with
lsthouse: Self-effons or self-entrepreneurship.
3rd house: Through communication, or younger co-born,
trading, writing etc.
4^house: Throlllgh manufacturing goods, or property
transactions or transpon business.

All about Second House
12^house: Gain from overseas or spending money on foreign
travel..
3. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd cusp links itself willi the third
cusp through its Star lord, it promises gain through the
significations of the third cusp. The Sub lord of the Sub-Sub
lord of the 2nd cusp will qualify and spedfy the nature of
gains as indicated below:
Sub Lord Expected Results.
Linked With
House I Earning through the significations of 3rd house,
i.e. writing, communication, journalism, with
courage & self-efforts.
House 2 Gain through younger co-bom, communication,
etc
House 3 Gain through courageous efforts.
House 4 Income through tenders and contracts.
House 5 Gain through writing scripts for films, serials or
articles on sports and cultural meets.

4. When the Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd cusp is linked to the 4th
cusp through its Star lord it ensures large gains. The Sub lord
of the Sub-Sub lord of 2nd cusp will qualify or specify the
nature of gain as detailW below:

All about Second
Sub Lord
Linked With
House 3
House 4
House 5
House 6
House 7
House 8
House 9
House 1 0
House 1 1
House 12
House
Expected Results.
FinanGial gains as brokerage in re~ estate, or
trading in manufactured goods, running
transport business. Here the Sub lord only
specifies and does not qualify the nature of
results. It could also mean gain by changing
place of residence.
Income through financing for land, property,
vehicles, production units, etc.
Gain through cinema halls, casinos.
Gain through service in manufacturing or
production units, builders etc.
Bank loans on properties or providing transports
to private companies etc.
Income through settlement of insurance claims
out of accidents.
Subsidy, royalty in land, property, vehicles etc.
Income through profession in real estate,
transports, agriculture, manufacturing of articles
or production units.
Profits from litigations m properties or
purchasing property, vehicles etc. with own
money for profit..
Gain through investments in land, property
vehicles etc.

5. Fifth house is an unfavourable house to the second house. If
the Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd house is linked to the sm house
through its Star lord it would cause depletion of wealth. The
Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord would qualify or spedfy the
result as deta.illWbelow:
House 12

All about Second House
6. If the Sub lord of the 2nd cusp is linked to the 6th cusp through
its Star lord it promises' gain in income. The Sub lord of the
Sub-Sub lord will qualify or spedfy the result as detailed
below.
Sub-lord Expected Results..
Linked With

jin
7. When the Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd cusp is linked to 7th cusp
through its Star Lord it promises gain in wealth. The Sub lord
of the 2nd cusp Sub-Sub lord will qualify or spedfy the nature
of result as follows:

All about Second House
8. This is an unfavourable house to the 2nd house. When the 2nd
cusp Sub-Sub lord links itself with 8th house through its Star;
it causes depletion in the native's wealth. The Sub lord of the
Sub-Sub lord will qualify or speGify the result as follows.
Sub Lord Expected Results..,

Ka/amsa & ~
9. The ninth house being 8th to 2nd house will cause unfavourable
results when the Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd cusp is linked to the
9th1 cusp through its Star lord. The Sub lord of the Sub-Sub
lord of the 2nd cusp will qualify or spedfy results as below.

All about Second House
10. The 10th house is the apex of the Matecialistic Triangle of
whicll another important side is the 2nd house. When the SubSub lord of the 2nd cusp links with 10th cusp through its Star
lord it promises gain through profession. The Sub lord of the
Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd cusp will qualify or spedfy the results
as below:

11. The 11th house is the house of fulfillment of desires. It is also
called the house of profit.. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd CUSp
links itself with the eleventh house through its Star lord it will
promise the native immense wealth. The quantum of growth
of wealth, of course is limited by the promise of the Ascendant,
the 10th and 6th house. The Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of
this 2nd CUSpwill specify the areas by which the wealth will
grow. It is indicated below:

All about Second House
12. The 12th house is the house of expenditure. It is no doubt the
eleventh house to the 2nd house and thus should indicate growili
of wealth if the 2nd CUSpSub-Sub is linked to it through its
Star lord. We have, however, to see what the second house
promises to the Ascendant.. Its connection with the 12th house
can at best ensure the availability of wealth for investment..
The Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd CUSpwill qualify
or spe~fy the results as indi(;;lltedbelow:

Influence of Linking Cusps:
Now let us see how the significations of the 2nd house in respect of
weaJth are influenced by the linking of the Sub- Sub lords of other
cusps through their Star lords to the 2nd cusp.
First Cusp: When the Sub-Sub lord of the first house is linked to
the 2nd cusp through its Star lord, it indicates that the native will
use his status and self-efforts to generate income or cause depletion
of weaJth. The Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant will
qualify or specifY the result as indicated below:

All about Second House
Sub lord Expected Result
linked with
House 8
House 9
House 10
House 1 1
House 12
The native will deplete his wealth by involving
in unsocial activities, or loaning money to others.
This linkage also cause the native to face
financial crisis due to his own actions like under
taking long journeys, spending on father or in
satisfying his extramarltaJ._relationships.
Increased income in profession through selfefforts.
Imm~nse wealth through self-efforts.
Money spent to satisfy personal needs or
spending money on foreign travels.
Third Cusp: If the Star lord of the Sub- Sub lord of theyd cusp
appears in the 2nd CUSp,the native will be able to generate money
through the significations of the third cusp viz writing,
communication, younger co-born, journalism, travels, trading,
liaison, etc. The Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the yd cusp will
qualify or specify the Star lord's significations as indicated below:
Sub lord
linked to
House I
House 2
House 3
Expected Results.,
Since pt house is 12th to the 2«d it means the
money gained will be used to enhance status or
maintain health.
Gain from younger co-born, trading, liaison,
writing etc.
Gains through selling of property or change of
place.

All about Second House
Fourth Cusp: If the Sub-Sub lord of the fourth house is linked
with the second house through its Star lord the native will be able
to multiply his income as per the significations of the 4th cusp viz
mother, property, educational activities, industry, Manufacturing,
dealing in valuable assets etc. The Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of
the 4th cusp will qualify or spedfy the Star lord's significations as
indicated below:
Sub lord Expected Results,
linked to
House I
House 2
House 3
House 4
House 5
House 6
House 7
This linkage will provide the native, opportunity
to increase his wealth through the significations
of the 4tlL house that he will use to enhance his
status.
Gain through the signifiaations of the fourth
house.
Increase in income through trading in
manufactured goods, brokerage in real estate or
sale of vehicles, commission or liaison work..
Financing for property, vehicles.
Increase in income through educational
institutions dea. 1 ing in arts & culture; cinema
halls, casinos, transport provided to carry artists
or sports person etc.
Gain in money by providing services in an
educational institution, manufacturing unit,
transport organization, industrial house, etc.
Income by arranging loans for vehicles, property,
land for educational institutions, transport
organization etc.

Fifth Cusp:Linkage of the Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp through its
Star lord with the 2nd house means the native wilL use the
significations of the 5th house to generate income. The Sub lord of
the Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp will qualify or specify the results
as indicated below:

All about Second
Sub lord
linked to
House 3
House 4
House 5.
House 6
House 7
House g
House 9
House 10
House 11
House 12
House
Expected Results.
Income through writing scripts for films, articles
on sports, games or cultural activities, or stock -
exchange broker.
This is no doubt the 12th house to the 5th house
and thus should cause impediments to the
significations of the 5th- house. Here, however,
we are assessing the outcome with respect to
the 2nd house. The Sub lord's role here is that of
specifying the area of concentration of activities.
The person would like to generate income by
dealing in craft work, running or working in a
sports organization or training institutions etc.
Gain by being an artist or a sports person.
Income by providing service in stock exchange,
sports, art & cultural fields.
Gain by organizing sports & cultural events.
The native will concentrate on activities like
running sexy shops or dances, or he may deal in
antique artisti~ products. A singer may gain
money by singing tragi'l.: songs or an actor may
play the role of occultist etc.
Gain through publications, advertisement
relating to sports, arts and cultural activities,
articles of speculation etc.
Adopting sports etc. as a profession.
Income by arranging sports meets, cultural
shows, etc. 5th house being gth_ to 10th house
means unexpected gains in profession.
Gain through sports, arts and culture etc. in a
foreign country adopting prostitution as a
profession.

Sixth Cusp: If the Sub-Sub lord of the 6th cusp establishes link:
with the 2nd house through its Star lord then the native will try to
gain wealth through the significations of the 6th house viz service,
poultry- fanus, dealing in medicines, labour oriented jobs, dealing
in leather or plastics, or loans, etc. The Sub lord of the Sub-Sub
lord of the 6th cusp will qualify the results as indicated below:

All about Second House
Sub lord
linked with
House 7
House 8
House 9
House 10
House 1 1
House 12
Expected Results..
May get loans from banks or partner since 7th
house is 6th to 2nd, it supports the natives effort
to generate money through 6th house
significations. It may also indicate servi- in
banks or private company.
Service in archaeologiaal department, mines etc.
or the native has the capacity to repay loan by
getting loan.
This house being 8th to 2nd indicates impediment
in the generation of money. The native may look
towards father or religious organizations for
loans.
Service as a profession. Money as salary or
incentives.
Loans from elder brother or friends. Gain
through service or dealing in any aspect related
to 6th house.
Service in hospital, jails, or overseas. This may
also mean getting loans for repayment of debts.
Seventh Cusp: Linkage of the 7th house Sub-Sub lord through its
Star lord with 2nd cusp promises that the native wm try to generate
income through private business, working in a private company or
working as a public relation officer etc. The Sub lord of the SubSub lord of the 7th cusp will qualify or specify the results as indicated
below:

Sub lord
linked with
House 1
House 2
House 3
House 4
House s
I House 6
House 7
I House 8
I House 9
House 10
House 1 1
House 1 2
Expected Results..
Running business through self-effons.
Gain from partnership business.
Trading or travel agencies, call centers,
information centers, etc.
Centecing business activities on the 4th house
significations viz. manufacturing units, real
estate business, transpons etc.
Business related to sports, arts and culture but
sui house being llllrto the 7th and 4th. to the 2nd
proWJles gain to the partner more than the native.
This promises immense gain in business. The
| native is not going to lose earned income to
| others. It may also mean business related to 6th
| house Signification viz. medicines, poultry farm
etc.
Gain in business through the partner.
8th house being 7th to 2nd promises that the
partnership business is not favourable" to the
native.
Being 8th to 2nd house, it means the native will
have to face financial crisis in business or
through others.
Private business as profession to earn income.
Gain in private business or through others.
Loss in private business or through others.

Eighth Cusp: Eighth house is the house of unexpected gains or
losses. It is the house of unearned money because it is the house of
wealth of others. The linkage of the 8th cusp Sub-Sub lord with the
2nd CUSp through its Star lord wilt indicate how the 8th house is
going to influence the significations of the 2nd house, especially
wealth. The Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the 8th cusp wilt qualify
or specify the results as indicated below:
work in the field of occult services.

Ninth Cusp: The ninth house is called the house of father and
unkm>wn acquaintances, religion, higher education, long journeys
etc. How it will influence the generation or depletion of one's wealth
will depend upon the links that the Sub-Sub lord of this house
establish through its Star lord with the 2nd cusp as qualified or
specified by its Sub lord. It is indicated below:

All about Second House
Sub lord
linked to
House S."
House 9
House 10
House 1 1
House 12
Expected Results...
This indicates the native will face fman<llal crisis
by spending money on father's or second wife's
foreign travel or hospitalization.
This linkage indicates that the native may have
to face seliious financial crises due to his
extramarital relations, long journeys, or to safe
guard the prestige of father or second wife.
Gain through 9^ house significations in
profession.
Immense wealth through father or second wife
or imports or unkJwwn quarters.
Loss of wealth due to father's sickress 2nd is 6^
to 9^1# 12^indicates loss to the native.
Tenth Cusp: It is the house of profession, name and fame, awards
etc. When the Sub-Sub lord of lOthcusp is linked to the 2nd cusp
through its Star lord, it will reveal gain or loss through profession
as per the links that its Sub lord establishes with cusps in the chart.
It is indicated below:
Sub lord Expected Results...
linked with
House 1 Status and fman<llal gain in profession.
House 2 Gain through profession.
House 3 Increased income by way of trading or
concentrating business activities as per the
significations of the 3rd house.

Eleventh Cusp: The eleventh house is the house of one's fulfilment
of desires. It is called the house of profit i.e. the balanced sheet of
the native that indicates what he has achieved in life from the earlier
houses. It is also the house of friends. If the Sub-Sub lord of the
nth house is linked with the 2nd cusp through its Star lord it will
influence its wealtlLas per the significations of the cusps to which
its Sub lord has established links in the horoscope. It is indicated
below:

All about Second House
Twelfth Cusp: The twelfth house is called the house of expenditure,
loss, robbery, etc. It is the house of gain for others. If the Sub-Sub
lord of the 12th house establishes link with the 2nd cusp through its
Star lord it prom.ises gain from overseas, or investments or second
profession. It is like Vipreet Raj Yoga in traditional astrology. The
Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the 12th cusp will quaJify or specify
the results as indicated below:

Gain or Loss of Wealth: To answer questions relating to sources
of gain or loss of wt?alth, we need to examine the. chad: as follows:
Step 1 :Detelillline the linkages ofthe 2nd CUSjSub-Sub lord through
its Star lord. If it establishes links with cusps 1,5, 8, 9 and 12 this
will indi~te depletion of wealth. If it establishes links with 2, 4, 6,
10 and 11 it promises gain of wealth. The Sub lord and Sub-Sub
lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the second cusp specifY the specific
areas causing loss or gain of wealth.

All about Second House
Step 2: Detennine the linking planets and the linking cusps that
maintain relationships through their Star lords with the 2nd cusp.
The Sub lord and the Sub-Sub lord of the linking planet will specify
the areas of gain or loss through the significations of the linking
planet and linking cusp.
Step 3 : The other houses that we need to consider for gain of wealth
are 6 and li..
Thus a person is promised gain from those sources (represented by
planet or cusps) that establish links with houses 2, 6 and 11. The
person has to suffer losses from those sources that establish links
with house- 1,5, 8 and 12.
Timing Periods of Gain or Loss: Aperson gains in thejoint period
of the planets that provide favourable results of 2, 6 and 1 1 houses.
Aperson loses in thejoint period of planets that provide favourable
results of 5, 8 and 12 houses or in the period of those planets that
provide unfavourable results of 2, 6 and 1 1 houses. In general the
joint period of planets connected to 1,8 and 9 (unfavorable houses
for 2nd cusp) and 4,5 and 9 (unfavourable houses for profession) is
not good for fmancial/professiont. servi(;;ematters.
Loans: Technically speaking loan means increase in financial status
through others money, which may include financial institutions,
relatives, friends, unknown acquaintances, banks, corporate
societies, government or the employees etc. The person may need
loan for various purposes like purchase of property, land, and
vehicle, ornaments, etc. or setting up business or even for repayment
of earlier loans.
A person's capability to get loans is in general detelimined from the
6th house. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 6th cusp is linked to 2, 6 or 11
cusps through its Star lord it promises that the native possesses the
ability to get loans.

Sources from where Loan can be obtained.
Private parties If the 6th cusp is linked to 2, 6 and 11, it
promiBes loan from private parties.
Banks If the 7th cusp is linked to 2, 6 and 11, one
can get loan from banks.
Younger co-born If the yd III th 17th 1 gth cusp is linked to 2, 6
or Elder co-born and 1 1 one can get loan from younger
or Partner or Father co-bom_ or elder co born, partner, father
respectively.
Repayment of Loan: The ability of the native to repay loans is
detemlined from the 12th cusp. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 12th cusp
is linked to houses 5, 8 and 12 the native possesses the capability
to repay loans.
Sources of Repayment: These may be as follows:
1. Income from business, inheritance, gift, lottery, speculation.
2. Loan from baDks, other parties, relations, friends, etc.
The repayment of loan in other way means gain in wealth and its
simultanious depletion. To detelillline the sources from where one
can gain wealth for repayment of loans, we are to look for those
planets and cuspal positions which are connected to 2, 6 and 1 1 as
well as 5, 8 and 12. The other method is to note down the planet,
which is the Sub-Sub lord of the 12th cusp as explained here .
Find out in which cuspal positions it appears in the chart. The next
cuspal position will reveal the source of getting money for
repayment.. It can be the same cuspal position if this planet has the
positional status. Suppose, A is the Sub-Sub lord of the 12th cusp.
Find out if it has positional status and also the cuspal positions
where A appears as Star or Sub or Sub-Sub. If A has positional

status then you look for the sources as per these cuspal positions
otherwise, we need to look for the sources as follows:
What the Second Cusp Promises for Other
significations:
a. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd cusp is linked to the 6th cusp
through its Star lord, then the parts of the body represented by
second cusp are prone to sickooss. It may cause surgery or
hospitalization if the Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of 2nd cusp
is linked to 8th cusp or 12th cusp respectively.
b. Ifthe Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd cusp is linked to 8th cusp through
its Star lord, then the parts of the body represented by the 2nd
cusp are prone to serious sickooss. If the Sub lord of the SubSub lord of the 2nd cusp is linked to 12th cusp it indkates
defect in the part.
The specific part that is prone to sickooss or defect can be analysed
through the planetary significations of the Star lord of the Sub-Sub
lord and the Sign, Star, Sub, Sub-Sub rising on the 2nd cusp. Cure

m.
is possible if the Sub-Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd cusp
is linked to 1,5, or 11.
Oratorical Skills: The voice or speech of the native is deteMined
through the planetary significations of the Star lord of the Sub-Sub
lord of the 2nd cusp and also the SigtY'Star /Sub and Sub-Sub rising
on the 2nd cusp.

Chapter 8
Analysing Horoscope for
Educational Prospects
Education, in the real sense, means a process of developing an
integrated personality to enable the native to live in the society
with respect.. However, today education has become synonymous
with qualifiGation, the possession of a certificate or a degree. By
this, we may not be able to call the great intellectual giants like
Shakespeare, the educated persons. On the other hand, we call those
who study the Shakespearean literature and obtain degrees as
educated persons. A Gardner who might not have even entered the
gate of a school might know the secrets of Botany, whkh even the
graduate of Botany, may not know. A village housewife may be
able to cook delicious food, a rare variety of pickl- and yet be a
totally illiterate. Her expertise in cookery may even challenge the
great expert writers of cookery books. Therefore, the study of the
topic of education from the natal horoscope of a person is an enigma
in itself.
In astrology, to analyse the educational prospects, we study the
houses 1,3,4, 5, 9 and 1 1 . However, the primary house for bask
education is fourth and for higher education, it is 9th house. The
detailed procedure of analysis is given below:
Stepl. Study of the Ascendant: A person is destined to receive
reactions from those houses with which the Ascendant maintains a
connection. Thus for achieving qualifiGation or the attendance of a
school/college or an institution of learning, the Ascendant Sub-

Sub lord should establish a connection with 4th or 9th house. The
promise of the Ascendant decides the ultimate promise of any other
house. Thus the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord should be strong enough
to motivate the native to undergo the process of learning.
Step2. Study ofthe Third House: This house denotes one's mental
inclination, performance specification, writing capability,
communication skills, mental concentration and memory. Its study
indicates the native's inclination for the Subjects of study. The
disposition of the Sub-Sub lord of the yd house, its Star lord would
indicate the Subjects in whkh the native would specialise. It is
also the house of courage and confidence. As such SigWStariSub
rising on the cusp will help us to detelillline whether the native is
capable to compete or face examinations. The planetary
signif-tions of the Star lord of the Sub-Sub lord will indicate the
mental strength of the native.
Moon: The native lacks boldness to take decisions.
Saturn: The native is calculative, cautious, industrious, but
lacks confidence, and develops the fault, of
forgetfulness.
Mercury: Dual mind (To be or not to be), but good memory.
Sun, Mars: Gives courage and confidence. Jupiter in addition
Jup, Venus gives the power of concentration. Detailed
signif-tions of Signs and planets have been given in
respective chapters in my book (Basic And Traditional
Concepts) Published by Sagar Publishers New Delhi,
India.
Procedure to decide mental inclination for Subjects
a. What the Star lord of the Sub-Sub lord indi'llltes.
b. WhJltthe Star (Nakshatra) in which the Sub-Sub lord is,
indkates.
c. Linked cusps through the Star lord of the Sub-Sub lord of
the 3rd cusp.

Step 3. Study of the Fourth House: This is the primary house for
basic education. Analysis of this house will indifate:
A. Whether the native will have formal education or not.
B. The quality or excellence level likely to be achieved by the
native.
Analysis of the fourth house is carried out as follows:
1. The SigniStariSub/Sub-Sub rising on the 4th house.
2. The Sub-Sub lord and the links it establishes through its
Star lord, Sub lord, and Sub-Sub lord.
3. The Signs appeacing on the cusps to which the Star lord
of the Sub-Sub lord of the 4th cusp is linked.
4. The influence of the planets and the cusps that establish
links through their Star lords with the 4th cusp.
If the Sub-Sub lord of the 4th house establishes a relationship with
the 9th house, it indicates native's capacity to go in for higher studies.
The linkage of the Sub-Sub lord through its Star lord to cusps 3 or
8 is detrimental to education. Linkages with 1,4, 9 and 11 indicate
excellence in bask., education.
Step 4: Study of the Fifth House: This house shows the native's
intellectual capacity, his power of comprehension or understanding.
The Sub-Sub lord of the 5th house must establish links with
favourable houses for achieving success and excellence in higher
education.
Step 5: Study of the Ninth House: This is the house for higher
educational pursuits. The essential conditions for higher education
are:

A. Fourth Sub-Sub lord should maintain a connection with 9th
house.
B. Ninth house Sub-Sub lord should be linked with favourable
houses with respect to itself and also with respect to the
Ascendant.. Favourable houses for achieving excellence in
higher education are 5, 7 and 1L
C. Linkages of the Sub-Sub lord of the 9th house with 4, 8 or 12
are not considered good.
D. Link of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord with 9th house through
its Star lord or through 11th house promises success in higher
education.
Step 6: Study of the Eleventh Cusp: If the 11th house is linked to
the 9lh house it promises fulfillment of native's desire through higher
education.
Subjects, of Study: In the modem India, a child who seeks admission
in a school has no choice for Subjects up to a certain standard. Fie
has to study the Subjects that are offered by the schooL. Thus,
sometimes we find that inspite of a strong 4th house Sub-Sub lord's
links, the performance of the child is not up to his level of
expectation. If the choice is given to the child, what subjects he
will study is indicated below:
A. The Linking planets and the linking cusps that establish a
relation with the fourth/ninth house will indicate Subjects of
study. Signs appealing on the cusps where the linking planet
is placed in the cuspal positions should also be taken into
consideration.
B. The same procedure is to be followed for selecting the subjects
for basili:.and higher study. This is detailed below:

Planet establishing Subjects.- of Study.
link with 4th/9th house
Moon Textiles, chemical engineering,
psychology, water engineering,
hydraulics, musia... marketing, violin,
veena.
Medicines, chemistry, astrology,
geography.
Mechanical & civil engineering, surgery,
structural design, physic. s, martial arts,
military science.
Mercury Mathematics, engineering, astrology,
puranic studies, logic, journalism,
astrology, advertisement, public
speaking.
Venus Chemistry, electronics, computer,
agriculture, veterinary, chemical
engineering, textiles, naval science,
poetry, mUSlC, foreign literature,
sexology, nepluiology, ophthalmology.
Jupiter Law, medicine, military science,
administration, instructional techniques,
philosophy, religion, politics,
international law, business management,
banking, astrology.
Saturn Geology, petrochemi.cah engg. refinery
techniques, civiL and military engg.
electronic&, labour law, black magiG"
industrial engg.
Rahu & Ketu Radiology, photography, space science,
and the planets they represent.
Sun
Mars

Linking Cusps who Subjects.. of Study
maintain relationship
with 4th/9th house
1st house
2nd house
3rd house
4th house
5th house
6th house
7lh house
8th house
9th house
Brain, head, p~chiatry, yoga.
Sound engg. linguistics, economics,
mathematics, and dental ophthajrnology.
Electrical, electronics, communication,
computer science, printing technology,
physics, ENT, neurology, journalism
infonnation technology.
Agriculture engineering, automobile
engineering, mechanical engineering,
machinery, civil engineering, geography,
home - science, cardiology, industrial
engineering.
Architecture, film technology, sports,
atomic energy, nuclear science, arts,
musilk, paedritic, gynecology, obstetrics.
Textiles, chemisttiy, biology, medicines,
law, radiology.
Public administration, business
management, International law.
Surgical equipments, sanitary
engineering, history, zoology, study of
secret parts, urology, mining
engineering.
Aeronautical engineering, space
technology, Sansknit, philosophy, law,
colorectal surgeon, genetk disorders.

Subjects of study and Role of Planet- Pebiods: If more than
one planet that appear as the Sub Sub lord of a cusps are linked to
the 4lhY9th cusp through their Star lords, then the planet whkh comes
as the Bhukti/ Antara lord may take precedence in deciding the
Subjects of study.
Example:
Let us explain the use ofthe above method to analyse the educational
prospects through an example. Refer chart fig 8.1. This is the chart
of a young man who has successfully completed his basic education.
Through out his education, the native has shown excellent results.
He has obtained the degree ofB. Tech, in Information Technology.
The native competed in GATE (Graduate Aptitude Test in
EngineeLing) conducted by LLT. and secured a very high rank.
Inspite of this the native has declined the offer tojoin M. Tech. He
has decided tojoin service. Let us analyse the chart

Kalamsa ft, ~
Interliaks
Simpfifiad §W, Enlarged
Date of Birth: 09.06.1982 time of Birth: 11,29.41 hrs.
Place of Birth: LaL 28N39, Long nEB
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit”
Cusp Chart

Analysing Horoscope for Educational Prospects
Planetary Position

Step 1: Promise of the Ascendant: The Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant is Moon. It is in Venus Star. Venus is linked to the houses
1,4, 5,9 and 1 1 . The Ascendant promises baskand higher education
by its direct linkage through Star lord. Moon is in the Sub of Saturn
that appears in 9lh cusp. This promises fulfillment of native's desire
through higher education. However, Saturn is also linked to 3 and
8. This lowers the promise of higher education. Ascendant's link
with 1 and 1 1 promises great success in life. Saturn Sub lord of
Moon in 3 and 9 indicates why the native chose Infonnation
Techrology as his choice Subject..
Step 2: Analysis of Third Cusp: The Sub-Sub lord of the third
cusp is Saturn. It is in Moon Star that appears in 1,2, 5, 6, 9 and l'O.
This linkJlge promBes enough strength to the native to compete in
examinations. Third cusp is rising in the Sign Libra in Rahu Star
and Saturn Sub. Rahu represents Mercury. The attributes of the
planets co-ruling the third cusp show the right choice of the native
in the selection of the Subjects. Saturn in the third cusp, where the
Libra Sign rises provides the desired courage and confidence to
the native.
Step 3: Analysis of the Fourth Cusp: The Sub-Sub lord of the
fourth cusp is Venus. It is in Venus Star and Moon Sub. Thus 4th
cusp is linked to 1,4, 5, 9 and 11. The Star lord's linkages are hilly
supported by the Sub lord. Tenth cusp linkage of Moon hints at
getting name and fame in education. Analysis of the Signs rising
on the cusps where Venus appears also supports the native's choice
of Subjects.
Step 4: Analysis of Fifth Cusp: The Sub-Sub lord of the Fifth
Cusp is Jupiter. It is in Rahu Star, Rabu Sub and Saturn Sub-Sub.
Rahu appears in the cuspaJ positions 3,7, 10 and 1 1 . Rahu represents
Mercury. Mercury is in the 7lh cusp. Thus the fifth house promises
a high level of intellectual capability and link of 1 1 indicates that
the native has the right attitude to compete successfully.

Step 5: Analysis of Ninth House: The Sub-Sub lord of the ninth
cusp is Moon that establishes links with cusps 1,4, 5, 9, and 11.
Linkage with 4th house is bad for higher education. Moon is in the
Sub of Saturn that appears in 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10 and 12. Linkages of
Sub lord with 3,8 and 12 are not good for higher education.
Step 6: Analysis of the Eleventh Cusp: The Sub-Sub lord of the
nth cusp is Venus. We have seen above that Venus is linked to
cusps 1,4, 5, 9 and 11. There is direct link with 9th cusp and Moon
the Sub of Venus is linked to Ninth cusp. Destiny has thus ensured
the native of higher education.
Step 7: Planets and cusps that are linked to fourth house will
influence the significations of the fourth cusp. Here, in this chart
Moon, Venus and Ketu are in the Star of Venus and thus will
influence significations of the fourth cusp according to their
planetary significations as well as through the significations of the
cusps in which they appear. Saturn is the Star lord of the fourth
cusp and the Sub and Sub-Sub lord of the third cusp. It has positional
status and thus, there is a strong connection between third and fourth
cusps. The native studied Physics, Chemistry, MathematiC8, and
Computer before taking up the Information technology in B. Tech.
All this is due to linkages of cusps 2 (Mathematics), 6 (Chemistqr),
3 (Physics, Computer, Information technology). The planet Venus,
who is strongly linked with fourth cusp, is Significator of Chemist!¥.
and Computer. Ketu indili:ates Mathematics.
The above analysis clearly reveals the reasons for the native to
decline admission in M. Tech.

Chapter 9
Analysing Diseases
We have already discussed the theories of diseases in the chapter
"Kalamsa Theory and Analysis ofNirayana Chart". Analysis of a
chart to detemline the nature of diseases a person is likely to suffer
in his life is done using Cuspal Interlinks theory as follows:
Step 1: Status of Health: The linkage of the Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant through its Star lord with 6th or 8th or 12th indicates that
the native is prone to sickress. If the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord is
simultaneously linked with 6, 8 and 12 then the native is likely to
suffer serious diseases like cancer. If the Ascendant is also linked
with 3 or 9 along with 6,8, 12, it may point to the removal of some
organs. The Sub lord and the Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant Sub-Sub
lord as per their cuspal positions would reveal the parts of the body
likely to be affected by diseases.
Step 2: Analysis of 6th Cusp: The general significations of the 6th
cusp are indicated by the sum total of attributes of the planets coruling the 6th cusp. The Sub-Sub lord of the 6th cusp indicates the
specific significations as follows:
A) The significations of the Sub-Sub lord of the 6th cusp as
modified by the Sign rising on the 6th cusp.
B) The significations of the Star lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the
6th cusp as modified by the Signs rising on the cusps where

Analysing Diseases
the Star lord appears as Sign, Star; Sub or Sub-Sub.
C) The house signifiaations of the cusps where the Star lord
appears in cuspaJ positions or in Bhava chart
The nature of the disease is indicated by the planetary significations
of Sub-Sub lord and its Star lord. The house positions of Star lord
will indicate the area of concentration of disease. The Sub lord and
the Sub-Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the 6th cusp will specify
the areas more minutdy. Ifthe Sub-Sub lord of the 6th cusp is linked
to the Ascendant through its Star lord, its Sub lord will clearly
specifY the area where the disease will concentrate as per its cuspaL
positions. If the Sub-Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the 6th cusp is
linked to 1,5, 11, the native is promised cure. Its link with 8 or 12
causes serious health problens.
Step 3 : Analyse the 8th cusp for serious or fatal disease or accident
in the same way as we have explained in step 2.
Step 4: Any planet can affect the heajth of the native if it is linked
to the Ascendant through its Star lord and is committed to 6, 8, 12
through its Sub-lord. The disease can also be caused by any planet
who is linked with. 6, 8, 12 through its Star lord and with Ascendant
through its Sub-lord or vice-a-versa. Nature of the disease will be
as per the nature of the linking planet as modified by the Sign rising
on the linking cusp and as per the significations of the linking cusp.
For example; if Sun or Mars appears in 5th or 7th or lillt cusp and is
linked to Ascendant through its Star lord and linked to 6th cusp
through its Sub lord, the native may suffer from viral fever during
the periods of Sun & Mars.
If the Sub-Sub lord of the 6th cusp or its Star lord or the planet
causing the disease is connected with Saturn, disease becomes

chronic, if with Mars disease is acute, sudden and painful, and cause
operations, if with Mercury disease gets complicated, and if with
Rahu and Ketu, diseases, more often than not, remains undiagnosed.
Similarly, if the Sub-Sub lord of sib or 121bcusp be linked to 6 or s
or 12 through its Star lord and with Ascendant through its Sub lord,
the native suffers from serious illness or chronic disease or the
disease which might bring some permanent defect..
Timing Disease and Cure: Disease is caused during the period of
a planet who has established links with Ascendant and 61b or sib or
12th house in the natal chart or by a planet who establishes a link
between Ascendant and 6th or sth or 121b house during transit.. Cure
is possibltL in the period of planets that are linked to houses 1,5, or
11. It may, however, be remembered that if a person falls sick at
the start of a Dasa or a Bhukti as per its natal significations then the
cure will not be possible during the Bhukti or Antara of any planet,
however strongly it may be connected with 1,5 and 11. The cure
will be possible only in the next Dasa or Bhukti as the case may be
who is linked with 1,5 and 11. It may also be pointed out that if the
Ascendant Sub-Sub lord does not promise any serious sickness, it
is not essential that the Dasa or Bhukti connected with 1,6,S or 12
will cause disease. 6th sth, or 12th house not only stand for sickness,
they have other significations also.
Let us Analyse the following charts to detelillline the nature of the
diseases a native is destined to suffer in his life:
Example 1: Refer chart of fig. 9. L This is the chart of a person
whose kidney was removed on 51b October 1976.
Date ofbirth: 26 April 1915
Time ofbirth: OS.OL16 A.M.
Place ofbirth: Latitude 23 N2 and Long 72 E 35.

Analysing Diseases
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit"
Cusp Chart

Planetat¥ Position
Nirayana Cusps

Analysing Diseases
Step 1: Analysis of Ascendant: The Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant is
Jupiter. It is in Moon Star. Moon appears in 6th cusp as Sub lord.
Jupiter is in the Sub of Ketu who appears in 1, 4, 8, 10 and 12
cusps. Ketu also represents Mars who appears in 6th, 7th, 10th &
12lh cusp. Ketu also represents Mercury that appears in 2nd, 4th &
12lh cusp. The linkage of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord through its
Star lord with 6th cusp and supported by its Sub lord linked with 8
and 12 clearly indicates that the native is destined to face serious
health problllDls. The cusps indicate the parts of the body that are
prone to sickness where Ketu, Mars and Mercury appears. The SubSub lord of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord is Venus that appears in
the 2nd, 6th and 9th cusp. This indicates that the native's structure of
the body will undergo a change due to the failure of some organ.
Venus is suggestive of kidney.
Step 2: Analysis of 6th Cusp: The cusp rises in Libra Sign and
Chitra Star ruled by Mars, Moon Sub and Saturn Sub-Sub. As per
the natural significations of this degree rising on the 6th cusp, the
natures of the diseases a native will suffer are as follows.
Failure of adrenal gland, excessive urine, renal stone, kidney
hemorrhage, appendicitis, hernia, lumbago, ulcers, sharp acute pains
etc.
In this chart, the planets Venus, Mars Moon and SatuI'Qare all under
the dictates of either Venus or Jupiter by being in their Star, Sub or
Sub-Sub. This helps us to specify the disease relating to the planets
Venus and Jupiter through Mars and Moon. Diabetes and kidney
trouble thus looks more prominent, along with heart problem
because of Mars and Moon.

The Sub-Sub lord of the 6th cusp will specifiGally indicate the
disease. It is Satunl\ karaka for chronic disease, and being in its
own Star, clearly specifies the parts as indicated by 6th house, i.e.
appendicitis, kidney, etc. Saturn also appears in 3, 4, 5, 7,8, 10, 11
and 12. This reveals, in fact, that there is no resistance in the body
of the native. Saturn is in Jupiter Sub that appears in 1,3, 7, 8, 9
and 1 1 . Since Rahu the Sub lord of Ascendant also acts as Jupiter,
it further confmns the native's poor health.
Step 3: Rahu in the chart is in the Star of Ketu who represents
Mars. Rahu is thus linked to 6,8 and 12 houses and is influencing
the nature of the disease. Rahu being in the Sub-Sub of Jup who is
appearing in the 9th- And Sat the Sub-Sub lord of 6th & 8th is in the
Sub-Sub of Sat appearing in 9th cusp further clearly establishes the
kidney problem and its removaL.
The native in fact suffered from many ailments. His kidney was
removed on 5.1011976 in the joint period of Mercury -Rahu -Rahu
- Saturn - Venus.
Example 2: Refer chart of fig. 9.2. This is the chart of a person
who suffered from Leukaemia i.e. blood cancer.

Analysing Diseases
Lat,23N34
Lagna Chart
Bhav "Chalit"
Cusp Chart
Fig 9.2

Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Leukemia is a malignant growth of white corpus~es in blood, which
is commonly known as cancer of blood. A native usually suffers
from such a disease when the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord is
simultaneously linked to 6th, 8th and 12th cusps. Also the 6,h/8th
cusp should be simultaneously linked with_6,h 8th and 12th cusps.
Rahu and Jupiter are important planets known for causing cancer.
Mars and Moon cause diseases of blood. Diseases due to blood
cells are caused if the Sub-Sub lord of the 5th or the nth cusp links
with 6/8 cusps. Let us analyse the above chart to verify why the
native had to suffer this disease.
Analysis of Ascendant: .The Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant is Saturn.
It is in Moon Star and Venus Sub. Moon is the Sub-Sub lord of the
6th cusp and Venus is the Sub-lord of 8th and Sub-Sub lord of 12th
cusp. Thus the Ascendant Sub- Sub lord is simultaneously linked to
6,8,9 and 12. Saturn is in the Sub-Sub of Moon which appears in
2 and 6. This indicates the disease may prove fataL
Analysis of 6th Cusp: Moon is the Sub-Sub lord of the 6th cusp. It
is in Saturn Star and Jupiter Sub and Rahu Sub-Sub. Moon thus
involves the Ascendant and commits to 6,8 and 12, where Jupiter
appears. The natural significations of the planets co-ruling the degree
rising on the 6th cusp do not indicate the disease the native suffered.
But if we analyse their significations as per chart, it reveals every
thing.
Venus the Sign lord is in Ketu Star; Rahu Sub and Rahu Sub-Sub
completely controlling the 5th cuspal position and linking with 8th
and 12th cusps. Sun the Star lord of the 6th cusp is in Mer Star and
Moon Sub i.e. Sun involves the 5th house and commits to 6th house.
Jupiter the Sub lord of the 6th cusp is in Moon star and Sun Sub.
Thus Jupiter involves the n th cusp and commits to 6th cusp. Jupiter
is in the Sub-Sub of Venus that appears in 8 and Badhaka cusp. 6th ,
cusp Sub-Sub lord also promises that the disease will prove fataL

Study of the 8th Cusp: For serious sickness or fatal diseases we
need to analyse 8^ cusp. Here the Sub-Sub lord of the S^1 cusp is
RallU who also represents Saturn and Jupiter. Rahu is in Jupiter
Star and as such is linked to 6, 8 and 12 cusps simultaneously.
Rahu as Jupiter and Saturn clealily reveals the concentration of
disease on the 5^/11 lhcuspal position and also since there Sub-Sub
lords are linked to MarakalBadhaka or 8m cusp, disease will prove
fatal..
For diseases due to blood cells, 5^ or lllh house should be linked
to 6^/8^-cusp.
The 5 " cusp is co-ruled by Ketu as Star lord, Rahu as Sub lord and
Mercury as Sub-Sub lord. All are linked with 6^ or 8^' cusp.
Eleventh cusp is co-rullWby Mars as Star lord. Moon as Sub lord
and Venus as Sub-Sub lord. All these planets are linked with 6^
and 8"1 cusp.
Thus the linkages of the Sub- Sub lords of Ascendant, 6^ cusp and
8*h cusp through their Star lords and Sub lords promise that the
native was destined to suffer serious disease related to 5^/11 lhcuspal
positions. The Sub-Sub lord of the 5lb cusp is Mercury who occupies
Aquarius Sign whkh tells about diseases related to blood cells.
Mercury involves the 8"1 cusp through its Star lord Jupiter and being
in its own Sub commits to 1 and 5. This indicates decay of blood
cells. Rahu the Sub-Sub lord of the 8^ cusp involves the 8^ cusp
through its Star lord and commits to Ascendant.. This also indicates
decay of blood cells. Saturn that represents Rahu involves the
cusp through its Star lord Moon and commits to 11th cusp through
its Sub lord Venus. This clearly points out chronic disease of blood
cancer

The native died on 5.1.1969 in the joint period of Moon - Sat -
Mercury - Mercury - Ketu. Dasa lord is linked with I and 8, being
in Saturn Star and Jupiter Sub. Saturn being in Moon Star and Venus
Sub is linked to 2nd house and 9th house i.e. Badhakasthana. Mercury
and Ketu are not only linked with Maraka and Badhakasthana but
also linked with houses that are to cause death.
At the time of death Sun was transiting in the Star of Venus who is
the Sub lord of the 8th cusp. Moon was transiting in Jupiter Star
and Rahu Sub. Both these planets appear in 8th cuspal position.

Chapter 10
Marriage and Married Life
Seventh house stands for partners and associates whose interests
are blended with those of the native whether in love or hate. It is
known as Kalatrasthanam - the place of spouse, sexual union, semen,
genitals and secret pleasures arising from sexual union. It also
Signifies, trade, private business, social relationships, International
relationships, break in journey, maniage, divorce. We will limit
our discussion to the analysis of the 7th house to the delineation of
the nativity with respect to his maniage and married life.
Indians regarded maniage in the ancient past as a sacred institution,
which provides legal, moral and social sanctity to the native to
enjoy sexua.l pleasures. The purpose, of course, was procreation.
With the crumbling of the moral values, marriage today is regarded
by many as if it is nothing more than legalized prostitution.
Mamage, in fact, has different connotations in different societies
in the world. Peopl- enjoy sexual pleasures living under the same
roof with mutual consent and even produce a child, yet they are not
ready to use the word maniage to describe their relationship. Such
questions pose serious problems to the Astrologer when he is asked
upon to analyse the horoscope to answer a volley of questions by
the native or hislher parents.
Analysing the horoscope for maniage, calls upon the Astrologer to
look for answers to the two most important questions.
1. Is the native promised maniage?
2. When the maniage will take place, if it is promised.

There is, of course, a long list of supplementary questions relating
to marriage viz.
a. Will it be love or arranged marriage?
b. Will there be delay and impediments in mauiage?
c. What will be the physical and mental characteristics of
the partner?
d. What will be the finanlcial status and career profile of
the partner?
e. Will the partner enjoy long and healthy life?
f. From whicil direction and locality the pa.rtner will come?
g. What will be the quality and longevity of mauied life?
h. Is there any chance of separation or second mCLUiage?
l. Is the partner capable to pelfornL sexual act?
j. Is the partner capable to procreate?
Houses That Need To be Analysed For Mardage:
Generally the Vedic Astrologers consider the 7th house as the
Primary house for Marriage. The other relevant houses are taken
as:
Second House: It is the house of family. MCLUiageis taken as an
addition in the family. Here I would like to suggest to the reader to
ponder a little bit. The mauiage may be an addition in the family if
the mauiage partner joins the family. Moreover, the 2nd house is,
infact, a house of danger, and deafu to the 7th house.
Fifth House: It is the house of magnetic attractions, socially
accepted forms of courtship, romantic affairs and progeny.
Eleventh House: It is the house of fulfilhnent of one's desires and
personal needs. It is also the fifth house from the 7th House.

Twelfth House: It is considered as the house of pleasures of bed.
How far we need to take 12th house to analyse mauiage is a question
of debate. One can enjoy bed comfoJis outside wedlock.. This house
is the house of self-undoing and is generally regarded as a house of
loss.
Fourth House: No doubt it is considered as the house of domestic
happiness but why should it need to take part in enacting mauiage
is questionable. This house being 12th to the 5th house can detail
for disturbed mamed life.
From the above discussion it is clear that the houses that should
take part in enacting mmiage are 5, 7 and 11.
The Promise or denial of marriage should be decided as follows:
1 . Mwiage is prowised if:
a) The Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is linked through its
Star lord with 5 or 7 or 11 cusp, or linked to 7th cusp
through eleventh cusp.
b) The Sub-Sub lord of the 7th cusp is linked with 5 or 7 or
11 through its Star lord.
2. Mwiage is denied if both the following conditions exist in
the horoscope.
a) The Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is linked to 4, 6, 10
and 12 cusps through its Star lord and does not link to 5,
or 7 or 11 through its Star lord or by positional status.
b) The Sub-Sub lord of the 7th cusp is linked to 4,6, 10, &
12 cusps through its Star lord and does not link to 5 or 7
or 11 through its Star lord or by positional status.

Marriage promis.ed but delayed: Mamage comes off late due to
the following reasons:
1. The Ascendant Sub-Sub lord is linked with 5 or 7 or 11 through
its Star lord but linked to 2, 4, 10, or 12 cusps through Sub
lord and Sub-Sub lord.
2. The Ascendant Sub lord is linked through Star lord with 7 and
with houses 2,4, 10 and 12 through Sub lord or Sub-Sub lord.
3. The Sub-Sub lord of the 7^ cusp is linked through its Star
lord with 2,4, 6, 10, and 12 along with 5 or 7 or 11.
4. The Sub-Sub lord of the 7^ cusp is linked to 5 or 7 or 11 but
is connected to 2, 4, 6,10, or 12through Sub or Sub-Sub lord.
5. The eleventh Sub-Sub lord is connected to 7**1 cusp through
its Star lord and linked to 2, 4, 6, 10, or 12 cusps through its
Sub lord.
Marriage comes off early in the absence of the above and also when
7^ Sub-Sub lord is linked through its Star lord with 3, 5, 7 or 11.
Happy or Unhappy Married Life:
The 7*h house is the house of sexual relationships and the house of
spouse. 7*h house in the horoscope is the counter part of this
Ascendant.. The relationship between the two depends upon the
promise what the 7*^ house indicates in respect of the Ascendant..
Looking at eleventh house for the relationship between the
Ascendant and his partner is not very convincing. Suppose, the
eleventh cusp is linked strongly with the 6th and lOthcusp, it should
only indicate that the native could fulfill, his desili.es through the
significations of the 6*^ and lO^house. It however, does not mean

that the native's rnauied life is going to be full of dissatisfaction.
A person will lead a happy mauied life if the 7th cusp and Ascendant
Sub-Sub lords are free from the linkages of 4, 6, 12th cusps. If both
the Ascendant and the 7th cusp Sub-Sub lord are simultaneously
linked with these houses, it definitely indicates a very unhappy
man:ied life. This may even hint at possible divorce if the Dasa
periods also indicate results of 4th, 6th, 10th or 12th cusps. The links
of the Ascendant and 7th cusp Sub-Sub lord with houses 3,5, 7, 9,
and 1 1 are indicative of happy manied life.
The detailed analysis should be done as; follows:
1. If the Sub-Sub lord or the Sub lord of the Ascendant of the
native is linked through its Star lord with 7th cusp, and this
Star lord happens to be the ruling planet of the life partner,
(i.e. the Star lord appears as Star or Sub or Sub-Sub lord of
the Ascendent of the life partner) it will cause dissatisfaction
to the native through the partner, if it is linked to cusps 4, 6,
10 and 12through its Sub lord or Sub-Sub lord. The Sub lord
and Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord will specifY
the specific area by way of which the dissatisfaction to the
native 'will happen. For example, linkage with 6th cusp through
the Sub lord may cause separation i.e. wife leaving the native
due to the ego of the native or his behaviour.
2. If the Sub-Sub lord or the Sub-lord of the 7th cusp is linked to
5 or 7 or II and also linked with I, 2 or 6, or 12, this will
cause dissatisfaction through the life partner provided the SubSub lord or the Sub lord of the 7th cusp happens to be the
ruling planet of the life partner. The Sub lord will specifY the
reasons for dissatisfaction. For example; if the 7th cusp SubSub lord is linked to 1st cusp through its Star lord, then the
specific areas by which the partner will cause for disturbed
relations will be told by Sub lord as follows:

Sub lord
linked with
House 1
House 2
House 4
House 6
House 10
Expected results.
Dominance of the life parmer.
Frequent reminder about the status and money
that the partner has provided.
May be due to ill treatment of the mother of the
native or due to the partner's professional
activities.
May be due to the ill health of the native.
May be due to taking undue interest in the
partner's business.
Any planet during its Dasa periods can cause disturbance in married
life if it is linked with 7th house through its Star lord and with
houses 4, 6, lOor 12through the Sub or the Sub-Sub lord provided
the planet happens to be the ruling planet of the native or the partner.
Extra-Mantal Relationships or Plurality of Sexual
Relationships:
Will a person involve in sexual intrigues or sexual relationships
with persons other than his or her legally or socially accepted parmer
should be judged very metiGUlously. We need to analyse the
following cusps to be able to hint at some probability of the native's
involving in plurality of sexual relationships.
1. Ascendant: The Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant reflects the mental
set-up of the native. If it links with 9th1 cusp, which is considered
primarily the house of extra marital relationships or the second
wife, there is a possibility but no confirmation. Ninth house
stands for many other signifillations also. However, it is a
necessary condition.

2. 7th Sub-Sub lord should be linked to the 9th cusp through its
Star lord. Again it is an essential condition only. No one should
declare that the native would have extra marital relations, even
when bofu the above conditions exist in the horoscope.
3. Whether the native has the required courage, boldness and
confidence to involve in sexual intrigues is seen from the third
cusp.
4. The attitude of the native is analysed from the fifth cusp. If
the Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp is linked to 9th cusp and the
12th cusp, the person may possess the inclination for extra
marital relations.
Sexual intrigues are as a matter of fact indicative of the native's
perversion of mind. This is reflected by the Ascendant and the 5th
cusp Sub-Sub lords through their links wifu 5, 8 and 12 cusps.
Planets Saturn, Mars and Venus appearing as the Sub-Sub lords of
Ascendant, 5th and 7th cusp with above linkages may paint out to
extramarital relations of the native to some extent surely.
Physical and Mental Characteristics of the
Partner:
Take the 7th cusp as the Ascendant of the partner and analyse it as
indicated for the Ascendant in the chapter "Analysing the
Ascendant" .
Profession and Financial Status of the Partner
It should be examined through the Sub-Sub lords of the 4th and 8th
house respectively. This should, however, be done in consonance
with the 7th house i.e. the Ascendant of the partner.

Marriage and Married Life
Age difference between the partners: It is analysed through the
planetary significations of the Sub-Sub lord of the 7m cusp and its
Star lord as modified by the Signs rising on the cuspal positions
where the Star lord appears. In general, Saturn is said to indi~te
eldedy partner or a partner that looks older than his or her age.
Jupiter, Sun, and Venus denote proper age difference. Moon, Mars
and Mercury indi~te young partners Le. age difference may be
small.
Direction and locality of the partner
Each planet, each house and each Sign has been assigned the ruler
ship over a direction. To detenmne the direction of the partner means
the direction of the birthplace of the partner with respect to the
place of birth of the native. Locality means the living place of the
partner with respect to the living place of the native.
Direction is indicated by the Star Lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the
7m cusp and its appearance in the cuspal positions. The planetary
Signification ofthe Star lord and the direction indicated by its cuspal
position should be combined to determine the direction. For
example, if the Star lord of the Sub-Sub lord is Moon and it appears
in the sin cusp, it indicates North-West direction. If the two show
contrary directions, then the direction indicated by the cuspal
position should be taken as more probable direction. If the SubSub lord's Star lord appears in cuspal positions which are contrary,
we should also analyse through the Star lord of the Sub lord of the
7m cusp and decide. Locality ofthe partner should be judged from
the Sub-Sub lord of the loin cusp (Le. 4Mi from the 7m). If it links
with 4m through its Star lord, it indicates that the partner may be
from the same place where the native is living; with gin the partner
may be from a far off place; with 121'1 it may indicate that the partner
may be from overseas. In complicated cases, we may decide the
common house by detemlining the linkage of the Sub lord of the
7m cusp.

Nature of Marriage:
It is indicated by the signify llitions of the linking planet and the
linking cusps that establish relation through its Star lord with the
cusp. It is indicated below:

Marriage and Married Life
Matching the Horoscope:
Often an Astrologer is asked to match the horoscopes of a male
and a female who want to marry and thus become life partners. The
psychology behind this request from the clients is the belief that
the destiny of an individual undergoes a transformation due to this
alliance. This belief has gained strength because of the statistiG:al
analysis of the mamed life of couples that face health, finan(;jal
status and life hazards or who have gained in social and finan(;jal
status and general level of prosperity. There may be some truth in it
if we understand the role of environment. . Each person, each object
sends some vibrations according to its own chemistry. If these
vibrations produce synchronous effect on the person, it may improve
hislher living and cause for hislher happiness. But this belief is
basically in contradiction to the philosophy of Astrology. A native
is destined to bear the fruits of his own Kama. His longevity, health,
prosperity, and social status are governed by his own nativity. If
the native is destined to have setbacks only after marriage, no
amount of matching the horoscopes is going to prevent it. If he is
destined to get promotion in his professional career after marriage,
he will get it irrespective of the quality of matching of horoscopes
arrived by Astrologers. Broadly speaking the quality of manied
life depends upon the following:
1. PhysiG:a land mental compatibility.
2. Social and financial status compatibility.
3. Attitude of life partners particularly to sexual relationship,
respect for individuality, respect for partner's relations etc.
4. DomestiG-environment; quality and quantity of intenerence
by close relatives.
5. Good or bad experiences of mauied life of close relatives
or friends.
6. Purpose for which the persons go in for mauiage.

The basis for matching two horoscopes should be resorted to answer
the following two important questions:
A. Can the two marry?
B. Should the two marry?
Therefore, the matching of the horoscopes should be resorted to
deta.iled analysis of each individual's chart for health, longevity,
potency, professional and financial status etc. In Cuspal Interlinks
Theory, it is suggested that the matching of the horoscopes of two
persons, Mr. A and Miss B for the matrimonial alliance should be
done as follows:
1. Two persons A & B will marry only if the ruling planets
(Planets co-ruling the Ascendant and Moon position) of
Mr. A are linked with cusps 5, 7 and 11 of Miss Band
vice-a-versa.
Ifthe ruling planets of Mr. A are linked with cusps 1,6 and 10
of Miss B, no maniage between the two can take place. For
mixed significations, consider other factors also.
2. Ascendant Sub-Sub lord of Mr. A should not be linked with
cusps 4, 6, 10 and 12, houses ofMiss Band vice-a-versa.
3. 7fu cuspal Sub-Sub lord of Mr. A should reveal the Moon
position of B and vice-a-versa. It is done as follows:
a. The Sub-Sub lord it-self can be Moon Star lord of the
partner.
b. Any planet in the Star or Sub or Sub-Sub lord of the
Sub-Sub lord of the 7th cusp can be the Star lord of Moon
of the partner.
c. Moon Star lord of the partner may be in Star, Sub or
Sub-Sub whkh is the Sub-Sub lord of 7th cusp of native.

Marriage and Married Life
4. Planets co-ruling the 7th cusp of Mr. A and the planets in the
Star or Sub of these planets in Mr. A's horoscope should reveaL
the Ascendant of Miss Band vice-a-versa.
5. Potency of the partners should be judged from the 5th cusp in
each horoscope.
6. Health, Longevity, financial status, progeny should be analysed
from the respected houses cuspal Sub-Sub lords in each
horoscope.
7. Estimated date of mauiage in the two horoscopes should agree.
Timing Marriage: If mauiage is promised it will take place in the
joint period of the planets as indicated below:
1. Dasa pehiod: The Dasa lord should be linked to 5 or 7 or 11
cusps. If the Dasa lord is only linked to 4,6, 10 or 12 without
establishing any link through its Star, or Sub or Sub-Sub with
5 or 7 or 11 cusps it will not allow mauiage to take place
during its period.
2. Bhukti lord: A mauiage often takes place in the Bhukti of a
planet who is linked with 7th cusp as follows:
a) The planet appears in the cuspal position of the 7th cusp
as Star or Sub or Sub-Sub and is linked through its Star
lord with 5 or 7 or 11. It should not be linked to 6th cusp
through its Sub lord.
b) The planet appears in the 7th cuspaL positions and has
the positional status.
c) Any planet can cause mauiage if
(i) It is linked with 7th cusp through its Star lord and is
not simultaneously linked to 6th cusp through its
Sub lord.

2JQ
(ii) It is linked to 5^ or ll.thcusp through its Star lord
and to 7th 'cusp through its Sub lord.
3. Antara & Sookshma lords should establish favourable links
with 5, 7 and 1 1 cusps.
4. The maniage will take place in the joint period of the planets
as per above conditions, when transit agrees.
Second Marriage: The concept of second marriage is Subjective.
To some it means re - maniage after the death of the ftrst wife or
after a legal divorce. Some enjoys the legal or religion sanctity to
have a second wife while the ftrst wife is alive and also lives with
the native. Astrologers quote a number of planetary combinations
or yoga's that cause for second maniage. There are Astrologers
who believe that the planets Mercury and Jupiter being lords of the
dual Signs play Signiftcant role in causing second marriage.
According to them, if the Sub lord of the 71'1 cusp is either Mercury
or any planet occupying a dual Sign or deposited in the constellation
of a planet in a dual Sign, there will be more than one maniage. If
we seriously apply these rules, we will penorce have to believe
that a very large number of persons have to have second maniage.
In Cuspal Interlinks Theory, the problem is analysed as follows:
The ninth house is taken as the house of plurality of sexual relations
being 3rd from 7t'1,It is thus taken as the primary house for second
maniage. If the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord maintains relationship with
^cusp through its Star lord and with cusps 5 or 7 or 11 through its
Sub or Sub-Sub lord, the native is promised the enjoyment of
plurality of sexual relationships. The Ascendant Sub-Sub lord can
also establish link: with the 9t'1'Lusp through its Sub lord when it is
linked to Ilth' cusp through its Star lord. The Sub-Sub lord of the
7111' cusp if linked with the 9^tusp through its Star lord and to cusps
5 or 11 through its Sub or Sub-Sub lord it promises plurality of
sexual relations.

Marriage and Married Life
If the above two conditions exist and also if the 9th cusp Sub- Sub
lord maintains link with the 7th cusp through its Star lord and is
supported by its Sub and Sub-Sub lord, second mauiage can be
said to be promised. All about the second mauiage and life partner
need to be analysed by taking the 9th cusp as the primary cusp.
The second mauiage will take place in the Bhukti period of the
planet that is strongly linked with 9th cusp.
Marriage - Divorce and Remarriage:
Sometimes a Mauied couple seeks divorce due to some reasons.
This, ofcource, should be promised in the horoscopes of the two
natives. Then after some period they think to re-marry.' This is,
thus, a case of second mauiJlge but between the same persons that
were characterised by the 7th cusps of both the horoscopes. In such
cases we need to analyse the horoscopes of both the persons as
follows:
Step 1 : Both the horoscopes should promise pt marriage between
two persons, and also divorce.
Step 2: Both the horoscopes should promise second ma.mage.
Step 3: The ninth cusp of each should reveal the Moon position
and Ascendant of the other in the same way as revealed by the 7th
cusp in each horoscope. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 9mcusp in any
horoscope fails to reveal the Moon position of the other, they will
not be able to re-mart)';
Step 4: Both the horoscopes should promise the same period of
second mauiage.
Let us try to see the application of all the prin~ples stated in this
chapter in respect of Mauiage and mam~d life through an example.

Kalamsa ~ ~
Interlinks
Simplified aDJi, Fnlamed
Example: Refer charts fig. 10.1 and fig. 10.2. These are the charts
of a couple that mamed on 10.2.2001... flic malriage was arranged
with the consent of the parents. Fig. 10.1 is the chart of Mr. A and
fig. 10.2 is the chart of Mrs. A.
Mr. A Date of Birth: 07.06.1973 Time of Birth: 03.20.::40hrs.
Place of Birth: Lat. 28N39, Long. 77EB.
Mrs. A Date of Birth: 04.12.1976 Time ofBirth: 00.55.11 hrs.
Place of Birth: Lat. 28N30, Long. 77E06.
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit"

Marriage and Married Life
Plane- Position
Nirayana Cusps

2M
Kalamsa
Interlink!)
Simqlifierl £)QJi | EnJagwrl
Lagna Chart
ShaY "Chalit"
Cusp Chart

Marriage and Married Life
Planetal¥ Position

Step 1. Promise of Mamage:
Mr: A: The Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant is Rahu that is in the Star
and Sub of Venus that appears in Sthand 7l^cuspaJ positions. Thus,
the Ascendant promises that the native is destined to enjoy the
significations of the 7m cusp. The Sub-Sub lord of the 7th cusp is
Ketu that represents Rahu and Mercury. Ketu and Mercury both
are in Rahu Star that is the Star lord of 7lh and Sub-Sub lord of Sth
cusp. Rahu also represents Venus who is the Sub lord of both Sth
and 7lh cusp. All these clearly reveal that the native is promised
mauiage. However, Mercury being in Saturn Sub causes for some
delay due to its linkage with_41^ and IOthcusps.
Mrs. A: The Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is Jupiter that has
positional status and appears in Sth, 71^ and llthcusp. More over
Jupiter is in Sun Star and is thus linked to Sthcusp and being in
Rahu Sub that represents Venus, it is also linked to 7^ cusp. The
Ascendant thus promises mattiage.
The Sub-Sub lord of the 71^ cusp is Ketu. It is in its own star and
Saturn Sub that appears in Sth& 7th. The mauiage is thus promised.
Matching the Two Horoscopes:
Step 1 : The two persons will many if the ruling planets of Mr. A
are linked with cusps S, 7 or 1 1 of Mrs. A and vice-a-versa.
The Ruling planets of Mr. A are Mars, Venus and Rahu. In Mrs. P\s
horoscope, Mars is in the Star of Saturn who is the Sub-Sub lord of
Sth cusp and in the Sub of Jup who appears in Sth, 7th and 1 1
cusps. Venus is the Sub lord of 71^ cusp in Mrs. P\s horoscope and
is in Sun Star who is the Star lord of Sthcusp. Rahu in Mrs. P\s
horoscope represents Venus which is the Sub lord of 71^ cusp. Rahu
is in Rahu Star who is the Sub lord of the Sthcusp. Rahu is in the

Marriage and Married Life
Sub of Jupiter who is the Star lord of 7th & 11th and Sub-Sub lord
of the 11th cusp.
The ruling planets of Mrs A are Sun, Mars and Jupiter. Sun in Mr
H\s horoscope is in Moon Star who is placed in 5th Bhava and in
Sub of Venus that appears in 7th cusp. Mars is in the Sub of Venus
who is the Sub lord of 5L.I and 7th cusps and Mars itself is resident
of 11th house. Jupiter the Sub Sub lord of the Ascdt is in Moon Star
who is placed in 5th Bhava. Jupiter is in the Sub of Mercury who is
the Sub lord of the 11th cusp.
Step 2: Ascendant Sub-Sub lord of Mr. A is Rahu. In Mrs. A's
horoscope Rahu is in its own Star- Rahu is the Sub lord of the 5th
cusp and is resident of 2nd cusp. Rahu also represents Venus who is
the Sub lord ofthe 7th cusp. There is no linkage ofRaJau with houses
Ascendant Sub-Sub lord of Mrs. A is Jupiter. In Mr. A's chart Jupiter
is in the Star' of Moon whidl is placed in 5th Bhava and is the Star
lord of 2nd cusp.
Step 3: The Sub-Sub lord of the 7th cusp of Mr. A is Ketu. It is in
Rahu Star. Rahu in Mr. H\s horoscope represents Jup and Venus.
The Moon Star of Mrs. A is Venus. Thus the Sub-Sub lord of 7th
cusp of Mr. A's horoscope matches with the Moon Star of Mrs. A.
The Sub-Sub lord of the 7th cusp of Mis. A is Ketu. It is Moon Star
ofM{. A.
Step 4: The 7th cusp of Mr. H\s horoscope is ruled by Venus - Rahu
- Venus - Ketu. The Ascendant of Mrs. A is ruled by Sun - Sun -
Mars - Jupiter. In Mr. J!\s horoscope Sun is in Moon Star & Venus
Sub. Mars is also in Venus Sub. Ketu represents Mercury. Thus the
7th cusp of Mr. A reveals the Ascendant of Mrs. A.
The 7th cusp of Mrs. J!\s horoscope is Saturn - Jupiter - Venus -
Ketu. The Ascendant of Mr. A is Mars - Venus - Mars - Rahu. In

Mrs. A's horoscope, Mars is in Saturn Star and Jupiter Sub, and
Rahu represents Venus. Thus the 7th cusp of Mrs. A reveals the
Ascendant of Mr. A.
Step 5: Potency of Mr. A: The Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp of Mr.
'A' is Rahu. Rahu is in Venus Star that appears in 2, 5, and 7. This
indicates that the native is not only potent but is also capable to get
a child.
Potency of Mrs. A: The Sub-Sub lord of 5th cusp of Mrs. A is
Saturn. It is in Mercury Star and Moon Sub. Mercury is appearing
in 2, 4, 6, 10 and 11. Moon is in the nth cusp, it indicates Mrs. A is
capable to produce the child but there will be some delay due to the
4th, 6th and 10th cusps linkages.
Step 6: The couple married on 10.2.2001.. At that time Mr. A was
running the joint period of Moon - Moon -Rahu -Mercury -Rahu.
Mrs. A was running the joint period of Moon - Rahu - Venus -
Venus - Mercury. Thus the Dasa period lords of Mr. A are the
significators of houses 5, 7 and 11 of Mrs. A and the Dasa period
lords of Mrs. A are the significators of 5, 7 and 11 of Mr. A.
It may be noted that in both the horoscopes, mamage has taken
place in the Bhukti of the planet that is strongly connected with 7th
cusp.

Chapter 11
Analysing the Tenth House
(Profession)
The Tenth House represents profession, honour, rewards, and the
quality of leadership. Karma of the soul, government service,
administrative jobs, and achievement in the material world. In this
chapter we will discuss how to analyse the lOthhouse to determine
the native's profession.
When we analyse the horoscope to study the profession of a person,
we need to answer the following two sets of questions:
Set 1. Here the main questions are:
a) Will the person do a paid job or carry out his independent or
partnership business or live without a professional status?
b) Will he attain any status (fman~al, administrative, or social)
through profession?
c) Will he continue the same job lhusiness throughout his life or
does it promise diversifications, development etc?
d) When will he start earning through servke or business?
e) Will the native be able to carry out his professional activities
smoothly or face set - backs?

Set 2. Here the main questions are:
a) In which organisations (viz the education department, health
deptt, railways, communication deptt, banking and fmanciaL
institutions etc.) the native will serve?
b) Will he be an industrialist, manufacturer, a trader, commission
agent, cloth merchant, a hotelier, a shipping magnate, a
publisher, street merchant, etc. ?
In short we need to find out the organization in whicll the person
will have his professional activities to penorm, the nature of the
products he will deal etc.
In addition to the above two sets of questions, there are other
supplementary questions, relating servkelbusiness that we need to
answer. For example, questions relating servke matters include
transfer, promotion, suspension, tennination, retirement,
reinstatement, change of service profiles etc. Similarly questions
relating business may include products that will fetch more gains,
change of business place etc.
Procedure to determine Profession:
Step 1. Analyse the Ascendant: Natural inclination of the native
need to match with the promise of the 10lb cusp. If the Ascendant
Sub-Sub lord establishes strong relationship i.e. through its Star
lord with 6lh and the 10th house, the person is more likely to be a
servke person. If the Ascendant is strongly connected with 7th and
the 10th house, he is likely to adopt business as his profession. Strong
connection with 5th and 9th without having any connection with 6,
7, and 10 indi~tes that the native is likely to live his life without
any professionals status. For the success in service or business the
Ascendant Sub-Sub lord should be linked with cusps 2, 6, 10 and

Analysing the Tenth House (Profession)
11 through its Star lord and should be supported by its Sub and
Sub-Sub lord.
Step2. Analyse the Tenth House: It is the prin<;.iple house for
analysing profession. It forms the apex of the materialistic. : triplicity.
The other two houses that we need to study are second and sixth.
The analysis of the 10th cusp to determine profession is done as
follows:
a) Analyse the Sign, Star, Sub, and Sub-Sub lord rising on the
loth cusp. The sum total of the attliibutes of the planets
co-ruling the cusp will show in general the nature of the
Profession of the native.
b) The linkages that the Sub-Sub lord of the l'Oth cusp makes
with other cusps through its Star lord will indicate the promise
of the loth cusp and the area of concentration of activities of
profession of the native. The Sub and the Sub-Sub lord of the
Sub-Sub lord ofthe loth cusp will qualify or spe<;.ifythe area
minutely. The broad areas where the native will like to
concentrate his activities as per the Star linkages are shown
below:
Linked House Area of Professional activities
1 Psychiatrist, a specialist in treating cerebral
cases, neuralgia, coma, head injuries, a yoga
practioner, physical instructor, professor of
psychology, self-venture', advisor in his own
field.
2 Professional in financial institutions, revenue
department, economists, accounts department,
dental or E.N.T. clinics, acoustics, gastroentromoligist section, jeweller, gemnist,
moneylenders.

Linked House Area of Professional activities
3 Communication department, plint media,
information centers, professionals in. KN.T ..
deparment, news correspondent,
physiotherapist, anesthetist, neurology
department, commission agencies.
4 Production unit, education institutions,
cardiology, lungs or chest specialists, building
constmction organisation, real estate dealers,
agriculture fanns, veterinary department, dairy
falming, furniture houses.
5 Stock exchange, sports organisations, art and
culture; cinema, places of amusement,
manufacturing units of toys for children,
paediatics or gynecology department, nuclear
science or atom.ic energy department, clergies.
6 I Public health depanment, chemists, repairing
I units in a factory, poultry fanns, law department,
dealers in leather, medical profession, labour
oriented jobs, dealers in plastics.
7 Judge in a court of Law, Publ~ relations officer,
I embassy, marriage bureaus, advocate dealing
divorce cases or marital problems,
N cpthrologists, public administration
departments, employment in private companies,
brothels, prostitution, sexologists, doctors
dealing in venereal diseases, private business.
8 Historians, archaeologists, geologists,
personnel's working in insurance, mining, tax

Analysing the Teoth House (Profession)
Linked House Area of Professional activities
collection. Auditing, CITI, CITI Departments,
pension cells, surgeons, ONGC Department,
death and estate duty collectors, advocates
practicing criminal cases or cases dealing with
legacies and wills, urologists.
9 Research organisations, university, religious
organisations, honorary posts, export houses,
pilot, travel agents, politicians, aeronautical
department, space technology organisations,
advocates.
10 GovL organisations, production houses, politi(;:S,
self-venture, managers.
11 Computer hardware, general physicians,
charitable institution, commercial houses,
Journalists.
12 Jail department, hospitals, investigating agents,
detectives, research organisations, asylums,
foreign countries.
Step 3. The native will carry out the activities of profession as per
the influence of other cusps Sub-Sub lords that maintain relationship
through their Star lords with the lO^1 cusp. The Sub lord and the
Sub-Sub lord of the linking planet will qualify or specify the nature
of profession.
Step 4. Eleventh House: The linkage of the Sub-Sub lord of this
house with Ascendant and IOthHouse through its Star lord represents
the success of the native in his profession. This linkage can also be
established as follows:

a) The Sub-Sub lord of the 11th cusp can link it-self to the i()th
cusp through its Star lord and to the lstcusp through its Sub
lord.
b) The Sub-Sub lord of the llthcusp can link to the Ascendant
through its Star lord and to the 10th cusp through its Sub lord.
Step 5. Fourth and Ninth House: This helps us to detennine the
education of the native. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 4th or the 9th
Sub-Sub lord is linked through its Star lord with lath cusp it indicates
the use of education in the profession.
Step 6: Analyse the influence of Dasa periods. The nature of
profession will be influenced by the Dasa periods.
Service Matters
Persons who have not yet started their professional career or persons
who are due some reason or the other are unemployed come to the
astrologer and pose the following questions:
a. Will I ever get ajob?
b. Will it be pennanent or temporary?
c. Will it be Government or Private Servi~?
d. Will it involve change of place?
e. When will I getjob?
These questions can be answered by the Astrologer following
steps as indicated below:
Step!. Promise of Job: The Sub-Sub lords of Ascendant, 6th cusp
and lath cusp should establish linkages through their Star lords and
Sub lords as shown below:

Analysing the Tenth House (Profession)
Step2. Permanent or Temporary Job: If the Sub-Sub lord of the
Ascendant and 6^ cusp is linked through its Star lord and Sub lord
as indicated above in step 1, it will invariably promise permaneilt
Job. But if they establish linkages as shown below, thejob may be
temporary or the native is not likely to stick to one job.
For temporary jobs the Sub-Sub lords of the Sub-Sub lords of
Ascendant and 6^ cusp will be in cuspal positions 5 or 9 in addition
to 2 or 10 or 6. This has to be also seen from the Dasa periods
running at the time ofjoining the job.
Step3. Government or Private: If Sun or Ketu is strongly linked
to 6^/10*^ thro ugh its Star lord and to cusps 2, 6 or 10 through their
Sub lords, the chances of Government job or job with a security
will be quite high. Also if the Sub-Sub lord of the b^Y'usp is Sun or
Ketu and is linked to 10th cusp through its Star lord and to cusp 2
through its Sub lord, the chances of getting a Government job is
very high.

If the 10th Sub-Sub lord is linked to 6th cusp through its Star lord
and to cusp 7 through its Sub lord, it indicates private job.
One may serve in Private Sector if the Sub-Sub lord of the 10th
cusp is linked to 7fu cusp through its Star lord and to cusp 2 at Sub
level..
The private employer is represented by the 7th cusp and the
Government employer is represented by the 10th cusp. If the querist
is to draw salary from private employer, then the Sub-Sub lord of
the 8th cusp should involve the 2nd cuspal positionlBhava through
its Star lord and to cusp 6 through its Sub lord. If the querist is to
draw his salary from Government employer, than the Sub-Sub lord
of the 1 1th cusp involve the 2nd CUSphrough its Star lord and commit
to 6th cusp through its Sub lord.
Step4. Change of Place: Whether the native will get the promised
job at the same place or at a different place may bejudged from the
Dasa period running at the time ofjoining thejob. If the Sookshamal
Prana lords involve the 10fu cusp and commits to 3 or 12, it will
indicate service at a new place. In general if AntaraiSookshmai.
Prana lords are signifi(illtors of 2, 6, 10 and also 3 or 12; thejob
will involve change of place.
StepS. Timing of Joining Job: The Dasa period lords should be
significators of2, 6,10. Transit ofDasa period lords, Sun and Moon
should agree. Transit of Sun and Moon should be in Stars, the lord
of which should appear in 6/10 or be significators of 6, lOin the
chart.

Analysing the Tenth House (Profession)
Service or Business:
Sometimes the querist approaches the astrologer to know the
following about his professional career.
The word service means work done by someone for somebody
else as ajob or a duty. Generally we take it to mean a person who is
an employee of somebody. Servi- provider on the other hand is a
person who earns by providing service of some kind to somebody
else but not an employee of any body.
Business usually means to carry out activities independently or
jointly with others, to earn money.
What is promised for the queliist can be analysed from the natal
chart as follows:
If the Sub-Sub lord of the 6lh cusp establishes linkages through its
Star lord and Sub lord as shown below, the person would do service.
If the same linkages are established by the Sub-Sub lord of the 7th'
cusp, one may do business.

Service or Business which is Profitable: If the Sub-Sub lords of
both and 7^ cusp show linkages through their Star lords and
Sub lords as above, then the astrologer can advise the querist to
choose one between service and business by noting the appearance
ofthe Sub lords ofthe Sub-Sub lords in cuspaJ positions. Appearance
of Sub lords in 4, 5 and 9 cuspal positions are unfavourable to the
lOthhouse and 8 and 12 are adverse for the Ascendant.. Thus the
choice between service and business should be made by seeing
whose Sub lord makes appearance in adverse or unfavourable cusps
and whose Sub lord makes appearance in favourable cusps from
lOthhouse and Ascendant.
Nature of Service or Business: It is decided by noting down the
cuspal position whose Sub-Sub lord involves the 6*hnthor loth
cuspal position through its Star lord. The Sub lord of the Sub-Sub
lord of that cuspal position wilLdecide whether the nature of Service
will be favourable or not_ If the Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of
that cusp appears in 2 or 6 or 11, the person will carry out service
or business as per the nature of the Sub-Sub lord of that cuspal
position as modified by the Sign which it occupies in the chart and
using the significations of that cusp. It will be profitable. The
appearance of the Sub lord in cuspal positions which are
unfavourable to 10, 2 and Ascendant will account for problems in
service or business.
Nature of Organisation or Type of Business: This is studied from
the, significations of the Sub-Sub lord of the 10th cusp. This has
been explained above under the title "Analyse the Tenth House".
Fitmncial -Administrative - Social Status
Whether a person does Servili\eor Business, th~re is always a desire
to know whether the person will acquire financial, administrative
status through profession or not. If the Sub-Sub lord of the
and lOthcusp involves the 2nd cusp and commits to favourable cusps

Analysing the Tenth House (Profession)
with respect to 2nd cusp, it promises better financial status. However,
this is limited to what is promised by the Ascendant and 2nd cusp
Sub-Sub lords.
Administrative or social status is decided by the signification of
the Sub-Sub lord of the 101b cusp. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 101b
cusp involves the Ascendant and commits to 6 or 7, the person will
acquire status through profession as service or business. The
appearance of Sub lord in cuspal positions 8 and 12 is very
unfavourable.
Promotion in ServiGe as Profession: Promotion means:
a. Enhancement in Status.
b. Increase in Salary.
c. Enhancement in status as well as increase in Salary.
Answers to above questions are provided by the astrologer by
analyzing the natal chart as follows:
1b
Enhancement in Status: The Sub- Sub lords of the Ascendant, 10
cusp and llthcusp should establish linkages through their Star lords
and Sub lords as shown below:
Star Lord In Sub Lord In
The Sub-Sub lords of the Sub-Sub lords of 1, 10 and 11 cusps
should be in favourable cusps with respect to Ascendant and 10^
cusp.

Increase in Salary: It is promised in the chart if the Sub-Sub lords
of the Ascendant, lO^cusp and lltheusp establish linkages through
their Star lords and Sub lords as shown below:
The- Sub- Sub lords of the Sub-Sub lord s of Ascendant, lOthand
llthcusps should not be in cusps 1,5, 8,9 and which are adverse to
2nd cusp. I2^cusp is unfavourable to the Ascendant..
Enhancement in Status and Salary: It is promised in the chart if
the Sub-Sub lords of Ascendant, lOthcusp and lltheusp establish
linkages through their Star lords and Sub lords as shown below:
The Sub-Sub lords of the Sub-Sub lords should preferably not
appear in 5, 8, 9 and 12.
Promotion takes place in the joint period of planets that are
significators of 2, 6, 10 and 11. T:l;ansit should agree.
T:l;ansfer and Posting in Service: The word transfer generally
means the person is asked to move from his present place of working
to a different place. Posting generally means the person is called
upon to take specified responsibility ofjob at the same place or
else where. Transfers in service career are part and parcel of service
conditions. Persons are transferred due ta some transfer policy or
as per exigencies of servke or as punishm ent or even on promotion.
Person will undergo transfer if the Dasa period lords running at the

Analysing the Tenth House (Profession)
time establish linkages through their Star lords and Sub lords as
shown below in Tables A, B and C, the person will have to undergo
transfer and posting.
Table A. Transfer and Promotion.
Star Lord In Sub Lord In
For change of place, the SookshamaJPrana lord may appear in 4th
cuspal position and involve the 3rd cusp and commit to 10 or involve
the 10* cusp and commit to 3 or 12.
Table B. Routine Transfer: Person may have to undergo transfer
willing or unwilling if the following conditions exist in the natal
chart. The AntLalSookshama and Prana lords establish linkages as
shown below:
Star Lord In Sub Lord In
The transfer will prove beneficial if the Sookshama. 1 Prana lord
appears in the 3rd cuspal position and involves the 6th or 10th cusp
and commits to 2 or 1 1 or in favourable cuspal positions with respect
to Ascendant, 6th cusp or 10th cusp.
The person undergoes transfer in the joint period of planets that are
significators of 3, 10 and 12. Transit should agree.
Table C. Transfer due to Punishment: A person may undergo
transfer as a means of punishment, though it may not be specified
in transfer orders. For this the SookshamaJPrana lords establish
linkages as shown below:

Star Lord In
Sub Lord In
This happens in thejoint period of planets that are slgnificators of
3, 10 and 12. Sookshma and Frana lords should be planets that
appear in 8th cuspal position. Transit should agree.
Suspension and Puuishment:
In legal terms suspension is not regarded as punish menL It is only
a means to disallow a person to do his duty for a period till some
investigation is carried out for any misconduct.. In practical life
suspension attaches a stigma and the person suffers from
trauma due to loss of reputation and also loss of emoluments.
On the other hand the person may be punished by the employer for
any misconduct or any criminal act for whkh the court of law has
convicted him.
The person is suspended or may be suspended at some point of
time if the following conditions exist in the natal chart. The SubSub lords of the Ascendant, lath cusp and 11th cusp should establish
linkages as shown below:
Star Lord In Sub Lord In
The Sub-Sub lords of the Sub-Sub lords should not appear in
favourable positions with respect to 10.
The person is placed under suspension in thejoint period ofplanetS
which are significators of 1,8,9 and 12. Transit should agree. Transit
of Sun and Moon should be in the Stars the lord of which appears

in 9^1or I2^1cuspal position or are significators of 9 and 12 in the
horary chart.
If the person has to undergo punishment, the Sub-Sub lord of the
loth cusp should involve the gthcusp. The Sub lord ofthe Sub-Sub
lord ofthe lOthcusp will specify the nature of punishment.. If the
Sub lord appears in lstcuspaJ_position, it may indicate loss of money.
If the Sub lord appears in 5 and 9 cuspaLpositions it may indi~te
removal from service. If the Sub lord appears in 3 it may indifate
communication of adverse remarks etc.
Re - instatement: Very often persons who are placed under
suspension or removed from service by way of punishment orders
approach the astrologer to know when it will be possible for them
to rejoin service. The interpretation of this question enables the
astrologer to analyse the chart following the procedur- which has
been stated under the title "Joining Job".
Foreign Assignments.., or Tour Abroad in Offidal Capadty.
A person can travel abroad for official assignment during the period
of planets that signify houses 3, 9 and 12,Antara, Sookshama and
Prana lord should appear in 6^or lOthcuspal position and be linked
to above houses.
Change of Job: Person leaves the first job in the joint period of
planets that are ruling planets at the time of judgement and are
significators of 1, 5 and 9. Transit should agree. Sun and Moon
should transit in the Star, the lords of which appears in 5 or are
significators of 5 in the natal chart.
Person joins the new job during the period of planets that are the
ruling planets at the time ofjudgement and are significators of 2, 6
and 10. Transit should agree. Sun and Moon should transit in the
stars, the lords of which appear in 6 or are significators of 6.

If a person has to leave the ftrstjob and joins the new job on the
same day then the Dasa period lords should be signiftcators for
both the activities. Sun and Moon should transit in Stars the lords
of which appear in 5 and 6 or are signiftcators of 5 and 6 in the
natal chart.
Change of job will be beneftcial if the SookshamalPrana lord
involves 6th or 10th cusp through its Star lord and commits to 2 or
11 or to a cuspal position favourable to 6th cusp.
Voluntary Retirement: It means willingly leaving the present job
permanently. This happens inthejoint period of Planets that involves
the 6th and 10th cusp through their Star lords and commit to 5 and 9
through their' Sub lords. The Sub-Sub lords of these period lords
should not appear in 6 and 10. Or aperson gets voluntary retirement
inthejoint period of planets that qualify to be ruling planets at the
time ofjudgement and are signiftcators of 1,5 and 9. Transit should
agree.
Questions relating Business
A. ChoiGe of Business: Very often persons approach an astrologer
to know what type of profession they should choose that will
provide them the desired fma.ncial and social status and offers
less problems. Should the person choose to be a trader, a
manufacturer, a servi- provider, mm producer, an actor, a
singer, an agriculturist, dealer in jewellery and gems,
transporter, a doctor, a chemist, should deal in whkh items etc.
? Answers to these questions can be given by studying the natal
chart as explained below:
Stept. . A person carries the professional activities as per the
significations of the cusp whose Sub-Sub lord involves the 10th

Analysing the Tenth House (Profession)
house through its Star lord. The nature of profession depends upon
the nature of the Sub-Sub lord of that cusp blended with the Sign
which it occupies in the chart and also the Sign that rises on the
cusp. The Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord ofthat cusp indicates whether
the person will be able to gain financially or face problems and
losses in profession. The Sub lord's appearance in 5, 8, 9 and 12
cusps from Ascendant are unfavourable positions.
The choice of type of profession has to match what the Ascendant
promises and also as per the experience, skill and knowledge of
the person. If the Sub-Sub lord of 6th cusp involves the loth cusp
and commits to 2 and 11, we cannot blindly suggest that medi~l
or medilllne will be the right profession. The person has to be
qualified to be a chemist or a doctor.
Step2. Each planet, each Sign and each house has specific
significations for types of business or items in which the person
can deal in business. Note the planets that involve the 10th cusp
through their Star lords. Note the cuspal positions in which the Sub
lord of the planet appears as lord of Sign or Star or Sub or Sub-Sub
and Bhava position if the Sub lord has positional status. Advise the
person to carry out profession in the significations of the planet as
blended with the significations of the Sign which it occupies in the
natal chart and also the Sign that rises on the cusp where the planet
appears as lord of Sign or Star or Sub or Sub-Sub if the Sub lord of
the planet appears in 2 or 6 or 10 or 11. If the Sub lord appears in
cuspal positions 1, 5, 8, 9 and 12, profession done in the
significations of the planet will result in fmanlllal loss and problems
in business.
Step3. Note the Dasa period running at the time ofjudgement.. If
the planets are significators of 2, 6, 10 and 11 then the person may
be advised to carry out the profession according to the significations
of the planet that involves the 10th cusp and commits to 2, 6 and 11
and qualifies to be a ruling planet at the time ofjudgement and
appears in the Dasa period running at the time ofjudgement..

B. Change of Business - Profitable or Not.
Sometimes a businessman who is facing problems and financial^
losses in the present business wants to know from the Astrologer
whether the change in business will improve his financial status
and relieve him from stress and strain of the existing business. The
astrologer can provide answer to such questions by analyzing the
nata.l chart as follows:
Stepl. Tenth house in the chart represents the present business.
Twelfth house which is yd from the Tenth represents the new
business. If the following conditions exist in the chart then it
promises change in profession.
a. The Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant involves the 12th cusp
through its Star lord and commits to 10th cusp through its
Sub lord or involves the 10th cusp and commits to 12th
cusp.
b. The Sub-Sub lord of the 10th cusp should involve the 12th
cusp and commit to a cusp favourable to 12th cusp.
Step2. Gain from New Business: It is determined from the
significations of the Sub-Sub lord ofthe 12th cusp. The querist will
gain from new business if the Sub-Sub lord establishes linkages
through its Star lord and Sub lord as shown below:
Star Lord In Sub Lord In
The Sub-Sub lord ofthe Sub-Sub lord ofthe 12th cusp should be in
cusps favourable to 2nd cuspal position.
If the Sub-Sub lord of the 12th cusp involves cusps 3, 6, 7 and
commits to 2 or 11 it will show losses due to new business.

The type of new business whkh the querist should do has to be
studied as indicated above under the title "ChoiGe of Business"
replacing the lOthhouse by 1 2^ house.
C. Change of Business place - Profitable or Not.
Sometimes due to one or the other reason, the businessman may
have to change his present place ofbusiness to some new place. He
approaches the astrologer to know if the change of place will prove
beneficial or not. The astrologer can provide answer to this type of
question by analyzing the natal chart as follows:
Stept. Fourth house represents the present place ofbusiness. Change
of place is indicated by the 3rd house. The new location is
represented by the house which is third from the 4^' house. The
change will take place only if the Dasa period lords running at that
time establish linkages through their Star lords and Sub lords as
shown below:
Star Lord In Sub Lord In
The Sub-Sub lords of the Dasa period lords should be in
cuspal positions whkh are favourable to 3rd cusp but not
in 4^ cusp.
a. For benefic:.ial change of place the Sub-Sub lord ofthe 6^
cusp should establish linkages through Star lord and Sub
lord as shown below:
Star Lord In
Sub Lord In

The Sub-Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the 6lh cusp should
be in cuspal positions favourable to 2nd and loth cuspal
positions.
Earning Through Profession - Eady or Late.
In Astrology second house represents the house of self-acquired
wealth and Tenth house is the house of Profession. A person may
earn money by way of servke or business. Whatever may be the
choice of a person to cany out his professional activities, the money
he gains accounts for the depletion of other's money. Since 7th house
is the house of other, 6th house which is 12th to 7th represents other's
loss. Thus for earning through profession we take into consideration
the houses 2, 6 and 10.
Promise ofEaming througll Profession: If the Sub-Sub lords of
the Ascendant and Tenth cusp establish linkages through their Star
lords with 2 or 6 or 10, it promises earning through profession. If
the Sub-Sub lords of the Ascendant and Tenth cusp are linked only
to cusps 1, 5 and 9 without having any links with 2 or 10, it denies
earning through profession.
The Sub-Sub lord of the 11th cusp should also be linked through its
Star lord with 2 or 6 or 10 to confirm earning through profession.
Timing Earning Period: If the Sub-Sub lord of the 10lh cusp is
linked only to favourable cusps (with respect to Tenth cusp) through
its Star lord, it promises early earning. If the Sub-Sub lord of the
10th cusp is linked to houses I, 5, 9 and 2 or 6, the person starts
earning late.
Note: Please refer my book "Basks & Traditional Concepts. "for
identifying the significations of Planets, Signs and Houses in
relation to Profession.

Chapter 12
Analysing the Fifth House
The fifth house operates under the fixed - fire combination and it
represents an individual's reaction to his past. Our ancients related
this house to wisdom, religion, and traditional laws, intelligence,
and intuitive perception of the future, socially accepted forms of
courtship i.e. romantic affairs, progeny, sports and culturaL activities,
artistic- and creative pursuits, speculation.
The main aspects, which an astrologer is called upon to analyse in
respect of the 5th house signifWltions, can be listed as follows:
1. Potency and procreation power of the native and aspects
relating progeny.
2. Intellectual capability and the attitude of the native.
3. Success in sports and cultural activities.
4. Gain or loss in speculation, gambling, races etc.
5. Success or failure in romantic affairs.
The promise in respect of the above aspects has to be seen through
the linkages that the Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp establishes with
other cusps through its Star lord. The Sub and the Sub-Sub lord of
the Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp will qualify or specify the promise
in respect of each aspect.. For example, suppose the Sub-Sub lord
is linked to 5th cusp through its Star lord and to 4th cusp through its
Sub lord. Now if we are Analysing the 5th cusp for detelimining the
prospects of progeny than the linkage of the Sub lord with the 4th
cusp will qualify the promise in the sense that it will cause
impediments or delay in childbitlh. But if we were analysing the
5th cusp for detewining what it promises for an artist, the linkJlge

of Sub lord with the 4^ cusp would specify the nature of
concentration of his artistic talent.. The native may deal invaluable
assets or crafts. He may even be a poet who loves to concentrate in
his poetry on domestio.;happiness or love for the land, or he may be
an artist who may open an institution for training people.
What the 5th cusp promises for progeny:
To produce a child the native has to have not only the required
potency but also the procreative power. This is determined as
follows:
Step 1: If the Sub-Sub lord of the 5^ cusp is linked through its Star
lord with favourable houses with respect to 5^ cusp, and also
supported by its Sub lord and the Sub-Sub lord, we generally declare
that the native is potent.. However, the linkage of the Sub-Sub lord
through its Star or its Sub or Sub-Sub lord with 1 1 ^tusp should be
taken as favourable. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 5^ cusp links with
only unfavourable houses like 4^ and 1 2^1cusp. (i.e. 12^and 8^
from 5~ and lOthvhidl is 1 2^to 1 lth,the person lacks in potency
i.e. performance of sexual act.
Step 2: The native will be able to produce a child if the Sub-Sub
lord of the 5^ cusp is linked through its Star lord to favourable
cusps along with 2nd or 11th cusp and to 2nd or llthcusp through its
Sub lord.
In other words the native is said to be procreative i.e. He/She has
the capability to produce the child when the SSL of the 5*^ cusp is
linked to 2nd cusp directly or indirectly. For example let us assume
that Saturn is the SSL of the 5th cusp. Let it be in Venus Star and
Jupiter Sub. Now if Venus appears in 2nd cuspal position as Sign or
Star or Sub or Sub Sub lord or in 2nd Bhava, and Jupiter appears in
1 ltbeusp or in a cusp favourable to 2nd Bhava, the native is capable

Analysing the Fifth House
to produce a child. This is called direct linkage of the SSL of the 5^
cusp with 2nd cusp. If Venus appears in Illh cuspal position or Illh
Bhava and Jupiter appears in 2nd cusp, it is called indirect linkage.
If any of the above conditions exists in the chart, the native is capable
to produce child.
Note:
Direct Linkage means linkage with the Primary cusp of the matter
under consideration through Star lord or by way of Positional status.
Here the matter under consideration is the capability of the native
to produce a child i.e. addition in the family. So the 2nd cusp becomes
the Primary cusp.
Indirect linkage means that the Star lord appears in 11th cusp, the
house of fulfilment of desire. The Sub lord linkage specifies the
area through whicil desire win be fulfilled. In the above example if
the Star lord appears in 11th cusp and Sub lord appears in 2nd cusp
it should be read as the fulfilment of desire by way of having a
child. If the Sub lord appears in 7^ cusp it would mean- fulfilment
of desire of love marriage. Indirect linkage is also said to be
established if the Sub Sub lord of the 51*1 cusp has positional status
and it appears in llthcuspaj position or Bhava and its Sub lord
appears in 2n<1 cuspal position.
Direct or Indirect linkage has nothing to do with the strength i of
linkage. Strength of linkage is checked by the position of Sub lord
in unfavourable cusps along with the desired cusp.
If the Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the 5^ cusp is linked
simultanilously to 4*^1 ,6^ and 12^ cusp, it indicates possible loss
offrrst conception. It is tenned as abortion in case offema.Ie nativity.
Timing Child birth: Ifthe native is promised progeny, he/she will
get the child during the joint period of the planets that are linked

with cusps 2, S and 11 through their Star lords and supported by
their Sub lords and Sub-Sub lords. The transit of Dasa periods, Sun
and Moon must agree. Simultaneous links of the Dasa periods with
unfavourable houses indi~tes probl(IDls in pregnancy period. The
Sub-Sub lord of the Sth cusp will indi~te the Moon Star of the
child. The planets co-ruling the Sth cusps or planets in their Star,
Sub or Sub-Sub will decide the Ascendant of the child.
Sex of the Child: To be honest, this area needs still much research
to provide a foolproof prediction. However, the various methods
that are used are listed below:
1. Analyse the planets co-ruling the Sth cusp and the Signs in
whkh they appeaL in vaLious cuspal positions. If the planets
are placed in cusps, whicll rise, in male Signs, the chance of
getting a male child is more.
2. The Sub-Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lord of the Sth cusp if it is in
male Sign, one gets a male child. In case all the planets are in
female Signs in a horoscope, we should look to cuspal
positions of the Sub-Sub lord. If it appears in male Signs
predominant-, we may predict a male child.
3. Another method, which is used by some Astrologers, is that if
the Sub-Sub lord of the Sth cusp or its Star lord is in Sun hora,
one will get a male child.
4. Research minded astrologers could use the Nadi concept of
former or later part of the Sub- Sub lord of the Sth cusp as
follows:
Each Sub-Sub arc is of a particular_ length. If the Sub-Sub arc is
ini st half of this space in male Signs or 2nd half of the space in the
femal&:Signs, one may get a male child. For example; suppose in a
chart the Sth cusp rises at 12 degree 22 minutes 46 seconds in Virgo.
Jupiter will rule it. The Sub-Sub of Jupiter starts from 12 degree 11
minutes 20 seconds and ends at 12 degree 27 minutes 20 seconds.

Thus, the Sub-Sub arc rising on the 5th cusp is in the 2nd part. Virgo
being a femaJe Sign, the 2nd part indicates maJe child. In short we
may say that the sex of the child is indicated by the following
concepts:
1. The SSL of the SSL of the 5th cusp represents the sex of the
child as per its placement in the male or female sign.
2. The SS arc of the 5th cusp indi~tes the sex of the child as per
its placement in the relevant haJf.
3. Forfemale nativity the sex ofthe child be seen from 11th cusp
Sub-Sub lord instead of 5th cusp Sub-Sub lord.
However, the application of these concepts demands attention to
the various possibilities that may occur in a chart.
For example:
A. All the Planets in the chart may be in Male or in Female signs.
B. All the Planets are in the Sub-Sub the lords of which may be
in male or in femaJe signs only.
In the above cases the placement of the Sub-Sub arc of the 5^ cusp
in the relevant half has to be given preference to deci— e the sex of
the child.
IfRahu orKetu comes as the SSL ofthe 5th cusp then we also need
to consider the planets that RahloJIKeturepresents.
I am sure this method will give much satisfaction to the astrologers
if they have horoscope, which has been rectified for all cusps up to
the Sub-Sub level..' \"
Note: The accuracy ofthe longitude ofthe Sub-Sub arc depends
upon the accuracy of the Software that you use. Hence the use
of this method is beset with this problem.

Note: The subject of sex detemtination is very complex and bereft
of consistancy. Some of the reasons for the same are listed below:
1. Rules drafted by various authorities on the subject are based
on the fundamental concept of the division of the Zodiac on
the basis of Universal Law of Polarity. Odd signs represent
Mak- and Even signs represent Female. However each sign
has more than two Nakshatras. The Nakshatras are also
classfied as Male, or Femal- Now Aries is a male sign but it
has a quarter ofKrittika Nakshatra which is Female. Similarly
Cancer is a Female Sign but both Pushya and Ashlesha are
Male, Nakshatras. Should we follow the Sign concept or the
Nakshatra concept?
2. Planets are also classified as male or female. Jupiter is regarded
in general as a male Planet.. It is Karaka for child. According
to some ancient sages following nadi astrology Jupiter behaves
as a female Planet if it is placed in a female sign.
3. Some Astrologers use Tropical Zodiac and some use Sidereal
Zodiac. According to Dr Jona the position of Moon in male or
female sign at the Time of conception determines the sex of
the child. Dr Jona uses Tropkal Zodiac. Suppose Moon is at
15 degrees in Sagittacius(Tropical) at the time of conception,
we may be tempted to predict the birth of a male child. For a
Siderealist Moon will be in Scorpio and for him the child
should be a female. Should we follow Tr~pical Zodiac for
PNE (Pre Natal Epoch) and Sidereal for other matters?
4. There are a large number of possibilities in which Planets can
occupy positions in the Zodiac. The Sub lord or SS lord of all
the Planets may for a few hours on a day be in those Planets
whkh may be either in male signs or in female signs only.
Similarly the Planets on a particular day may all be in male or
female signs. Does it mean there will only be male or female
births on that day?

Analysing the Fifth House
There are some more contradictions that arise as per rules drafted
by authorities.
I have studied the complIDcities and tried to. provide some sort of
solution. I believe that each point of the Zodiac represents a specified
energy content.. For all practical purposes this energy content is
reflected by the SSL of a cusp. If the concepts as explained in my
book on Rorary Astrology is followed and the prediction for the
gender is made on the basis of the analysis of a Rorary chart, I
think the success rate will be very high.
Destined To Get Male Child?
To answer such specific question, it is better to cast a harary chart
which should be analysed as follows:
1. " The Sub-Sub lords of the Sth and 11th cusp should conform to
the following two conditions:
a. The Sub-Sub lord of the Sub-Sub lords of the Slit and
11th cusp should be in male signs.
b. The Sub-Sub arc of the Sth and 11th cusps should be in
the relevant halves.
2. Analyse the Rashi chart to look for:
a. Whether all planets are placed in male/female signs?
b. Whether some planets are in male and some are in femllk
signs?
In the case of (a), the male child is promised only if
i. All planets in male sign and the Sub-Sub arcs of
the Sth and the 11th cusps are in the relevant halves
that promise male child.

ii. All planets in female signs, but the Sub-Sub arcs of
5th and 1 lib. cusps are in the relevant halves that
promise male child.
In case (b), the male child is promised in the following
conditions:
i The Sub-Sub lords of the 5^ and 11m cusps are in
the Sub-Sub lords whicll occupy male signs,
ii. The Sub-Sub arcs of the 5th-and lllh cusps should
be in relevant halves that promise male child.
In case (b), however at the time ofjudgement if no planet
appears in the Sub-Sub the lord of which does not appear
in male sign, then irrespective of what arc of the SubSub lords of 5thJ cusp and lllh- cusp promises, the male
child is denied. This is because though there are planets
in male sign, yet the time the horary chart is cast and the
number given by the querist, the super intelligence has
not placed any planet in the Sub-Sub, the lord of whicll
occupies male sign. The Super Intelligence unfolds the
destiny of the querist in a strange way and leaves it to
the capability of the astrologer to interpret correctly.
Note: Intelligent and experienced astrologers can, however, use
the above method for the analysis of natal chart also.
Promise for Twins: It is an important area that peeds serious
attention of the scholars doing research in the field of astrology.
The existing rules or guidelines do not promise much assistance to
a genuine astrologer to declare the possibility, of twins. Some of
these rules are listed below:

Analysing the Fifth House
1. When there is intimate link: between the lagna and the 3rd
house, and its Signifi<mtorMars, and Mercury' too is involved
in the yoga, the birth of twins take place.
2. In the Sub lord theory, some astrologers say that if the Sub
lord of the 5th cusp is Mercury or a planet that is placed in
dual Sign or in the constellation of a planet in dual Sign, birth
of twins take place.
The use of such dictums is beset with more failures than with
success. In Cuspal Interlinks Theory one may attempt to predict
the possibility of twins by analysing the 5th cusp as follows:
If the Sub-Sub lord of the 5“’ cusp is linked to 5th and 711' house or
5th and 3rd house through its Star lord and to cusps 2 or 11 through
Sub lord then there is a possibility of twin births.
What the fifth cusp Promises for Love Affairs:
1. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp is linked to cusps 5, 7, and
1 1 through its Star lord and its Sub lord or the Sub-Sub lord is
not linked to 4 or 6 or 10, the love affair may result in marriage.
2. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 5“' cusp is linked to nth cusp through
its Star lord and to 7th cusp through its Sub lord, then also it
promises success in love affair. That will end in marriage.
3. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 5,h cusp is link~d only to 111b cusp
through its Star lord and the Sub lord is not linked with 101b or
4th cusp, it will only remain an affair. If it is linked to 4" or
10th through its Sub lord it will cause dissatisfaction.

Kalamsa Ii,
Interliaks
Simplified aDJi. Enlarged
4. If the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is linked through its Star
lord with the 5th cusp, the native will initiate love affairs. If its
Sub lord establishes links with 4th or 10th cusp, the affair will
end in a failure.
5. If the 7th cusp Sub-Sub lord establishes a link with 5th cusp
through its Star lord, then the opposite sex will initiate the
love affair. If its Sub lord is linked with 4th or 12th cusp, it will
end in failure.
6. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp is linked through its Star
lord with 5th and 11th cusp, the love affair will materialize.
But if its Sub lord were linked to 4 and 12, the person would
ultimately separate.
What the fifth cusp Promises For Sports and Arts:
To deteimine whether a native will achieve any success in sports
and arts, we need to analyse the following cusps:
L Ascendant: If the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is linked to
the 5th cusp through its Star lord one will have the desire to
make use of the significations of the 5th house. This will be
qualified or specified by its Sub lord or Sub-Sub lord. If the
Sub lord is linked with 6, 10 and 11 it promises success.
The Ascendant Sub-Sub lord can also establish link through
its Star lord with 11th cusp and Sub lord with 5^ cusp.
The absence of the link of Ascendant Sub-Sub lord or Sub
lord, with the 5lh cusp does not promise success in sports and
arts.

Analysing the Fifth House
2. Eleventh Cusp: If the Sub-Sub lord of the nth cusp maintains
a link with the 5th cusp it will promise success to the native in
the field of sports and arts Subject to the condition that the
Sub and Sub-Sub lord supports.
3. Sixth House: It is the house of competitions and victory over
others. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 61*1 cusp is linked to 11th
cusp, it promises the native success over others.
4. Fifth Cusp: The fUth cusp has to be fortified. That is the
Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp should be connected to 1,3, 5, 6
and 11 cusps to indicate success in the field of sports and arts.
Gain or Loss in Speculation etc:
1. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp is linked to 2nd cusp through
its Star lord and to cusps 6, or 11 through its Sub lord, the
person will gain in speculation etc.
2. If the Sub-Sub lord of the 5^ cusp is linked to 11th cusp through
its Star lord and to cusps 2 or 6 through its Sub lord the person
will gain in speculation etc.
3. If the Sub-Sub lord ofthe 51*1 cusp is linked to 2nd or 11th cusp
through its Star lord and to cusps 8 or 12 through its Sub lord,
the native will lose in speculation etc.
Let us try to see the application of what we have discussed in this
chapter through an example.
Example: Refer charts of Fig. 12.1 and Fig. 12.2. The chart of fig.
12.1 is of a young lady who got manied on 9.5.1997 and delivered
a Son on 26.12.1999. Fig. 12.2 is the chart of her Son.

270 Kalamsa & Cusnal Interlinks Theory: Simplified end Fnlamed
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit-

Analysing the Fifth House
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Enlarged
Lagna Chart ShaY "CHalit"
Cusp Chart

Analysing the Fifth House
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Step 1: Ref. .fig. 12.1: Analysis ofthe 5th cusp: The Sub-Sub lord
of the 5th cusp is Sun. It is in Mars Star and Saturn Sub. Mars is the
Sub-Sub lord of the 2nd cusp and Saturn is the Star lord of the 11th
cusp. The lady is, therefore, not only potent but is also capable to
produce a child.
Step 2: She delivered the child in the joint period of Saturn - Saturn
- Mercury - Rahu - Jupiter. All these planets are linked with 2, 5
and 11 cusps.
Step 3: From the chart of fig. 12.2 it can be seen that the child is
bom in Ketu Star: In fig. 12.1 it can be seen that Ketu being in the
Star of Venus represents Venus. Now in the chart Venus is in the
Star of Sun who is the Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp. Planets Mercury
- Moon - Jupiter- Sun rule the 5th cusp of the mother. The Ascendant
of the child is co-mled by the Planets Mer - Sun - Jup - Sun. Thus
the Ascendant and Moon's Star lord of the child are clearly as per
the fifth cusp of the mother.
Step 4: The planetary positions in the chart of the child are the
transit positions of planets for the mother. It can be seen that the
transit of Dasa periods, Sun and Moon agrees for the event of
childbirth. Dasa and Bhukti Lord Saturn is transiting in Venus Star.
In the natal chart of the mother Venus is in Sun Star (that is the
Sub-Sub lord of 5th cusp). Saturn on that day is in Moon Sub (that
is the Star lord of 5th cusp) and Saturn Sub-Sub, whicil is linked
with 2 and 11 cusps. Mercury the Antara lord is transiting in its
own Star; Saturn Sub and Moon Sub-Sub. Rahu the Sookshma lord
is transiting in Saturn Star; Venus Sub and Mercury Sub-Sub. Jupiter
the Prana lord transits in Keu Star Venus Sub and Sun Sub-Sub. All
these planets appear in relevant cusps. Thus we can see that transit
agrees with the event..

Analysing the Fifth House
Step 5: Sex of the Child: Please refer Fig 12.1
1. The Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp Sun is in Moon Sub-Sub.
Moon is in male Sign Gemini.. This promises a male child.
However for female horoscope the lith cusp which is 5th from
7th (husband) needs to be given preference. Sub-Sub lord of
the 11th cusp is Jupiter. It is in the Sub-Sub of Moon who is
placed in male Sign Gemini. This promises male child.
2. The Star lord of Sun is Mars who is in Sun hora.
3. The Sub-Sub arc of the 5th cusp rises in Virgo in 15 degree 06
minutes 38 seconds. Sun rules it. The Sub-Sub arc of Sun starts at
15 degree 03 minutes 33 seconds and ends at 15 degree 08 minutes
52 seconds. Since Sun Sub-Sub is rising in the 2nd part in female
Sign Virgo, it promises a male child. However as stated above we
need to consider the Sub-Sub arc rising on the 11th cusp. Now it
can be seen that the Sub-Sub arc of Jup also rises in 2nd half in
female Sign Pisces. This clearly indicates that the lady is destined
to have a male child.

Chapter 13
Theory of Transit
The Destiny of the native is fixed as per the Sub-Sub arc that rises
in Ascendant in a particular Sign at the moment of birth. Based on
this, other cuspal positions are formed whkh help us to delineate
the nativity in detail in respect of each aspect of life. The zodiacal
position in whkh each planet rises at the moment of birth, indicate
through its linkages with various cuspal positions what nature of
results it will provide during its dasa periods. But, the planets are,
as their name suggests, wanderers. They are constantly on the move.
It is an accepted fact that there is a positive co - relationship between
the natal positions of planets and the positions they hold at a later
date in the life of thl.}native. The new positions of planets do have
the characterising effect on the results, which the native is expected
to receive as per dasa periods. In fact no event, however, strongly it
may be promised in the chart as per the dasa periods happens unless
transit agrees. Some of the theories of transit as used by modem
traditional astrologers have been listed in earlier chapter "Planets
Behaviour in Kalamsa Theory". This chapter will detail the
philosophy behind the theoiy of transit as applied in predicting
events using Cuspal Inteilinks Theory.
Philosophy behind the theory of transit:
~e theoiy of transit is deduced from Nadi concepts as discussed
below:

Theory of Transit
1. Conjunction of Dispositors in Transit:
In verse 3272 on page 97 of Deva Keralam book 3 (Published by
Sagar Publishers, New Delhi, India), it is stated, "A native born in
Cancer Ascendant, with Venus in Sign Aries, subject to its being in
Sagittarius Navamsa, will obtain much wealth when Jupiter joins
Mars."
Venus, lord of 4 and 11 is posited in Mars Sign Aries and Navamsa
ruled by Jupiter. So Mars and Jupiter are the dispositors of Venus.
Their conjunction is said to enhance the power of Venus. From this
we can deduce the general rule that the two planets, one Navamsa
dispositor and the other Sign dispositor, during their conjunction
in transit produce results good or bad pertaining to the houses for
which the disposited planet has to give results. But when this theory
is to be applied in Cuspal Interlinks, the conjunction should mean
the depositors to hold the same Sub-Sub arcs.
2. Transit of Slow Moving planets Saturn and Jupiter.
Transit of Saturn: Deva Keralam gives exhaustive details of the
effect of Saturn's transit through Signs identi~l with the Navamsa
occupied by the lords of all the twelve bhavas or their trines. It is
generally believed that the transit of Saturn plays significant role
in causing evil events as can be seen from the following verses
from Deva Keralam.
A. Saturn's transit in the Sign identical with the Navamsa
occupied by the lord of the 8th house from a given bhava or
trine there of on the degree of that Sign lord will destroy the
good effects due to that bhava.
B. One's father will fall ill when Saturn transits in the Sign caused
by the Navamsa occupied by the 4th1 lord i.e. (8th to qth house)
or trine there of, on the degree of that Sign lord.

C. Saturn's transit in the Sign identical with the Navamsa of the
7lh lord or a trine there of on the degree of that Sign lord will
endanger one's maternal grandfather. (7th house is 8th to 12th
that represents maternal grand father)
D. One will incur evils to his progeny when Saturn transits in the
Sign identical with the Navamsa occupied by the 12th lord
(i.e. 8th to 5tb house) or trine there of, on the degree of that
Sign lord.
Similarly, there are verses, which indicate the effect of the Saturn's
transit with respect to the karkas of planets as indkated below:
1. Saturn's transit in the Sign identical with the Navamsa
occupied by Sun or the 9th lord, on the degree of the lord of
that Sign would promote father's death.
2. Saturn's transit in the Sign identical with the Navamsa
occupied by Venus at birth, on the degree of the lord of that
Sign would cause physical sickness to one's spouse.
There are verses, whkh indicate the use of Saturn's transit for
determining year of bad events as indi~ted below:
Learned men should reckon the number of Navamsa from the
Navamsa occupied by Saturn up to the Navamsa occupied by the
Ascendant, both inclusive. Injury as wound through a weapon is
feared in the year indi~ted by the total figure.
A critica.l study of the above clearly reveals that the N adi Astrologers
used to indicate the happening of evils due to the transit of Saturn
not based on the transit of Saturn in a particular house in the chart
but on the basis of the following:

Theory of Transit
A. Transit of Saturn is with respect to the cuspal positions of the
lord of the house. The Navamsa lord of the house's lord will
be appearing in some cuspal positions. The Sign of the
Navamsa lord will be rising in a parti'llllar cusp.
B. Their emphasis on the degree identiGaLwith the lord of the
Sign reveals that the planet Saturn in transit should provide
the samt; results as is expected to be provided by that planet..
Transit of Jupiter: Jupiter transit is believed to cause happy events
as indicated below:
1. Transit of Jupiter in a Sign identkaL to the Navamsa occupied
by the lord of a bhava results in the realization of good results.
2. Note the Navamsa occupied by the 5th lord or the Significator
Jupiter. When transit Jupiter comes to the Sign identical with
the said Navamsa, on the degree of that Sign lord, one will
beget a son.
3. Jupiter's transit in the Sign descliibed by the Navamsa of the
7th lord or Venus causes marriage to take place.
Similarly, year of good events is predicted using the transit of Jupiter
as follows:
Reckon the number ofNavamsa from the benefic planets (the Moon,
Mercury, Jupiter and Venus) to the Navamsa occupied by the
Ascendant, during the years indicated by these sums, the native
will be blessed with progeny, wealth, happiness and the like without
doubt..
Here, also we notice that the transit effect of Jupiter is seen with
respect to cuspal positions held by house lords or planets rather
than the placement of Jupiter in a parti'llllar house in the natal chart.

Cuspal Intedinks Theory of Transit for Major
Events:
From the critkal study of the transit as used by Nadi Astrologers,
the theory of transit as applied in Cuspal Interlinks technique of
predktion has been developed on the following concepts:
A. A Planet when it transits in a Sign it excites the cuspal positions
in which its Sign lord appears as Sign or Star or Sub or SubSub lord. The Planet thus should transit in a Sign the Lord of
which appears in relevant cuspal positions or it should be
significator ofthe relevant cusps in the chart. Suppose Jupiter
transits in Aries and if Mars appear in 2 and 5 or Mars is
Significator of 2 and 5 in the Natal chart then this transit of
Jupiter favours the birth of the first child. Take another
example.. Suppose Jupiter transit in Leo. If Sun appears as
Sign or Star or Sub or Sub-Sub in 4th and 9th cusps then this
transit of Jupiter will favour the death of father if Jupiter's
Star lord also appears or signifY 4 and 9. Suppose Saturn
transits in Taurus Sign. Venus does not appear in I and 8 but
, appears in Maraka and Badhaka house then the transit of Saturn
in Taurus can favour the death ofthe native provided the Star
lord of Saturn in Transit appears in I and 8 or signifies I and
8 in the Natal chart.
B. The Planet in transit in a particular Sign will always 1>- in a
particular_ Star, Sub and Sub-Sub. The Planet will excite the
cuspal positions where its Star lord (in transit)' appears in the
cuspal positions irrespective of the fact whether the Star lord,
Sub lord and Sub-Sub lord have positional status or not in the
natal chart.
C. The Planet in transit in a partkular Star, Sub and Sub-Sub
provides the same results as the Star lord. Sub lord and the
Sub-Sub lord provides in the natal chart.

Theory of Transit
In other words it means that the Planet in transit should be in
a Stal' the lord of which appears in relevant cusps or it should
be linked to the relevant cusps in the natal chart. It should be
noted that if the Sign lord of the Planet in transit does not favour
the event then even if its Star lord favours the event, the event
does not happen.
The above rules should be applied not only to the dasa periods but
also to the luminaries Sun and Moon. No event, however small it
may be, happens unless Sun and Moon occupy a particular position
in the zodiac that is ruled by the Sign, Star; Sub and Sub-Sub the
lords of which cause the event to happen.
Let us try to see the application of this theory through an
example.
Example: Refer charts offig. 13.1, 13.2, and 13.3. Fig. 13.1 is the
chart of an individual who is the father of two sons whose charts
are indicated by fig. 13.2 and fig. 13.3. We will see the application
of the theory of transit in respect of the following major events in
the life of the individual..
1. Marriage of the native on 24.10.1971
2. Birth of pt son on 7.09.1972
3. Birth of 2nd son on 22.01.1974
4. Death of father on 19.09.1979
5. Death of mother on 5.082003
It may however, be kept in mind that an event happens only if it is
promised and in the dasa periods, the lords of which are capable to
cause the event.. For example, mauiage if promised happens only
in a parti<llilar Bhukti, Antara and Sookshama. Fixing the year,
month, and day through the transit of Jupiter, Sun and Moon without
taking into consideration the capability of the dasa periods will
prove futile.

Kalamsa & Cusnal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Fnlaraed
Lagna Chart
ShaY "Chalit”

Theory of Transit
Planetary Position
Nirayana Cusps

Marriage ofthe native: The native mamed on 24.10.1971 when
he was running the joint period of Rahu - Mercury - Mercury
Venus - Venus. The transit of planets on the day of marriage is
indicated in Table 13. A.
Planetary Position
Table 13 A
Houses that take part in enacting man'iJlge are 5, 7, ;md 11. Dasa
lord Rahu is transiting in Saturn Sign, Moon Star, Saturn Sub and
Mars Sub-Sub. Saturn is the Star as well as the Sub-Sub lord of 5th
cusp and in the nata.l chart Saturn is in the Star of Venus who is the
lord of the 7th cusp. Saturn in the natal chart is in the Sub of Rahu
who is the Sub lord of the 11th' cusp. However, the appearance of
Venus the Star lord of Saturn in the natal chart in 2, 4, 7, 9 and 12®

Theory of Transit
cuspal positions would be indicative of some dissatisfaction. Here
Saturn does not have positional status in the natal chart and its
appearance in 4, 6 and lOdoesnot account for dissatisfaction because
these cuspal positions don't get excited. The slow moving planets
Jupiter, Saturn, Rahu, and Ketu remain in a star for a pretty long
period. For events like marriage that happens on a pa.rtkular day,
their transit in the Sub and Sub-Sub is more important.. Moon is the
Star lord of nth cusp as well as the Sub-Sub lord of 7th cusp. Note
that Moon has also the positional status in the natal chart. Moreover,
Moon in the natal chart is linked through its Star lord Sun to the 7th
cusp. Mars is the Sub lord of the 5th cusp. It has the positional
status in the natal chart and is linked to the 7th cusp through its Star
lord Sun.
Mercury the Bhukti and Antara lord at the time of marriage is
transiting in the Sign Libra (Venus), Star of Rahu that is the dasa
lord. Venus in the Natal chart is lord oVth cusp but has no positional
status. However Venus in the Natal chart is in Jupiter Star who is
the lord of 5th cusp, Sub lord of 7th cusp and Sub Sub of lith cusp.
Rahu itself is the Sub lord of the lith cusp. Sun Sub in whkh
Mercury is transiting is the Star lord of 7th cusp. Jupiter the SubSub lord in which Mercury is transiting at the time of marriage is
the lord of 5th cusp, Sub-lord of 7th cusp and Sub-Sub lord of the
11th cusp.
Venus the Sookshma and Prana lord is transiting in Libra (Venus),
Jupiter Star, Saturn Sub. We have discussed above the role of Venus
Sign, jupiter is the lord of 5th cusp, Sub lord of 7th cusp and Sub
Sub of nth cusp. Saturn is the Star lord and Sub Sub lord of 5th
cusp and in the natal chart is significator of 7th cusp being in Venus
Star. Venus is transiting in the Sub-Sub of Ketu. In the natal chart
Ketu represents Jupiter who as stated above appears in 5, 7 and 11.

Let us see the transit of Sun, Jupiter and Moon. Sun on the day of
mamage is transiting in Venus Sign Libra and in the Star and Sub
of Rahu, (the Dasa lord) and in Sub-Sub of Jupiter, which are the
Sub lord of 7th cusp and Sub-Sub lord of 11th cusps.
Jupiter is transiting in the sign Scorpio ruled by Mars. Mars has the
positional status in the natal chart and it is the Sub lord of the 5th
cusp, more over Mars in the Natal chart is in Sun Star who is the
Star lord of 7th cusp, jupiter transits in the Star of Sat and Sub of
Rahu and Sub-Sub of Mercury. Rahu is the Dasa lord and Mercury
is the Bhukti and Antara lord who are thus the significators of
mamage. Sat in Ven Star who is 7th Sign lord.
Moon transits in Jupiter Sign Sagittarius and in Ketu Star that
represents Jupiter in the natal chart. Jupiter appears in 5, 7 and 11
in the nata.! chart. Moon's Sub lord Rahu is the dasa lord, its SubSub lord Moon is the Sub- Sub lord of the 7th cusp who is also
linked to 7th cusp through its Star lord Sun in the natal chart.
Birth of pt son: The native got his first son on 7/9/1972 in the
joint period of Rahu - Mercury - Sun - Mars - Rahu. The houses
that we need to consider are 2, 5, and 11. The transit of planets on
7.9.1972 is indicated in fig. 13.2.

Theory of Transit
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit"
Cusp Chart

Planetary Position
Dasa lord Rahu is transiting in Saturn Sign Capricorn. Saturn has
no positional status in the natal chart but is in the Star of Venus
who is the Sub lord of 2nd cusp. Rahu transits in Sun Star and Jupiter
Sub. Sun in the natal chart is in Saturn Star who is the Star and
Sub-Sub lord of 5th cusp. Jupiter is the lord of the 2nd and 5th cusps.
Rahu is in the Sub-Sub of Saturn, whicil is the Star lord' as well as
the Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp. Saturn in the natal chart is linked
through its Star lord to 2nd house and through its Sub lord to the
nth house.

Theory of Transit
The Bhukti lord Mercury transits in Leo whose lord Sun as stated
above is signifiG:atorof 5th cusp. Mercury is in Ketu Star, Saturn
Sub and Sun Sub-Sub. Sign lord of Leo Sun has no positional status
in the natal chart but it is in Saturn's Star that appears in the 5th
cusp. Ketu is the Star lord of 2nd cusp, Saturn is the Star and SubSub of 5th cusp and Sun is the Antara period lord who is in Saturn
Star in the natal chart.
Sun the Antara lord transits in Leo Sign and its lord Sun is in Saturn
Star in the natal chart. Sat appears in the 5th cusp. Sun is in Venus
Star (which is the Sub lord of 2nd CDSp))upiter Sub (which is the
Sub-Sub lord of nth cusp), and in Rahu Sub-Sub. Rahu represents
Mercury, the Bhukti lord. It is also the Sub lord of llmcusp. Mercury
is the Sub-Sub lord of 2nd cusp.
Mars the Sookshma lord transits in Leo Sign and in Venus Star,
Jupiter Sub, and Mars Sub- Sub. Venus is the Sub lord of the 2nd
cusp. Jupiter is the Sub-Sub lord of the 11th cusp. Mars is the Sub
lord of the 5th cusp. The transit of Moon on that day is in Sun Sign,
Ven Star, Jup Sub and Sat Sub-Sub. All these planets are the
significators of relevant cusps i.e. 2, 5 & 11.
Birth of second son: The native got his second son on 22/111974
in thejoint period of Rahu - Mercury - Saturn - Venus - Rahu. The
houses that we need to consider for the birth of 2nd son are 2, 7, and
1L The transit of planets is shown in fig. 13.3.

2M Kalawsa ~ ~ Interlinks ~ Sitcwlified 2 'M Enlarned
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit"
Cusp Chart

Theory of Transit
Planetary Position
It can be seen that the Dasa lord Rahu transits in Jupiter Sign
Sagittarius and in Ketu Star, Mars Sub and Rahu Sub-Sub. Sign
lord Jupiter has no positional status in the natal chart but being in
the Star of Venus is linked to 2 and 7. Star lord Ketu is the Star lord
of 2nd CUSpMars is in Sun Star in the natal chart. Sun is the Star
lord of 7lh cusp. Rahu is the Sub lord of 11th cusp.
Mercury the Bhukti lord transits in Capricorn the lord of whi~ has
no positional status in the natal chart, Satan, however, is in Venus
Star in the natal chart that is the Sign lord of the 7iJiL cusp and Sub
lord of 2nd CUSpMercury- transits in Moon Star (7JhJ cusp Sub-Sub
lord, and Star lord of 11 lh cusp), Saturn Sub(linked with 2 and 7
through its Star lord Venus) and Ketu Sub-Sub, the Star lord of 2.
Saturn the Antara lord transits in Mercury Sign Gemini and in Mars
Star, Sun Sub and Venus Sub-Sub. All these Planets are related to
the relevant cusps 2, 7 and 11.

Sookshma lord Venus transits in Saturn's Sign Capricorn and in
Moon Star, Mars Sub and Rahu Sub-Sub. The transit of all the
planets is concentrating on the houses 2, 7, and 11.
The transit of Moon on that day is in Jupiter Sign, Venus Star,
Jupiter Sub and Sun Sub-Sub. Jupiter is the Sub lord of 7th cusp
and Sub-Sub lord of the 11th cusp. But Jupiter has no positional
status in the natal chart. However, it is linked to 2 and 7 through its
Star lord Venus. Venus the Star lord of Moon is the Sub lord of 2nd
CUSpand is linked to 7th and the 11th cusp through its Star lord
Jupiter in the natal chart. Sun is the Star lord of 7th cusp.
Death of father: The native lost his father on 19/09/1979 in the
joint period of Rahu - Moon - Jupiter - Saturn - Moon. The transit
of planets on that day is shown in Table 13. B.
Planetary Position
Table 13. B

Theory of Transit
Dasa lord Rahu transits in the Sign leo. Its lord Sun has no positional
status in the natal chart but it is in the Star of Saturn in the natal
chart. Saturn appears as the Sub and Sub-Sub lord of 41'1 cusp and
Star lord of 9^cusp. Thus the Sign lord is linked with 1 and 8 with
respect to 9t'1cusp.
Transit of dasa lord Rahu in the Star and Sub of Venus indili:ates
that the dasha lord is linked to 9^1cusp (i.e. Ascendant for father),
2nd cusp (Le.6thhouse of siclalt:ssfor father). Venus is the Sub Sub
lord of 9t^1cusp and the Sub lord of 2nd cusp. Venus is placed in the
4^ cusp in the nataJ chart. 4th cusp js the 8^cusp with respect to 9^
cusp. In the natal chart Venus is in the star of Jupiter which is the
Sub lord of 7th CUSp which becomes the Badhakastbana for father.
It is lord of the 2nd cusp, the house of sickness for father. It is the
transit of the dasa lord in the Sub-Sub of Saturn, which is more
important.. Saturn is the Sub and Sub-Sub lord of 4thcusp i.e. 8thto
9^\it is the Star lord of 9^ cusp i.e. Ascendant for father. Sat is also
the Sub lord of the loth cusp and lord of yd cusp i.e. Marakasthanas
for father. Saturn in the natal chart is in Venus Star who is Sub-Sub
lord of 9*h cusps & is placed in 41'1 Bhava i.e. 8^' house from 9^'
cusp.
Saturn has also come as the Sookshma lord at the time of death of
father.
Saturn itself transits on the day of death in Venus Star, Mercury
Sub and Moon Sub-Sub. Mercury is the Sub lord of yd cusp, i.e.
7^' to 9th and the Sub-Sub lord of the S^cusp i.e. 1 2t*1to 9t*1cusp.
Moon is the Sub-Sub lord of 7^ cusp i.e. Badhakastbana of father
and also the Sub-Sub lord of the 3rd cusp.
Transit of Bhlllkti and Prana lord Moon in the Sign Leo and in the
StarofKetu, Sub of Mercury and Sub-Sub of Saturn totally agrees
with the nature of the event.. Remember Ketu represents Jupiter in
the natal chart. Ketu is also the Sub lord of 8^' house i.e. 1 2^V) 91'1.

Transit of Antara lord Jupiter in Leo Sign and in Ketu Star, Moon
Sub and Ketu Sub-Sub also agrees.
Death of mother: The native lost his mother on 5/08/2003 in the
joint period of Saturn - Ketu - Venus - Moon - Jupiter. The transit
of planets on that day is shown in Table 13. C.
Planetary Position
Table 13. C
Dasa lord SatunL transits in Gemini ruled by Mercury who has
positional status in the natal chart Mercury is the Sub lord of the
yd cusp which is 1 2^V) 4^ cusp. Mercury is in the Star of Rahu
who appears in 4 (Ascdt for Mother) and in 11 (the house with
respect to 4).
Transit of Dasa lord SatunL in Rahu Star indicates the linkage of
the dasa lord with 4th and llthcusp i.e. the Ascendant and 8^ cusp
for mother. Rahu is the Star lord of 4^ cusp and Sub lord of llm

Theory of Transit
cusp. Saturn transits in Mercury Sub that is the Sub lord of the yd
cusp. i.e. 12^o 4^ and Mercury in the natal chart is in Raltu Star
and is thus linked to 4, 10 and llthcusps i.e. 1,7, 8 for mother.
Mercury is in the Sub of Jupiter in the natal chart. Jupiter is the
Sub-Sub lord of 11th cusp and Sub lord of 12th cusp that is the
Badha.kasthana for mother.
Transit of Saturn in the Sub-Sub of Jupiter, whkh is the Sub-Sub
lord of 11th cusp i.e. 8^ to moth~r and since Jupiter in the nata.L
chart is in the Sub of Saturn, not only ensures the linkage of the
Dasa lord with 1 & 8 houses but also to Maraka houses. Saturn is
the Sub-Sub lord of 5^ cusp, and Sub lord of lOthcusp. Jupiter
itself is the Sub lord of the Badhakasthana of mother.
Similarly, we can see that the transit ofBhukti, Antara and Sookshma
lords agree with the nature of event..
Thus we notia.e that in Sub Sub and Cuspal Interlinks Theory
the Dasa penod lords. Sun and Moon should transit in:
1~ A Sign the lord of whiGh should signify relevant cusp/cusps
in the natal chad: that take pad: in enacting the event i.e.
either the Sign lord should have positional status in the
natal chart and it appears in relevant cusp/cusps or it
should be significator of relevant cusps in the natal chart
by way of its: stellar status.
2. The Star, Sub and Sub Sub the lords of whi<ili appear in
relevant cuspal positions or the lords of which are
significators of relevant cuspal positions in the natal chart.
It is easy to justify an event or a theory in Astrology. Ifs a
different matter when we have to predict the event.. How to fix
the transit and time events will be explained in the chapter
"VimsottaciDasa and Timing Events. "

Cuspal Interlinks and the Theory of Transit for
Minor Events:
An event is expected to happen only if it is promised and the Dasa
periods should have the capability to enact the event.. But the
analysis of the capability of a planet to provide results is very
complex. Sometimes, a person falls sick for a couple of days, and
"Surprisingly, neither the Antara nor the Sookshma lord seems to be
linked with the Ascendant and the sixth house simultaneously. In
such events, the role of transit of lords of Antara, Sookshma and
Prana play significant role. Here if in transit the SookshamalPrana
lord transits in Star and Sub that links I and 6 then though the
Sookshama.IPi'ana lord were significator of I or 6 only in the natal
chart but transit of these lords in the Star and Sub that establishes
the relationship of I and 6 can cause for temporary sickness. The
philosophy of the transit of planets remains the same as explained
above.
For daily events, the transit of Moon is most important.. However,
the transit of any planet should always be seen in consonance with
Dasa periods. For daily events Sookshma and Prana lords play
significant role. Transit only facilitates the happening of the event;
it can't create an event.. Moon's transit in a Star, Sub, and Sub-Sub
lord will indicate the houses linked by Moon. The events will happen
as per the sum total of the significations of the linked houses.

Chapter 14
Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
The Hindu Astrological literature is pregnant with a number of
Dasa Systems. This provides a huge stage for the Astrologers to
play around and choose according to their own experiences and by
their intellectual correspondence with the philosophy behind whicll
aDasa System is based. However, the single most important edifice
upon whicll the timing of events in predictive Astrology rests is
that the execution of an event is the responsibility of Moon (Mind).
That is no event, may be birth, sicktJ. ess, accident, divorce, joining
service, making a journey, a quarrel, maniage, child birth etc. or
even death takes place in the life of an individual unless Moon
occupies a particular degree, minutes and seconds in the Zodiac,
which position is co-ruled by those planets which are responsible
for the execution of the parti~ar event.. VimsottarL Dasa, whicll is
based on the progression of Moon through Stars, is popularly
accepted to provide a sound technique for timing events.
In VimsottarL Dasa, the life span of a human being is taken as 120
yrs. Dasa periods follow a specific sequence i.e. Ketu, Venus, Sun,
Moon, Mars, Rahu, Jupiter, Saturn and Mercury. Each planet is
allotted a different period as indicated below:
Planet
Ketu
Venus
Sun
Moon
Mars
No. of Years

Many Astrologers in the past have made serious efforts to dig out
the reasons for the specific planetary sequence and the unequal
periods allotted to different planets. Though their efforts appear to
be very genuine yet they are not conclusive. Only conclusion one
can draw from their studies is that Vimsottari Dasa must have been
based on very sound principles and it was in use much before
Prasara, the great IndialLSage. Study ofNadi writers also confirms
the use of Vimsottari Dasa. In the present day, one can find the
undercurrent of this Dasa in the system of Progression used by the
Westerns.
Calculation of Periods
In Vimsottari Dasa, the calculation of periods is done with reference
to Moon's longitude in a particular_Nakshatra at the time of birth.
We know that in the division of the Zodiac into 27 Nakshatras,
each Nakshatra is allotted the same space of 13 degrees 20 minutes.
However, each Nakshatra is allotted rulership of different planet
and the number of years is also different as stated above. It may be
pointed out here that though for calculation of the periods, we are
considering the progression of Moon in Lunar Mansions, yet the
Dasa for the calculation of the length of a year, a month or a day is
Solar based. That is because a year is said to have been completed
when Sun completes 360 degrees i.e. in 365.2422 days from its
position at birth. Similarly, a month is calculated with reference to
Sun completing 30 degrees and a day is equivalent to 1 degree
movement of Sun.

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Dasa at Birth
At the time of Birth Moon will be in a particular Sign and in a
pai'tiwlar Star. Dasa at birth corresponds to the Lord of the Star.
For examp 1~ if a child is born at a time and date when Moon is
transiting in Bharini Star whose ruler is Venus, we say the child is
born in Venus Dasa or sometimes called as Maha Dasa of Venus.
Dasa Balance at Birth
Total span of a Nakshatra is 13 degrees 20 minutes = 800'. The
birth of a child may take place when Moon is in a particular
N akshatra at a position other than its Starting point i..e. some portion
of this total span has already passed. Since Dasa periods are used
for timing events, we need to have a proper idea of the Dasa period
at the specific age of the child at which the event will take place.
Hence, we need to calwlate the balance period of the Dasa at birth.
It is done as follows:
Let X is the number of minutes that have passed in the Nakshatra
in which Moon is transiting at the time of birth.
Balance span of Nakshatra will be 800' - X = say Y minutes
Balance period will be
Planet's Period x Y
Let the Nakshatra at birth be ruled by Venus.

Then balance period will be = x 600
Calculation of Sub-periods:
First Sub Period: It is called Bhukti. Each Dasa period is divided
into 9 parts. Each part is called Bh\JJcti .. In Vimsottaui Dasa, the
sequence of peliiods and Sub-periods is ftxed i.e. from Ketu to
Mercury as stated earlier. However, the tsi Sub-peciod in any Dasa
period wilL be the same as the Dasa period itself i.e. if the biuth
Dasa period is of Jupiter, then the tsi Sub-peciod in Jupiter period
will be of Jupiter, 2nd that of Saturn and so on till the last one will
be of Rahu. It may be noted, however, the Sub-period in the main -
period at the time of birth will be as per the actual span of the
Nakshatra that has yet to be progressed by Moon.
Allotment of Sub periods of planets in any period is propomionaL
to the number of years allotted to the planets in Vimsottaci- Dasa.
Example: Let us say, we want to find the Sub-peciod of Jupiter in
Jupiter Dasa i.e. we want to calculate the allotment of Bhukti period
of Jupiter in Jupiter Dasa. It is done as folLows:
Bhukti period of Jupiter = x 16 = 2 yrs 1 month 18 days.
General formula may be stated as:
A
= AB
Bhukti period

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Where
A = No of total years allotted to the main period lord in Vimsottari
Dasa.
B = No of total years allotted to the Sub-period or Bhukti lord in
Vimsottari Dasa.
Suppose we want to calculate the Bhukti period of Sun in Jupiter
Dasa, it will be as follows:
Sun's Bhukti period = x 6 = 9 months 18 days.
Calculation of Sub-Sub period or Antara Period:
Each Sub-period or Bhukti is further divided into 9 parts in
proportion to the number of years allotted to each planet in
Vimsottui Dasa. These parts are called Sub-Sub periods orAntaril
Periods. Antaras like Bhukties follow the same order i.e. m Antara
of any Bhukti will always be of that Bhukti lord. The general formula
for calculation of Antaras is as follows:
Antara Dasa lord yrs x Bhukti lord yrs x Antara lord yrs
Period =
For example, if we want to calculate Antara perioo of Moon in the
Dasa of Jupiter and Bhukti of Sun, it will be as follows:
Antara of Moon = — yrs = 24 days

Kalawsa 1$ -
Intediaks
SiwoUfied.aJJIJ. ' Enlarned
Calwlation of Sub-Sub-Sub Period or Sookshma
Period:
Each Sub-Sub period is further divided into 9 parts according to
the number of years allotted to the planets in Vimsottari Dasa. These
parts are called Sub-Sub-Sub periods or Sookshma periods.
Calculation of Sookshma period is done as follows:
Sookshma period of a planet PI x P2 x P3 x P4
in a particular_ Dasa, Bhukti = yrs
Where PI = Main lord period yrs
P2 = Sub lord period yrs
P3 = Sub- Sub Lord period yrs
P4 = Sub- Sub - Sub Lord period yrs
The calculation of the Sookshma period of Moon in Jupiter Dasa,
Sun Bhukti, and Moon Antara is done as follows:
16x6x lOx JO
= Yrs
= 2 days.
Vimsottari Dasa Pedods and their effects on
Native:
Vimsottari Dasa is the representative of the progression of Moon
in a chart, calculated in a specified technique (as expla.inoo above).
The Ascendant and the planetary positions at the time of birth in
the chart indicate the quantum and quality of energy apportioned
to the native and also how he is going to channelise his energy for

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
outward expression in the material world. The planets co-ruling
the Dasa, Bhukti, Antara and Sookshma etc. periods enabk- the
Astrologer to make predktion about various aspects of the life of
the native taking into consideration the following facts:
1. Potential and promise of the Ascendant: It reflects the
capa~ty of the native to enjoy the fruits of the present and the
past Kaqnas. The strength, of the Ascendant puts a limiting
action on the strength of other houses. That is even if the
strength of the 2nd house is worked out to be very strong, yet
the native may be able to earn wealth to the limit ftxed by the
Ascendant..
2. Potential and the promise of the houses under consideration.
3. Potential of the planet Signiftcator of the aspect under
consideration.
4. Potential and promise of Dasa periods: There are various
methods followed by Astrologers to detemline the strength of
a planet in a particular- chart. The Traditionalists mostl- use
the following to calculate planetary strengths.
a) Dignity of the planet viz. as per exaltation, debilitation,
own or mooltrikona Sign.
b) Ac-dental dignity i.e. disposition of the planet in the
chart from the Ascendant, from its own Sign, placement
in friend's Sign, combustion, retrogression, placement
of the planet with respect to the house under
consideration, placement of the planet with respect to
Dasa lord, conjunction, and aspects the planet receives.
Shad Bala strengths.

It may be emphasised here that each horoscope is unique. Each
planet in a horoscope has a specific role to play. In a little loose
language it can be said that Sun in A's horoscope is not the same
Sun as in B' s horoscope. Therefore, to say that in the main period
of Rahu in the Sub-period of Mars the native will lose or gain
partiaular things on the basis of their planetary positions in the
house, may be too far fetched fancy and may even appear to be
contrary to what the native actually gains or loses. It is, therefore,
suggested that each planet's results", should be announced as
based on the planet's behaviour in the particular chart*
In Cuspal Interlinks Theory, Dasa period results should be
declared after taking the following facts into consideration:
1 . A planet acquires the rulership of the house in which it appears
in the Cuspal position as Sign, Star, or Sub or Sub-Sub lord.
The strength of the planet depends upon the Sign, Star and
Sub rising on the cusp.
2. Since the planet acts as source it uses the significations of the
cusps in which it appears for causing the results during its
period.
3. The results offered by the planet are as per the links that the
planet establishes with other cusps through its Star l~rd i.e.
the results offered by the planet are as per its planetary a~d
cuspal significations. The Sub and the Sub-Sub Lord of the
planet qualifies or spe~fies the result as per the partiwlar
aspect of life and the houses under consideration for enacting
an event(
4. The results offered by the Dasa periods are affected by the
transit of planets.

Basic Philosophy of Dasa Periods:
1. An event, which is promised, happens in the joint period of
planets that can cause that event to happen, subject to the
condition that the transits of the period lords agree. The
agreement means that the period lords in transit should also
remain significators for the event or should transit in Stars the
lords of which appear in relevant cusps.
2. Bhukti lord cannot provide results, which are not allowed by
t~e Dasa lord. Similarly, the Antara lord cannot provide which
Bhukti lord does not provide. In other words, generally the
results offered by period lords will be related to those houses
which are common to all the period lords.
3. It may, however, be noted that Dasa may run for a number of
years and its lord may be linked only to a few houses. Bhukti
lord will be able to provide the results of those houses only
which are not disallowed by the Dasa lord. For example, Dasa
lord may not be linked favourably to houses 5 or 7 or 11 but is
also not linked only with houses 4, 6, and 10 then the Bhukti
lord can give mamage if it is a fruitful significator of the 7th
cusp. Same applies to Antara lord etc.
Natal Potential and Transit Potential of Planets:
Each planet in the natal chart as per the moment of birth, rises in a
particulaL Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub, and through its Star lord it
establishes links with certain cusps. The planet is expected to
provide results of these cusps during its peniod using the
significations of the cusps in whkh it appears and also as per its
nature, as modified by the Sign etc. rising on the cusps in whkh it
appears. The results of the planet stand to be qualified or specified

by its Sub or Sub-Sub lord. This is called the Natal Dasa potential
of the planet.. The planets, as we know, are constantly moving. Thus,
a planet whose period is running at a particular time in the life of
an individual may be moving in a Sign, Star, Sub or Sub-Sub, which
may be different from what the planet had at the time of birth. The
results... the planet willi offer at that time stands modified by its
transit position. This is called its transit potential..
What results actually the native will derive in a particular period
taking into its Nata.! potential and Transit potential period is a Subject
of serious study.
1st Method: According to some Astrologers, the result should be
predi<kledusing the following method.
Suppose a planet say Saturn in a horosco~e is responsible. .-to give
results of houses 2, 9, 10 and 11. That is, the planet may be linked
to houses 2 and 9 through Star lord and to houses 10 and 11 through
its Sub lord. Now, suppose the native runs the main period of Saturn,
whicll will run for 19 years. Since the basic philosophy of Dasa
periods expect the native to enjoy results of 2, 9, 10 and 11, it
would mean, the native can't enjoy the significations of any other
house. The planet in transit will, according to them, take care of
other houses. That is, during transit the planet will be moving in a
Star, Sub and Sub-Sub that will appear in some cuspal positions
and thus offer the results of these cusps. The nature of result will
be contrHlled by the natal potential of the planet.. For example,
suppose Saturn transits in a Star, the lord of which appears in, say,
4th cusp; Saturn will concentrate on providing 4* house results as
per its potential of 2, 9, 10 and 1 1 . If this potential is favourable to
4th cusp, it will offer favourable results otheiwise not. In this case
2,9:10 and 11 become 11,6,7 and 8 whicll is not very favourable.

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Drawbacks of this Method:
A. The natal potential of the planet promises results of houses 2,
9, 10 and 11 through the significations of the houses where
the planet appears in the cuspal position. Taking the natal
potential to mean 2, 9, 10 and 11 would thus mean losing the
concept of sources of the result..
B. If the planet is to provide only the favourable., or unfavourablev
results of the houses, which it gets linked through its transit
then what would happen to the results of the houses 2, 9, 10
and 11. In other words it would mean the loss of the natal
potential of the planet or transit creating results which were
never promised by the planet..
2nd Method: This is based on the following principles:
1. Transit positions of planets either agree or disagree with the
natal potential. Disagreement will cause impediments in the
happening of the event as promised by the natal potential of
the planet..
2. Transit of planets in Sign, Star, Sub and Sub-Sub is examined
in two ways:
A. As per their cuspal positions in relation to the natal
potential of the planet..
B. As per the natal potential of the Star, Sub and Sub-Sub
lord in which the planet transits.
3. This method also uses the concept of segregating the events
as per their nature so as to allow the Bhukti or Antara lords
etc. to cause for the events for whi<ili the Dasa is either
favourable or neutraL. The broad classification of events that
a period can cause to happen is listed below:

Events, which do not happen so often, have to be
predicted as per Dasa lord Signification. For example,
death of an individuaLwill happen only in a specific Dasa.
For most of the people even purchase of a house may
also be an event, whkh may not repeat itself in the life
of the native. So Dasa potential has to be favourable for
such events.
B. For matters that may repeat but not too often, Bhukti
plays the most significant role. For example, marriage
will take place only in a specific Bhukti that is strongly
connected with 7th cusp. The Dasa lord may be neutral
or favourable., for the event but should not disallow the
event..
C. For matters of common or repetitive nature, we have to
(concentrate on Antara, Sookshma and Prana lords.
However, the. Bhukti should, not specifically deny these
events.' \
It should, however, be kept in mind that the joint period of Dasa,
Bhukti, Antara etc. all have to be taken care of even for matters of
permanent nature or which happen with less frequency.
Timing Events; The following steps need to be followed in timing
an event.
Step 1. Decide the houses that are needed to enact an event..
Step 2. Check the promise of the event from the Sub-Sub lord and
Sub lord of the primary cusp. If the horoscope is rectified for each
cusp up to the Sub-Sub level, the necessity of checking the promise
through the Sub lord can be avoided.

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Step 3. If the event is promised, assess the time period in which the
event may happen. For example, the Sub-Sub lord of the 7th cusp
may promise a delayed maniage, say not earlier than 25 years.
Step 4. Having assessed the approximate time period, we have to
select the Dasa periods according to the nature of the event and
Dasa potential of the period lords that are favourable for the
particular evt<nt.
Step 5. Having ftxed the Dasa, Bhukti and Antara periods, we should
ftx the Sookshma and Prana taking into consideration the transit of
Dasa, Bhukti, Antara lords, Sun and Moon.
Transit of period lords should be examined as per the 2nd method
discussed above.
Timing events looks simple, but it is not. It comes with
experience. It depends upon the Astrologer's power of
comprehension and analytical capabililiy. Some believe, it
depends upon the intuitive power of the Astrologer. A student
of Astrology went to an experienced Astrologer to learn the
intJ;ica~es oftiming events. He said to the Astrologer, "Sir, this
is the chart of a beautiful lady who got married in the joint
period of Saturn - Jupiter - Rahu. Why did she not get marcied
in the period of Satllrn- - Rahu - Jupiter?" Suddenly the reply
came from that experienced Astrologer, "Did she go to the
Astrologer at that time?" The student was equally sharp. He
said, "Sir, I was told that the mamages are arranged in Heaven.
t!
A genuine student , of Astrology has the right to know the reasons
for such problems. He may use the following tips:
A. Remember for each event to happen, the Dasa periods
according to the nature of event must be strongly linked with

the primary cusp. The general statements like death may
happen in the dasa of this lord or that lord or marriage may
take place in the joint period of 5, 7 and 1 1 houses cause
probl— s to the students of Astrology. In the above case, Rahu
might not be connected strongly to the 7th cusp, but takes part
in marriage because of its links with 5 orll.. The student of
Astrology will also fmd cases where a person marries in a
particular Bhukti and gets divorce in the same Bhukti. We
will analyse such cases and try to provide answer to the
students.
B. Transit, especially of the period lQl'dsi.e. Dasa or Bhukti for
major events, should be examined very carefully.
C. Check the accuracy of the horoscope for each cusp before
making prediction.
Let us learn the art of timing events by analysing some example
charts- for speGific events..
Example 1. Refer fig. 14.1. This is the chart of an individual who
is holding a very senior position in the Department of
Telecommunications, Govt, of India. We will analyse this chart in
respect of the following events:
1. Completion of education, B. Tech in April/May 1973.
2. Joining flrstjob on 28.09.1973
3. Joining 2nd job on 29.12. 75
5. Matirlage on 28.9.1979
6. Birth of son 13.U983
7. Visit abroad from 30.1.1995 to May 1995.

Vimsotfari Dasa and Timing Events.
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit-'
Cusp Chart

PlanetaJ:¥ Position
Nirayana Cusps

Vimsotlari Dasa and Timing Events
In order to facilitate analysis, we can tabulate the linkJige sthat the
planets make with cuspal positions thiough Star; Sub and Sub-Sub.
This is shown in table 14. P
Table 14 P

Note: Rahu & Keto.also give the results of the planets they represent.
Note: The planet in the Star or Sub or Sub-Sub of Rahu / Ketu is
taken as in the Star or Sub or Sub-Sub of the planets they represent..
True positions of Rahu and Ketu are used.
1. Completion of education: The native was running the joint
period of Jup - Jup - Jup - Ven up to 13.5.1973. Jupiter was
transiting in Capricorn Sign in Moon Star and Jupiter Sub on
15.4.1973. The termination of education is indicated by yd
and 8th cusp. From the table above it can be seen that Jup is
strongly linked with 8 and its transit in Moon Star (3fd Cusp
Star lord) has facilitated its action in terminating the native's
education.
2. Joill.ing first job: The native joined the first job on 28.09.1973
when he was running Jup - Jup - Sat - Rahu - Venus. The
Transit position of planets is shown in Table 14A. The native
joined service in the joint period of the planets linked with 2,
6 and 10. Here, we need to examine whether the horoscope
promises servi- or not.
This is done as follows:
A. What the Ascendant promises: Sub-Sub lord of
Ascendant is Jupiter. It is connected to both 6 and 7.
B. What the lO^cusp promises: Sub-Sub lord of lOthcusp
is Mercury. It is also linked with 6 and 7.
C. What the 6^ Cusp promises: Sub-Sub lord of 6^ cusp
is Venus. It is in Sun Star, the Sub lord of 6^ cusp. It is in
Jupiter Sub that appears as the Sub-Sub lord of llincusp
and is placed in 5^ Bliava. Venus is in the Sub-Sub of
Rahu that represents Sat and Mars. Venus is thus linked
to the 2nd and lOthcusps through Sub-Sub lord.

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
D. What the 7th cusp promises: Saturn is the Sub-Sub lord
of 7th cusp. Its Sub-Sub lord is linked to 11 but not to the
house of profession. SaturLLmore over is strongly linked
to 3 and 1 1 . It does not indicate linkages with houses 2
and 6.
The native thus had to choose service as a mode of his profession.
The period lords espe~ll'y the Bhukti lord is linked to 2, 6 through
Star lord and to 10 through Sub lord. The Antara lord is linked to 2
and 10, Sookshma lord Rahu is linked to 10 through Star lord and
to 2 and 10 through Sub lord. Rahu represents Mars that also show
linkages of 2, 10 and 6. The Prana lord Venus is linked to the 6th
cusp through its Star lord, to 11 through Sub lord and to 2 and 10
through its Sub-Sub lord Rahu.
Planetm;r Position
Table 14. A

Let us analyse the transit of Jupiter, Saturn, Rahu, and Venus on
28.9. 73. Jupiter transits in Sat Sign, Sun Star (the Sub lord of 6^'
cusp), Venus Sub (the Sub-Sub lord of 61'1 cusp, and Star lord of
1 O^Y'usp) and Rahu Sub-Sub (Rahu represents Saturn and Mars in
the chart and thus is linked to 2 and 10).
Satum transits in Rahu Star (2nd and lO^cusps), Sat Sub (2ndCusp
Sub lord and resident of 10th) and Mercury Sub-Sub (2r'd & 1
Sub-Sub lord).
Raltu transits in Ketu Star (Ketu is the Star lord of 2nd cusp and
since it represents Sun, it indicates 6^ Cusp), Jup Sub (the Dasa
and Bhukti lord), RahJl Sub-Sub (i.e. Linked with 2 and 10 cusps).
Venus transits in Jup Star; Sat Sub and Jup Sub-Sub. i.e. in the Star
and Sub of Dasa, Bhukti and Antara lords.
Moon on that day transits in Mars Star (loth Cusp Sub lord and
Sign lord of 6^), Mercury Sub (2 11 d and lOthcusp Sub-Sub lord also
it becomes significator of 6) and Rahu Sub-Sub (2°dand loth cusp
linkage).
Sun Transits in Moon Star (3rdand llthStar lord, and Moon strongly
linked to lOthcusp through its Star lord and with 6^ as a Sign lord
in the chart). Mars Sub (lOth Sub lord), Sat Sub-Sub (2 11 d Cusp Sub
lord).
The Transit, thus, clearly agrees with the Dasa potential and enables
the event to happen.
3. Joining 2nd Job: The native left the first job on 26. 12 .. 1 975
and joined the new job on 29.12.1975. This happened when
he was running the period Jup - Sat - Mer - Jup - Ven. The
transit position of planets is shown in table 14. B. The Dasa
period and Transit clearly justify the happening of the evenL

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
The question, we need to analyse is whether the change injob
is promised or not. This is to be examined from the Sub-Sub
lord of lOthcusp. 10th Sub-Sub lord Mercury is linked to 1 2^'
cusp through its Star lord. This promises that the native is to
change his profession. The Sub lord of the lOthcusp is also
linked through its Star lord with 9th<;:jJldl2%rsp. Thus the
change injob is promised.
Planetary Position
Table 14. B
The change has taken place in the Antara of Mercury and Sookshma
of Jupiter i.e. in the periods of planets linked with 9 and 12. Both
these planets are linked with 5thcusp through their Sub lords.
4. Promotions: A native gets promotion in the joint period of
planets linked with 2, 6, 10 and 11, when the transit agrees.

1st Promotion: The native got his first promotion on 29.12.1979 in
the joint period of lup - Mer - Sat - Mars -Rahu. The Transit position
of planets is shown in Table 14. C. The Bhukti lord Mercury is
strongly linked with 6 through its Star lord, with 10 through its Sub
lord and with- 11th through its Sub-Sub lord. The Dasa periods are
clearly linked with. 2, 6, 10 and 11 cusps and transit supports the
event as can be seen from the table 14. C.
Planetary Position
Table 14. C
The native got another promotion on 13.11.1995 in the joint period
of Sat - Ketu - Mercury - Venus and Sun. The transit position of
planets is shown in table 14. D. The Bhukti lord Ketu is strongly
linked to 2, 6, and 10 but also to the 5^ cusp. This indicates the
native had to face some problems in his profession during Ketu

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Bhukti. But it has also to give results of Sun that is strongly linked
to 3 and 11. This enabled the native to get promotion in Ketu Bhukti
but he has to wait till the Antara of Mercury. As already stated
Mercury is a planet, which promises promotion to the native in his
professional career. The trail. sinn 13.11.1995 clearly supports the
event as can be seen from the table 14. D.
PlanetaJj' Position
-X
Table 14. D
5. Marriage on 28.9.1979: The native got maniod on 28.9.1979
in the joint period of Jup - Mer - Jup - Rahu - Venus. The
Transit position of planets on 28.9.1979 is shown in table 14.
E.

Planetary Position
Table 14. E
Let us see, whether the native is promised marciage or not..
Ascendant Sub-Sub lord Jupiter is linked with cusps 5 and 7 through
its Star lord and to cusp 1 1 through its Sub lord. It promises that the
native has the capability to enjoy the significations of 5, 7 and 11
cusps.
7th cusp Sub-Sub lord Saturn has the positional statu's and is as
such linked to 7th cusp. It is linked to nth cusp through its Star
lord. The native is thus promised madifiage.
The linkage of Saturn through its Star .lord and positional status
with 3, 7 and 1 1 promises early mamage but Saturn is also linked
to cusps 1 and 2. This causes some delay. The native, thus, married
at the age of 27 years and 4 months.

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
From the table 14. P it can be seen that only planets Mercury, Ketu,
Jupiter and Mars are linked with cusp 7 through theiu Star lords
and supported by their Sub lords for the significations of marriage.
Mercury the Bhukti lord, in Jupiter Dasa gave the native marriage.
Dasa period and die transit as seen from table 14. E deariy support
the happening of die event..
6. Birdi of Son: The native got his second child on 13.1.1983 in
the joint period of Jup - Yen - Sat - Mar - MarSj The transit
positions of planets are shown in table 14. F. The birth of die
second child tabes place in die joint period of 2, 7 and 11
when Transit agrees.
Plane- Position
Table 14. F
Let us see, whether the native has die capability^ to produce a child.
The 5th Sub-Sub lord is Mercury. It has positional status and is thus
linked to 2, 5 and 11. Mercury is in die Star.' of Venus and is thus

linkoo to 2, 3, 6, 8, 9 and 11 cusps from 5th cusp. Linkages of 2nd
and 8th cusps from the 5th cusp indi~te reason for the loss of ftrst
conception. The promise of the 5th cusp is, however, favourable for
the birth_of child.
Birth of the child on 13.1.1983 indi~tes that the conception had
taken place in the month of April 1982 in the Bh\lkti of Venus,
Antara ofRahu and Sookshma of Venus that lasts from 4th April to
28th April 1982. Both Venus and Rahu are strongly linked with 8lb
cusp.
The child is bom in the Antara of Saturn. Saturn, is in Moon Star
who is the Star lord of 11th cusp. Saturn is in the Sub of Jupiter
which is the lord of 2nd and 5llLcusp. Saturn has the positional status
and is the Sub-sub lord of the 7th cusp and the Sub lord of the 2nd
CUSp.Thus Saturn is liked with 2, 7 and 11.
The Sookshama and Prana lord Mars is in Rahu Star and Jupiter
Sub. Since Rahu represents Mars and Saturn we can take Mars to
be in its own Star as well as in the Star of Saturn. Mars is placed in
Illh Bhava and Saturn is the Sub lord of the 2nd CUSpand Sub-Sub
of the 7lb cusp, the Sub lord of Mars is Jupiter who is the lord of 2
and 5. Thus Sookshama and Prana lord is linked to 2, 7 and 11.
The child is bom in Venus Moon Star; See in the natal chart of the
native. Venus is in the Sub-Sub ofRahu that represent Saturn. Saturn
is the Sub-sub of the 7th cusp. Thus the Moon Star, of the Son
establishes relationship with the Sub-Sub lord of the 7th cusp.
The transit on 13.1.1983 and the Dasa periods support the event.
7. Visit Abroad: The native made a visit abroad on 30.1.1995 in
connection with his service in the joint period Sat - Ket - Ven
- Sat - Mars. The Transit position of planets is shown in table

Vimsottari Oasa and Timing Events
Planetary Position
Table 14. G
A person can visit abroad if the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord promises
the native enjoyment of the significations of 9th or the 12,h cusp.
Also the 12Jh cusp should be linked with 12Jh and 9th cusp.
The Native's Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant is Jupiter that has the
positional status and being Sub-Sub lord of 9th promises the native
longjourneys.
The Sub-Sub lord of 1 2Jh cusp Rahu is linked to both the 9th as well
as 12th cusp.
For visit abroad, for a couple of months, we should concentrate on
the Antara lord. Here, Venus is the Antara lord that links the 6th
cusp (house of seryice) through its Star lord Sun and to the 9th cusp
through its Sub lord Jupiter. Venus is in the Sub-Sub of Rallu that
is the Sub lord of 3,9 and Sub-Sub lord of 12. Thus the Antara lord
is linked to all the relevant houses i.e. 3, 9 and 12, that cause for
visit abroad. Linkage of 6th cusp Sub-Sub lord Venus through its

2M Kalawsa fl ~ intediaks - Simplified aJJU Enlarned
Star lord Sun indicates that the visit is in connection with his service.
In Transit, as earn be seen from table 14 - G. Venus is transiting in
Ketu. Star; Ketu. Sub and Rahu Sub-Sub. Both Ketu. and Raiiu are
linked to relevant cusps (Ketu. is resident of 9th cusp). Sookshma &
Prana lords support the event...
Thus the Dasa period lords as well as their Transit support : the event..
Example!. Refer fig. 14.2. This is the chart of a lady who got
married on 28.6.1998. Unfortunately, she lost her husband on
25.2.1999. (Date of Birth_2,4.J980, Time of Birth 01J31h& Place
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit"
Cusp Chart

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Planetary Position
Nirayana Cusps

Analysis of the horoscope for marriage:
Stepl.. The Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant is Saturn. It is in Sun Star
that is the Sub lord of 11th cusp. Saturn_ is in the Sub of Mars that is
linked to 5 and 7. The Ascendant thus prowises malD age.
Step2. The Sub-Sub lord of 7th cusp is Mars. It is in Ketu Star~Ketu
represents Saturn and Mars. Thus 7th cusp Sub-Sub lord is linked
to 5, 7 and 11. Mars is in the Sub of Venus that is the Sub lord of7th
cusp.
The mamage of the native is promised.
Step 3: Mamage takes place in the joint period of the planets that
are linked with 5, 7 and 11. The Bhukti lord should be strongly
linked with the primary cusp i.e. 7^ cusp.
The native got mamed in the period Rahu-Moon-Mam-Rahu-Sat.
The Transit positions of planets on the day of marriage Le.
28.06.1998 are shown in the table 14. H.
Planetary Position
Table 14. H

Bhukti lord Moon is in Mars Star, Mercury Sub and Saturn SubSub and is thus strongly linked to 711' cusp. The Dasa period lords
clearly justify the event.. Their transit also supports the event to
happen.
Why should the lady lose her husband in the same Bhukti that gave
her marriage? Let us analyse the 7“' cusp for determining the
longevity of the partner.
Sub-Sub lord of the 7*1* cusp is Mars. It does not have positional
status. Mars is in Ketu Star that represents Satura and Mars. Ketu
is the Sub-Sub lord of 6“' cusp i.e. 12th to 7“'- Ketu also appears in
1<YI' and 4*1* cusp. Satura is the Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant.. This
house is both the Maraka as well as the Badhakasthana for the
partner. Saturn is also linked to cusps 11 i.e. 5th from T\ But Mars
is in the Sub of Venus, which negates the linkages of 5lb Cusp.
Mars thus creates a doubt about the longevity of the partner.
Marriage took place in the Dasa of Rahu that is linked with 7"> and
2nd CUSpi.e. I and 8 of the partner. This is a critical period for the
longevity of the partner. The native lost her husband on 25.02.1999
during the joint period of Ra - Mo - Sat - Mer - Jup. The Transit
positions of planets on the day are shown in table 14.1. The period
lords and their transit supports the event..

Planetary Position
Table 14.1
This example clearly indicates that while analysing a horoscope
for maroage if the Astrologer finds that:
1 . The native is promised marriage in a Bhukti of a Dasa whose
lord is linked to 2nd and 7th cusps simultaneously and,
2. The Sub-Sub lord of the 7fu cusp promises short life for the
partner;
Then the Astrologer has to advise the native that he or she should
not choose the partner whose Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is the
same planet as the native's Sub-Sub lord of the 7fu cusp.
Astrologer should also check the promise oflongevity of the partner
from his or her horoscope.

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Example 3: Refer Fig. 14.3. Following is the chart of a young man
who married on 5.12.1985 and had to face the divorce on
22.12.1985. The planetary positions on 5.12.1985 at 22.40 his are
shown in Table 14. J. (Date of Birth: 14.9.1962 Time of Birth
23.14.10 hrs. Place of Birth 29 NO, 77E 42)
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit".
Cusp Chart

Planetary Position
Nirayana Cusps

Analysis of the Horoscope should reveal the promise for marriage
as well as divorce and that too in the same Bhukti
Here, the Sub-Sub Lord of both the Ascendant and Seventh cusp is
Saturn. It is in Moon Star, which is the Star lord of 5th cusp. It is in
the Sub ofRahu that represents Moon and Saturn.. Thus, the marriJlge
is promised to the native. Saturn in the Sub of Rahu is as good as in
the Sub of Saturn whom Rahu represents. Saturn is the Sub lord of
the 6th, 7th. 10th and 12th cusps it promises divorce also. In this
horoscope Saturn is in the Star of Moon and Moon is in the
Star of Saturn. It is observed that in such cases where there is
exchange of Stars the planets... behave as if they are in their own
Stars. Saturn being the Sub Sub lord of 7th cusp becomes the
significator of7,h cusp and since it appears in 6, 10 and 12 it becomes
the significator of these houses also.
The native got married during the joint period of Mer - Mo - Ve -
Mo - Mo. The Bhukti lord Moon is strongly connected with 7th
cusp being in the Star of Saturn (the Sub and Sub Sub lord of the
7th cusp and Star lord of nth cusp) and Sub of Mercury (the Star
lord of 7th cusp) and Sub-Sub lord of 6 & 12 cusp. Antara lord
Venus is in Rahu Star that represents Moon and Saturn and in Mer
Sub who appears in 7th along with 6 & 12 cusp. It is thus fully
capable to cause for the event of marriage and divorce.

Kalamsa j, —
Interlinks
$imofified .aim1 Enlarged
Plane l^ar¥ Position on the day of marnage.
Table 14. J
The Transit of Dasa period lords folly supports the event... Mercury
the Dasa lord was transiting in Saturn^ Star and Mercury Sub. Sun
was transiting in Mercury Star, the Star lord of 7th cusp. It was in
Venus Sub who is the Sub Sub lord of the 5th cusp and is the Antara
lord. Moon was transiting in Venus Star, who is the Antara lord and
significator of relevant houses for the event of mairiage.
Let us analyse the horoscope for divorce. Remember, it is not a
case that the Star lord gave the marnage and Sub lord gave the
divorce. The majjriage cannot take place in the Bhukti of a planet
whose Star lord appears in the 7th cusp and Sub lord is linked
to the 6th cusp alone. In such cases where the majjriage lasts., for
a few days, the Bhukti lord is always linked to 7th cusp through
its, Star lord and also through its. Sub lord with 5 or 7 or llcusps.
In this case, if the Sub lord Mercury had not been the Star lord of

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
the 7th cusp it would have not allowed the maraiage to take place
due to its being the Sub Sub lord of the 6th cusp. The native had to
face the divorce due to mutual agreement on 22.12.1985 when he
was running the joint period of Mer - Mo - Ve - Ra - Sat.
The planetary position of planets on that day is shown in table 14.
k.
Planetary Position
Table 14. K
The Sookshama lord Rahu is in Saturn Star and Jupiter Sub in the
natal chart. Saturn being in 6th and 1:2th cusp indicates the completion
of the activity of marriage and its Sub lord being in the 5th and 1 lttr
cusp specifies that divorce has resulted due to mutual agreements.
Example 4: Refer fig 14.4. This is the chart, of a young lady who
did M. Sc. in chemistry. It was detected on 6.12.2003 that she was
suffering from ovarian cancer. She was operated on 22.12.2003 in

334 Kalamsa & CusgaL Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Fnlaroed
U. S. A and her ovaries, uterus and appendix were removed. We
will analyse the chart to justify both, aspects of her life. Date of
Birth: 02.02.1958 Time of Birth: 22.0L49 Place of Birth 32 N 42,
Name
Place
Long. & Lat.
Date_ & Day
Lunar Nodes
Ayanamsa
Tithi
Jammu
True
Shukla Paksha Chaturdashi
Time
Geocentric Lat. .
Time Zone
Sun Rise Time
Naksbatra
Punarvasu-3 Qtr.
Lagna Chart Bhav "Chalit"
Cusp Chart

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Analysis for Educational Prospects:
A person can be awarded the degree of M. Sc. in chemistry if the
following conditions are apparent in the horoscope.
1. The Ascendant should promise higher education.
2. The 4th cusp Sub-Sub lord should be linked to 9th cusp.
3. Sun, Venus and 6th cusp should maintain relationship with 9th
cusp.
4. The 4th cusp Sub-Sub lord should be linked with Sun, Ven
and 6th cusp to study chemistry in the B. Sc.
5. 9th cusp should promise success in higher education.
In the horoscope, Ascendant Sub-Sub lord is Rahu. It is in its own
Star and Saturn Sub. Rahu represents Venus. Now Venus is the Sub
lord of 9th cusp. More over the Planet Rahu is the Sub lord of the
11th cusp and its Sub lord Saturn is the Sub-Sub lord of the 9th
cusp. This also indicates the fulfilment of native's desire through
higher education. The 4th Sub-Sub lord Mercury is in Sun Star and
Rahu Sub. Sun is the Star lord of the 9th cusp and Venus (Rahu) is
the Sub lord of the 9th cusp. Thus the 4th cusp is linked with the 9th
cusp and also with planets Sun and Venus that indicates chemistry.
9th cusp Sub-Sub lord is in Mercury Star that is the Sub lord of the
6th cusp. The Sub-Sub lord ofthe 6th cusp is Jupiter, which is in the
Star of Rahu and is thus linked to 9th cusp. All this clearly justifies
her choosing chemistry for higher education. Since Saturn has the
positional status, it is linked to 9th, 11th and 7th cusp i.e. 1, 3 and 11
cusps from 9th cusp. This indicates that the 9th cusp promises her
success in higher education.

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Analysis of the horoscope for Ovarian Cancer:
Rahu, the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is in its own Star and is
thus linked to the 6th cusp and also the 12th cusp because Rahu
represents Venus (Rahu being in Rahu Star is as good as in the Star
of Venus which it represents). Rahu is in the Sub of Saturn who
appears in 5 and 7 (overies, Uterous). Rahu also has to behave as
Venus who. is in Moon Star the Sub Sub lord of the 8th cusp. Thus
the Ascendant Sub-Sub lord is maintaining links with 6th, 8th and
12* cusps. This promises that the native has to suffer serious
diseases like cancer. The Ascendant Sub-Sub lord, 3rd Sub-Sub lord
and 8th Sub-Sub lord also show that the native is promised only
medium span of life
Sub-Sub lord of 8th cusp is Moon who is in Jupiter Star, Venus Sub
and Rahu Sub-Sub. Thus 8th cusp involves the 8th and 7th cusp and
commits to 5 and 12 through Sub lord.
The Sub-Sub lord of the 6th cusp Jupiter is in Rahu Star and is thus
also linked with 6th and 12th cusp. Since Jupiter is also in the Sub
of Rahu, the disease concentrated on 5th, 6th and 7th cusps.
The disease was detected when the native was running the joint
period of Ket - Ra - Ra - Ket - Jup. In the horoscope, the Sookshama
lord Ketu is in its own Star and Mercury Sub. Ketu is the Star lord
of 8th and Mercury is the Sub lord of the 6th cusp. Since Ketu
represents Mars, it is linked with Ascendant and 12th cusp also.
She was operated on 22.12.2003 in the joint period of Ket - Ra - Ra
-Mo - Jup. The transit position of planets at 12.00 hrs at Boston, U.
S. A is shown in table 14. L.

338 Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Enlarged
Planetary Position
Table 14. L
Both the Dasa period lords and their transit support the event. For
example the Prana lord Jupiter transits in Venus Star. In the natal
chart Venus is in MoonStar (Sub-Sub lord of 8th cusp) and Rahu
Sub (Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant and 7th cusp and Sub lord of 5th
cusp).
Example 5: Refer fig 14.5. This is the chart of a lady who had her
first marriage on 9.12.1998. She lost her husband on 13.6.1999
and re-married on 10. 7.2000. All these events happened during
the same Dasa and the same Bhukti. (Date of Birth 1.10.1977 Time
of Birth; 15:48.52; Place of Birth 29 N 0, 77 E42)

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit"
Cusp Chart

Planetary Position
Nirayana Cusps

Analysis of the Horoscope:
Step 1. First Marriage: The Sub-sub lord of Ascendant and the 7th
cusp is Ketu. It is in Mercury Star and Mercury is the Sign lord and
Sub-Sub lord of sth cusp and Star lord of 7th cusp. Thus, the native
is promised marriage. Now the first marriage of native takes place
in the joint period of planets that are linked with 5, 7 and 11 cusps
when Transit agrees. The Bhukti lord should be strongly connected
with the primary cusp i.e. 7th cusp. The native married when she
was running the joint period of Rahu - Rahu -Rahu - Ven - Jupiter.
Rahu is in Moon Star who is lord of 7th and Sub lord of 1 1 . Rahu is
in the Sub of Venus who is the Sub lord of sth as well as 6th cusp.
This linkage allows marriage but also hints at possible separation.
Venus is in Venus Star and Moon Sub. Jupiter is in Rahu Star that
represents Mercury and Moon. Thus all the Dasa period lords are
linked with S, 1 and 11. However Planets Rahu, Venus and Jupiter
are in the Sub-Sub of planets that appear in relevant cusps for
allowing marriage to take place and also these Planets Sub-Sub
lords appear in cusps that indicate possible separation. Transit
positions of planets on that day are shown in table 14. M.
Rahu on the day of marriage transits in Ketu Star, Venus Sub and
Venus Sub-Sub. Ketu is the Sub-Sub lord of the 7th cusp and Star
lord of the 11th cusp. Ketu in the Natal chart represents Mercury
that is the star lord of 7th cusp and sign and Sub-Sub lord of the sth
Cusp. Venus is the Sub lord of sth. The Transits of Venus the
Sookshama lord. Moon and Sun all agree and support the event.

Planetary Position
Table 14. M
Death of Husband
The Marriage has taken place in the Dasa that is, simultaneously
linked with the 2nd and 7th cusp i.e. 8th and 1st cusp from 7th cusp.
The native lost her husband on 13.6.1999 when she was running
the joint period of Rahu-Rahu-Sat-Sat-Sun. All these Planets have
the potential to cause the death of her husband. Transit positions of
planets on that day at noon at the place of birth of the native are
shown in table 14.N. The exact time and place of death are not
known.
The Bhukti lord is linked with 8th, 1st and 5th cusps that are Maraka
and Badhakasthana for the partner. Saturn is in Ketu Star and Venus

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Sub. Ketu represents Jupiter lord of 8th cusp with respect to 7Ul
cusp. It also represents Mercury who is lord of Badhakasthana for
7Ul cusp. Saturn is thus linked to Maraka, Badhaka and 8Ul cusp.
Prana lord Sun is in Moon star and Jupiter Sub. Thus it gets linked
to 1 and 8. Transit of Dasa lord Rahu on that day in Mercury Star
and Venus sub ensures the linkage of the 7th- and 2nd cusp i.e. 1st
and the 8th cusp. Transit of Saturn in Venus Star and Rahil Sub and
Jupiter Sub-Sub supports the happening of the event..
Planetary Position
Table- 14. N
Second Marriage: The native remarried on 10.7.2000 when she
was running the joint period of Rahu - Ratal - Venus - Mars - Saturn.
Transit positions of planets on that day at 23.00hrs (assumed time
of marriage) are shown in the table 14. Q.

Planetary Position
Table 14. Q
The linkage of the 9th cusp with 7th cusp and 7th cusp with 9th cusp
shows promise of second marriage. The Sub-Sub Lord of 9th cusp
is Jupiter who is in Rahu Star that represents both Mercury and
Moon. These Planets appear in 7th cn~p. The Sub-Sub lord of 7th
cusp is Ketu who is in Mercury Star. l\i 'rcury is the Sub lord of the
9th cusp. Thus second marriage for the native is promised. The
second marriage takes place in the joint period of planets that are
linked with 5, 9 and 1 1 . The Bhukti lord should be linked with 9th
cusp. The Second marriage has taken place in Rahu Bhukti. Rahu
is in Moon Star (Sublord of 11) and Venus Sub who is the lord of 9.
Venus, Mars and Saturn are all significators of rei event cusps i.e.
Transit support the event of second marriage. Dasa lord and Bhukti
lord Rahu transits in Jupiter Star and Mars Sub. Jupiter is the Sub-

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Sub lord of 9th cusp and Mars is the Starlord of the 5th cusp. Venus
the Antara lord transits in Jupiter Star and Rahu Sub. Rahu represents
Mercury and Moon. All these Planets appear in 5 or 9 or 11. Mars
transits in Jup Star and Sat Sub, Saturn is the sub lord of the 7th
cusp. In the Natal chart Saturn is linked with 5,9 and 11 through
it's Star lord. The Prana lord Sat transits in Sun Star. In the Natal
chart sun is linked with 9 and 11 cusp.
Note: Please refer my book Your True Horoscope for learning
the technique of rectification before you read the following
examples.
However I am indicating the necessary conditions that the
Ascendant of a correct chart should satisfy.
1. The Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant should establish
relationship with Moon's Star lord.
2. The Sub-Sub arc and the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant should
reveal the sex of the native.
3. The planets co-ruling the Ascendant should have linkages with
the houses 1 or 7 or 10 i.e. 5 or 11 or 2 from the 9th cusp, the
house that represents the father of the native in the horoscope.
4. Similarly the planets co-ruling the Moon's position should be
linked with the houses lor 7 or 10. The position of Moon is
its transit position at the time of birth of the native. Therefore
the Moon's Star lord. Sub lord and Sub-Sub lord should either
appear in cusps lor 7 or 10 or be significator of these houses
in the native's chart
5. The moment at which the event happens, is controlled by the
Prana lord running at that time. So at the moment of birth, the
Prana lord should be Significator of 10, 1, 7 houses ;atleast

two of these houses. Or the Prana lord itself should appear in
these cusps irrespective of the fact that it has the positional
status or not.
The philosophy behind fixing the Ascendant as per above
conditions is explained below:
An event happens at a moment when the Ascendant i.e. the degree
- minute - seconds rising in the Eastern horizon at the place of
happening is co-ruled by the planets that are significators of the
cusps that take part in enacting the event. The birth of a native
means addition in the family of father (2nd house) by way of child
(5th house) and fulfilment of ambition (11th house). Since in the
native's chart 9th house represents the Ascendant of the father, houses
10, 1,7 will take part in enacting the event. Thus all the planets coruling the Ascendant should be linked to 10 or 1 or 7 through their
Star lords or should have positional status to become significator
of Ascendant etc. Since the Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant closely
represents the moment of birth, it should be significator of invariably
all the three houses, but certainly be linked with the 10th (i.e. 2nd
from 9th) house directly i.e. Star lord of SSL of Ascendant in 10 or
the Star lord in 1 or 7 and its Sub lord in 10. If the SSL of the
Ascendant has the positional status and it appears as Sign or Star or
Sub or Sub-Sub lord of the 10th cusp then also the condition is
satisfied.
Example 6: Fig 14.6 shows the Natal chart of a person who
committed suicide on 20 Nov 2006. A suicidal note recovered from
his bedroom says, couple of days prior to his death, he underwent
an exclusive check up and was detected of blocks in his Heart and
was advised to go for open Heart surgery immediately. The fellow
was so scared of surgery; he took to the extreme step of committing
suicide by hanging from the fan in his office.

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit"
Cusp Chart

Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Analysis of the Chart: The Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant is Moon
Who is in Rahu Star. Rahu represents Moon and Saturn. Moon is
thus linked to cusps 1,7, 10. The Sub-Sub arc of Moon in Rahu
Sub is in second half. It shows that the Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant
satisfies all the necessary conditions for an accurate horoscope.
Promise of suicide: The Sub-Sub lord of 8th cusp Mercury is in
Sun Star (1, 8) and Sub of Mars (2, 7, and 11).
Promise of serious heart disease: Mercury the Sub-Sub lord of
8th cusp (serious disease) is in Sun Star, the Star lord ofthe 5th cusp
(Heart).
On 20 Nov 2006, the native was running the period of Mer - Ven -
Ven-Mars - Rahu. Dasa lord Mercury is the Sub-Sub lord of 7 and
8 cusps. It is in the Star of Sun (1, 8) and Sub of Mars (2, 4, 6, 7,
and 11) and Sub-Sub of Rahu that represents Moon and Saturn.
Moon appears in 7 and 12 and Saturn appears in 2 and 11 (Badhaka).
Venus the Bhukti and Antara lord has the positional status and thus
is capable to cause for the results of 2, 8 and 1 1 , being the Sub lord
of 2 and 8 and is posited in 11 (Badhaka). Venus is in Mer star (7,
8) and in the Sub of Jup (2, 7 and 12).
The Sookshma lord Mars has positional status and thus is capable
to cause for the results of 2, 7 and 1 1 . Mars is in Mercury star, the
Sub-Sub lord of the 8th cusp and in Rahu Sub, the Sub lord of the
Ascendant.
Prana lord Rahu represents Moon and Saturn being in the Cancer
Sign and Saturn Star. Moon involves Ascendant being in Rahu star
and commits to 8th cusp being in Venus Sub (the Sub lord of the 8th
cusp). Rahu involves Ascendant being in Saturn Star (placed in
Ascendant) and commits to 8th cusp being in Mercury Sub. Saturn
involves Ascendant being in Moon Star (the Sub-Sub lord of

Ascendant) and commits to 8th cusp being in the Sub of Ketu (the
Star lord of 8^ cusp).
On 20th Nov 2006, Sun Transits in Saturn Star. In the native chart
Saturn is in Moon star (the Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant) and Ketu
Sub (Star lord of 8^ cusp).
On 20 Nov 2006, Moon Transits in Jup Star, Jup Sub (2, 7, 12) and
Venus Sub-Sub (2, 8, 11). Jup in the natal chart has positional status
being in its own Star.
The method of committing suicide is revealed by the nature of the
Sub-Sub lord of the 8^ cusp as modified by the Sign which rises on
the 8^ cusp and the Sign in which it is placed in the horoscope and
also on the nature of the Prana lord. Now Leo rises on the 8^ cusp,
and the Sub-Sub lord of the cusp is placed in Sagittarius (both
are fiery Signs). The Prana lord is Rahu at the time of committing
suicide who is the Sub lord of the Ascdt.
Similarly the place of death is indicated by the Star lord of the SubSub lord of the cusp and the Prana lord. Here the Prana lord
Rahu represents Moon who is the Sub- Sub lord of the Ascendant
(Self effort). Moon itself is in Rahu star (10th cusp Star and Sub
lord - office).
Example 7: Fig 14.7 is the chart of of Ayrton Senna., three times
World car racing champion who had 41 wins out of 161 starts. He
was involved in a racing accident at Imola, Italy 44N21,
011E42 2.12pm CEDT - 2:00 on the 1st May 1994, He died in the
hospital at Bolgna Italy 44N29, 01IE20 6.40 pm CEDT - 2.00 on
the same day. Some important events that happened in his life are
listed below;

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Name
Place
Long. & Lat.
Datej & Day
Lunar Nodes:
Ayanamsa
Tithi
: Sao Paulo
True
: Krishna Paksha Navami
Time
Geocentric ^ Lat.
Time Zone
Sun Rise Time
Nakshatra
Poorvashadha.-2
Qtn.
Lagna Chart Bhav "Chalit"
Cusp Chart

Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

1st July 1973 Sao Paulo, Brazil. His first ever victory as a teenager
in Kart racing.
15th Aug 1981 Donington, UK. Final win of 1981 to win TT
Championship 1981.
12th Sep 1982 Mondello Park Ireland. Final win to win European
F. F. 2000 championship.
5th Sep 1982 Brands Hatch UK. Final win to win British
Championship.
23rd Oct 1983 Thruxton UK, Final win to win British
Championship.
1984 moved up to Formula 1. Not a good year. Didn't win a race.
Problems i.e.
Accidents and technical problems 5^ Aug, 19^ Aug. 26 ^ Aug. 7th
1985/86/87 moved up to 3rd and 4t^place in World Championship.
1988 became World Champion.
lOthOct 1988 Suzuka Japan. Final win to become World Champion.
1989 runner up for World Champion
9th Sep 1990 Monza Italy Grand Prix, Final Win to again become
World Champion. Note Poor showing in final 4 races 23 Sep, 30
Sep, 21 Oct, and 4 Nov 1990.
3 rd Nov 1991 Adelaide, Australia. Final Win to retain World
Championship.
1992 and 1993 slipped back to 4^ and 6th World ranking.
1994 Bad year.
27th March 1994 Sao Paulo Brazil, gave up.
17th April 1994 Aida Pacific Grand Prix Collision.
Analysis of Chart: Before we analyse a chart we should check its
accuracy.

Justification of Accuracy:
1. All the planets co-ruling the Ascendant are significators of 1
or 7 or 10 cusps i.e. 5, 11 and 2 from 9th cusp.
2. The Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is Mercury. Now Mercury
has the positional status (i.e. there is no planet in Mercury
Star) and as such it becomes Significator of 1 and 7 (i.e.
Mercury acquires the significations of all cusps where it
appears as Sign or Star or Sub or Sub-Sub lord). Mercury is in
Rahu Star who appears as Star lord of 10th cusp. Thus Mercury
is linked to 1,7 and 10. Mercury is linked with Moon's Star
Lord Venus because Venus is in Rahu Star and Mercury Sub.
Mercury is in the Sub-Sub of Rahu who is placed in female Sign.
But any planet in the Sub-Sub of Rahu is taken to be in the SubSub of planets that Rahu represents. Rahu represents Mercury being
in Virgo. Mercury is posited in Male Sign. In such cases, we need
to adjust the longitude of the Sub- Sub arc of the Ascendant to be in
the relevant half. Here since the Ascendant rises in female Sign,
the arc should be adjusted in the 2nd half. This is achieved even at
time 02.35 hrs. We can, therefore, move upwards so that the Dasa
potential justifies various events.
Promise of Unnatural Death:
Both Ascendant Sub-Sub lord and 8th cusp Sub-Sub lord are linked
Mercury is in Rahu Star who is placed in 8th Bhava, and is the Sub
lord of the 12th cusp. Mercury in Rahu Star is as good as in Sun
Star which is lord of the 8th house.
Venus is also in Rahu Star and has the same significations as of
Mercury.
Cause of Death: Death is caused due to the significations of those
cusps whose Sub-Sub lords are linked to 8th cusp through their Star

lords. Here Saturn who is the Sub-Sub lord of 4th (Vehicle), 6th
(competition), and 10th (Professional activity) is in the Star of Venus
who appearts very prominently in the 8th cusp.
Winning in Competition: A person wins in the competition on a
day when the Prana lord (in a suitable DfBINS) is linked with 1,6
and 11 and Moon transits in a Star that either itself appears in 6 or
is Significator of 6 and 1 1 in the chart. Since I don't know the exact
time of finish of races, I have checked approximately and adjusted
the T. O. B accordingly.
Losing in competition: A person loses during the Prana lords period
which is linked with 7, 12 and 5 and Moon should also transit in
the Star that is linked with 12/5 etc.
Timing Death: The native died when he was running the Dasa
period of Ra - Ra - Sat - Sun - Ra.
Rahu as Rahu: Rahu is in Sun Star (Sign lord of 8th cusp). Rahu is
in Sub and Sub-Sub of Jup who is the Sub-Sub lord of 12th cusp.
Rahu as Mercury: Mercury is in Rahu Star (placed in 8th Bhava)
and Sub of Mars placed in Ascendant. Mars being in its own Star is
as good as having positional status. Moreover Mercury has
positional status and is the Sub lord of 2, Star and Sub lord of 7 and
11 (Badhaka).
Rahu as Sun: Sun is the Sign lord of the 8th cusp and is in Saturn
Star (Sign lord of Ascendant). Sun is in the Sub of Mercury (2, 7,
Thus Rahu has all the potential to inflict death to the native during
its Dasa, Bhukti and Prana.
Antara Lord Saturn is in Venus Star who is the Star, Sub and
Sub-Sub lord of 8th cusp. Saturn is in the Sub of Mercury (1, 2, 7,
Sookshma is of Sun: 1 have explained above.

Kalamsa 3 Cuspal Interlinks Theory:
On the day of death. Sun was transiting in Venus Star and Moon
was transiting in Sun Star. Both are linked with 8th house.
Example 8: Fig 14.8 is the chart of a boy whom doctor has detected
Brain Tumor of 3.5 cm size. He had undergone surgery on
Name : Fig 14.8
Place : Nasik
Date & Day : 22-4-1995 (Saturday)
Lunar Nodes : True
Tithi : Krishna Paksha Ashtami
Time
Geocentric Lat. .
Time Zone
Sidereal Time
Nakshatra
Uttarashadha-4 Qtr.
Lagna Chart
ShaY "Chalit"

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Accuracy of the Chart: The Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is Sun
who is also the Moon Star lord of the native. Sun is in the Sub-Sub
of Saturn who is placed in male Sign Aquarious. More over the
Sub-Sub arc of Sun in the Sub of Ketu is in the first half. This
justifies the sex of the native. Sun is in Ketu Star who is Sub lord of
1 and 7 cusps and is placed in 10th Bhava. Thus Sun is linked to 1,
7, 10 cusps. Ketu represents Mars thus Ascendant Sub-Sub lord
links with 6th cusp.
Promise of Brain disease: The Sub-Sub lord of the 6th cusp is
Moon who is in Capricorn which reflexly affects the brain. Moon
is in Sun Star who is placed in Aries and is the Sub-Sub lord of
Ascendant (the seat of disease) which has dominance over the motor
centers of the brain. The Sub-Sub lord of the 8th cusp is Sun (in
Aries) and in Ketu star (in Aries). Ketu is the Sublord of the
Ascendant. Thus both 6th and 8th cusps Sub-Sub lords promise
disease in brain.
Promise for Recovery: Both Moon and Sun (the Sub-Sub lord of
6th and 8th cusps) are in the Sub-Sub of Saturn which appear in 5,8
and 11 cusps (only relevant cusps shown). This promises partial
recovery through surgery. However Saturn being also the Sub-Sub
lord of 2nd cusp indicates the disease ultimately may prove the cause
for death.
Event of Operation: The native underwent operation for removal
of Brain Tumour on 17.10.2006 when he was running the period of
Mars - Rahu - Ven - Rahu - Moon. Both Sookshma and Prana lords
are linked with 1 and 8.
Example 9: Fig 14.9 is the chart of a male who divorced his first
wife in the year 1987. He had two daughters from his first wife. On
31.7.1992 the native remarried.

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Cusp Chart

Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Analysis of the chart: First we need to check the accuracy of the
Ascendant. Here the planets co-ruling the Ascendant are linked
with cusps lor 7 or 10. The Sub-Sub lord of the Ascendant is
Mercury who has the positional status and is also the Sign lord of
the 10th cusp. Mercury is in Ketu Star. Ketu represents Venus who
is the Sign lord as well as the Sub lord of the 7th cusp. Thus the
Ascendant Sub-Sub lord is linked with 1,7, and 10 cusps. Mercury
is in the Sub-Sub of Sun who is placed in male Sign Aries. Moreover
the Sub-Sub arc of Mercury is also in the second half, since female
Sign rises on the Ascendant it justifies the sex of the native. Since
Mercury is in Ketu Star it is as good as in the Star of Venus which
Ketu represents. Since Venus is the Star lord of Moon, the Sub-Sub
lord of the Ascendant establishes relationship with Moon's Star
lord.
Promise of Marriage: The Ascendant Sub-Sub lord Mercury is in
Ketu Star that is the Star lord of 5th cusp. Since Ketu represents
Venus, Mercury is also linked to 7th and 11th cusps. The Sub-Sub
lord of 7th cusp is Rahu who has positional status. Rahu is also the
Star lord of 11th cusp. Marriage is thus promised.
Promise of Divorce: Mercury the Sub- Sub lord of Ascendant being
in Ketu Star is as good as in Venus Star. Now Venus appears as
Sign lord of 6th cusp and Sub-Sub lord of 12th cusp. The Sub-Sub
lord of 7th cusp is Rahu who is in Jupiter Star that appears in 6th as
well as in 12th cusp. This promises divorce.
Promise for Remarriage: For remarriage the Sub-Sub lord of
Ascendent and 7th Sub- Sub lord have to be linked with 9th cusp and
the Sub-Sub lord of the 9th cusp has to be linked with 7th cusp.
Mercury the Sub-Sub lord of Ascendant is in Ketu Star who is the
Star lord of 9th cusp and is placed in 9th cusp. Rahu the Sub-Sub
lord of the 7th cusp is in Jupiter Star who is the Sub lord of the 9th
cusp. Mercury is the Sub- Sub lord of 9th cusp who is in Ketu Star.
Now Ketu represents Venus. Thus the 9th Sub-Sub lord gets linked

to 7th because Venus is the Sign as well as the Sub lord of the 7th
cusp. Hence the chart promises second marriage.
Timing Second Marriage: A person re-marries in the Bhukti that
is linked with 9th cusp directly (Star lord of Bhukti lord in 9) or
indirectly (Star lord of Bhukti lord in 5 or 11 and its Sub lord in 9).
The native re-married on 31.07.1992 when he was running the
period of Ra - Sat - Ven - Sun - Ven. The Bhukti Lord Saturn is in
Sun Star (placed in 5th Bhava and is Sign lord of 9th cusp) and
Jupiter Sub, the Sub lord of the 9th cusp (Primary cusp for 2nd
marriage). The Antara and Prana lord Venus is in Mars Star (placed
in 5th Bhava) and in Sub of Mercury, the Sub-Sub lord of the 9th
cusp. Venus is in the Sub-Sub of Moon who is also placed in 5th
Bhava and has the positional status. The Sookshma lord Sun is in
Venus Star (the Sign lord of the 11th house) and Sub of Jupiter, the
Sub lord of the 9th cusp. Sun is in its own Sub-Sub and such is
linked to 9th cusp.
Sun on that day transits in Saturn Star, the Bhukti lord and Moon
transits in Ketu Star, the Star lord of 5th and 9th cusps.
Rectification of the chart was attempted using the Data: Male,
divorced (1987), two daughters.
Example 10: Fig 14.10 is the chart of a female. The various events
that happened in her life are indicated below:
1. Marriage: 15 Feb 1969
2. First Male child: 16Marchl975 at 09.18 hours.
3. Second child female: 270ct 1976
4. Death of Father: 06 April 1981 around 18.30 hours.
5. Cancer Surgery (Uterine): 08 March 1990.
6. Hernia Surgery: 19 June 1991.
7. Gall Bladder Surgery: 11 June 2002.

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit"
Figl4. 10

Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Analysis of Chart: Let us first check the accuracy of the chart for
the following:
A. Promise of early marriage
B. No divorce
C. Birth of son with delay
D. Proneness to diseases: (gall bladder, hernia, uterine cancer,
heart problem etc.)
Checking the Accuracy of The Ascendant: Planets co-ruling the
Ascendant have to be linked with the cusps that take part in enacting
of the event. Here the event is the birth of the native - an addition in
the family of the father. The houses that will take part will be 2, 5,
and 1 1 from the 9th cusp that represents father. These houses become
10, 1, and 7 from Ascendant.
In this chart Sign lord Jup, Star lord Sat and Sub lord Mercury are
linked with 1 or 7 or 10 from Ascendant. The Sub- Sub lord of the
Ascendant is Rahu that represents Jup and Mercury. It can be
checked that SSL of the Ascendant satisfies all necessary conditions.
I would like to mention here that except Jup, Rahu and Ketu all
other Planets are in male Signs. There is no Planet in the Sub-Sub
of Jup. Only Moon and Venus is in the Sub-Sub of Rahu and Ketu
respectively. Venus does not establish relationship with Moon's
Star lord. Thus Venus cannot come as the SSL of Ascendant. Moon
could come as the SSL of Ascendant but then the chart dose not
satisfy other conditions. In such a case for fixing the Ascendant
Sub-Sub lord for revealing proper sex, the Sub-Sub arc method
takes predominance.
Check of Promises: Promise for all that has been listed above is
clearly revealed by the Ascendant Sub-Sub Lord Rahu that also
represents Jup and Mercury.

Promise of Early Marriage: SSL of Ascdt Rahu is in the Star
of Mercury, the Sign lord of 5 and Sign and Sub lord of 7. Rahu is
in the Sub of Moon who is the Sub lord of 1 1 . More over Rahu as
Jup and Mercury also establishes linkages with 5 or 7 or 11 to
promise marriage to the native.
7th Sub-Sub lord is Jup who is in Sun Star, the Star lord of 7 and 11
cusps, and is placed in 8. This not only promises marriage but also
early marriage because of the absence of the SSL of 7th cusp's
linkages with 2 or 4 or 6 or 10 or 12.
No Divorce: Ascendant SSL, no doubt, is linked with 6 and 12 but
7th SSL has no such linkages. For promise of divorce both SSLs of
Ascdt and 7th cusp need be linked with 6 and 12.
Status of Health and Proneness to Diseases: SSL of Ascdt Rahu
is in Mercury Star, the Star lord of 6(general sickness) and the SubSub lord of 8 and also placed in 8th Bhava(serious sickness,
operations). Rahu also represents Jup who is also linked with 8
being in Sun Star.
Study of 6th and 8th cusps: SSL of 6th cusp is Rahu who involves
houses 6 (hernia), 7 (uterine), 5 (gall bladder and heart problem)
SSL of 8th cusp is Mercury who is in Jupiter Star and thus involves
5 and 7 cusps.
Confirmation of diseases pertaining to 5, 6 and 7 cusps: SSL's of
these cusps are linked through their Star lords to 6/8 cusps.
Delayed Birth of First Child:The native is able to produce a child
if the 5th SSL is linked with 2 either directly i.e. SSL's Star lord in
2 or indirectly i.e. Star lord in 1 1 and Sub in 2. Here SSL of 5th cusp
is Jupiter who is in Sun Star (the Star lord of 11) and Sub of Saturn,
the Sub-Sub lord of 2. Delay in getting first child is revealed through
the linkages of 5th SSL with 4 or 8 or 10 or 12 houses. Here Jup is

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
in Sun Star, placed in 8 and Sub of Sat (Placed in 6th with positional
status), the Sign lord of 12. The linkages of SSL of 5th cusp with
11th cusp through Star lord and with 6 and 12 through Sub lord
indicates possible miscarriages etc.
Sex of the First Child: -This is to be analysed from 11th cusp SSL
for a female chart. Here Saturn is the SSL of 11th cusp. It is in the
Sub-Sub of Venus placed in Sag. The Sub-Sub arc of Sat is also in
the first half - all this accounts for the Male child.
Death of Father: She lost her father on 6th April 1981 around 18.30
hrs. She was at that time running the period of Rahu - Mer - Ve -
Mer - Ve.
Dasa Lord Rahu is in Mercury Star (the Sign lord of 4 and SubSub lord of 9) and in Sub of Moon, the Star lord of 3. Rahu is in the
Sub-Sub of Mercury, the Sign lord of 4. Thus the Dasa lord involves
the Ascendant and 8th house of Father and commits to Maraka house.
This clearly indicates that the Dasa lord has the potential to cause
death of father.
Bhukti and Sookshma Lord Mercury is in the Jupiter Star and
thus involves 3 and 5 i.e. Maraka and Badhaka houses for father.
Mercury is in Ketu Sub that represents Mercury and Moon. Thus
Bhukti and Sookshama lord also has the potential to cause death of
father.
Antara and Prana lord Venus is in its own Star Venus is placed
in 10 i.e. 2nd to 9 and Sub lord of 5th cusp, Badhaka for father.
Venus is in Moon Sub and Ketu Sub-Sub. All this justifies the event
of father's death.
On that day at the time of Death Sun was transiting in Mercury
Star and Moon was transiting in the Star of Venus. This agrees with
the event.

Cancer Surgery (uterine) on 8th March 1990. This happened when
the native was running the period ofRa - Mars - Ve - Moon - Venus.
The Sookshma lord Moon is the Sub lord of the 8th cusp
(operation). It is in Sun Star (the Star lord of the 7th cusp, uterine)
and Moon is in its own Sub. Moon is the Star lord of 3 and Sub lord
of 11. Moon is in the Sub-Sub of Rahu and is thus linked with 1,5
and 11. This promises recovery but Rahu as Rahu and lup is also
linked with 2, 7, 8 and 12. It is a case of difficult survival.
The Prana lord Venus is the Sign lord of 8th cusp. It is in its own
Star (5 - Ovaries, 8) and in Sub of Moon and Sub-Sub of Ketu that
represents Mercury (Sub lord of 7th cusp).
Sun on that day was transiting in lup Star (the Sub-Sub lord of 5
and 7). lup in the natal chart is in Sun Star who is placed in 8th
Bhava. Moon was transiting in Mercury Star, the Sub lord of 7,
Sign lord of 5 and Sub Sub lord of 8.
Readers may verify other events as an exercise
Example 11: Fig 14.11 is the chart of a gentleman for whom 7th
March 2006 proved to be a black day in his life. He was traveling
in his car along with his wife, mother and first daughter. The car
met with an accident at about 06.25 hrs. His wife, mother and
daughter died on the spot. He escaped with minor injuries.

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Lagna Chart ShaY "Chalit"
Cusp Chart

Planetary Position
Cuspal Position
Cusp.

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
Analysis of the Chart: We need to check the accuracy of the chart
for correct Ascendant that should fix the different cuspal positions
to promise the following;
a. Birth of a female child.
b. Unnatural deaths of wife, mother and first child.
c. DfB/ AISIP potential to cause death of wife, mother and child.
Accuracy of Ascendant: If we examine the chart we notice that
Sub and Sub-Sub of Ascendant is Saturn who is also the native's
Moon's star. The Sub-Sub arc of Ascendant is in the second half
and confirms that the chart belongs to a male. Saturn is in Venus
Star, the Sign lord of 7th cusp. It is in Rahu Sub, the Sub lord of the
10th cusp. Rahu also represents Mercury who is the Star lord of
Ascendant and Sign lord of 10. Thus Saturn is linked to 1, 7 and
Promise of Female Child: The Sub-Sub lord of the 5th cusp is
Jupiter who is placed in the Sub-Sub of Mercury. Now Mercury is
posited in female Sign Scorpio. Moreover, the Sub-Sub arc of Jupiter
in the Sub of Saturn is in the Second half. Since male Sign Aries
rises on the 5th cusp it confirms the promise of a female child.
Promise of Un - natural death: Wife is represented by the 7th
cusp. Cause of death will therefore be studied from the SSL of the
2nd cusp which is sth from 2nd- The SSL of 2nd cusp is Mars who
has positional status. Mars is also the Star lord of 7th cusp. Mars is
in Mercury Star who is the Sub lord of the 6th cusp which is 12th to
7th cusp. Thus the SSL of the sth cusp from 7th cusp is linked to 1,
S and 12 from 7th cusp. This promises unnatural death of wife.
Mother is represented by 4th cusp, sth from 4th is 11th cusp. SSL of
11th cusp is Venus who is in Rahu Star. Rahu is the Star lord of 11th
cusp, Sub-Sub lord of 4th cusp and Star and Sub lord of 3rd cusp
(12th to 4th). Thus the SSL of the sth cusp from 4th cusp is linked to

1, 8 and 12 from 4th cusp which promises unnatural death of mother.
Fifth cusp represents the first child. 12lh cusp becomes the 8th cusp
from 5th cusp. SSL of 12th cusp is Venus who is in Rahu Star who is
the Sub-Sub lord of the 4th cusp (12th to 5th). Any planet in the Star
of Rahu is as good as in the Star of Mercury that it represents. Now
Mercury is the Sub lord of the 12th cusp. Venus is in the Sub of
Ketu who is the Star lord of 5th cusp. Thus the SSL of 12th cusp i.e.
8th from 5th cusp is linked to 1, 8 and 12 from 5.
This promises unnatural death of first child.
On 7th March 2006, the native was running the period ofVen - Ven
- Sat - Sat - Ven. This period has to justify the death of wife, mother
and first child due to accident.
Death of Wife: Dasa, Bhukti and Prana lord Venus is in Rahu Star,
the Sub lord of second cusp (8th from 7), Star and Sub lord of 3rd
cusp, Badhaka for wife. It is in the Sub of Ketu that represents
Jupiter. Now Ketu is placed in Badhaka and Jupiter is the Star lord
of 8th cusp i.e. second from 7th cusp. This clearly indicates that
Venus has the potential to cause death of wife. Antara and Sookshma
lord Saturn is in Venus Star who is the Sub-Sub lord of 8th cusp i.e.
second from 7. Saturn is in the Sub of Rahu, Sub lord of 2nd cusp
i.e. 8th cusp from 7; and Star and Sub lord of 3rd cusp (Badhaka).
This means Saturn also has the potential to kill his wife on that day.
Death of Mother: Dasa, Bhukti and Prana lord Venus is in Rahu
Star, the Sub-Sub lord of the 4th cusp and Star lord of 11th cusp,
Star and Sub lord of 3rd cusp i.e. 12th to 4 and Sub lord of 10th i.e.
7th from 4. Rahu represents Mercury who is Sign lord of 10th cusp
(Maraka for mother). Venus is in Sub of Ketu that represents Jupiter
who appears in 4th as Sign lord, and as SSL of 5th and 10th cusps.
Thus we find that Venus is linked to 1, 2, 7, 8 and 12 from 4 and
has the potential to kill mother. Antara and Sookshma lord Saturn

Vimsottari Dasa and Timing Events
is in Venus Star who is the SSL of 11th cusp and is also placed in
11th Bhava. Saturn is in the Sub of Rahu, the Sub lord of 10, the
Star and Sub lord of 3rd cusp. Thus Saturn too has the power to
cause death to mother.
Death ofFirst Daughter: We can verify that both Venus and Saturn
have the potential to cause death of the first child.
Transit of Sun and Moon: On that day Sun was transiting in Jupiter
star and Moon was transiting in Mars Star. The Sub- Sub lord of
11th cusp i.e. 8th from 4 is Venus. On the day of Death Moon transits
in the Star of a Planet, who is,
1. The Sub-Sub lord of the 8th cusp
2. Star lord of the SSL of the 8th cusp
3. The Planet who is in the same star as is the Star lord of SSL of
8th cusp
In this example the SSL of the 11th cusp i.e. 8th. from 4 is in Rahu
Star. Since Rahu reprsents Mercury Venus will be as good as in
Mercury Star. On the day of death of mother Moon transits in
Mars Star. Mars in the chart is in Mercury Star. Thus Transit of
Moon agrees with the event.
This transit fully agrees with the nature of the event. Reader may
verify
Why the Native escaped Death? The SS lords of Ascendant, 3rd
and 8th cusp do not promise short life for the native.
To conclude I may say that an event, which is promised, happens
in the joint period of planets that can cause the event to happen
when Transit agrees. No event happens unless Sun and Moon
occupy a particular position in the Zodiac. Planets that can

cause the event to happen should rule these positions. It requires
great dedication and effort on the part of the Astrologer to time
events accurately. The Nadi Astrologers used techniques like
Navamsha and Nadiamsa progression of slow moving planets
to declare the time period of happening of major events. I am
working on this theory to link Transit of slow moving planets
and happening of events using the progression of planets in the
Sub-Sub Lords of primary cusps, this will help the Astrologers
to assess the time period of major events like death, marriage,
purchase of property, serious illness or accident etc. Study of
Nadi literature also hints at a very close relationship with
Moon's position at birth and happening of events in respect of
a particular Nadiamsa rising at the Ascendant. Probably this
may be covered in some of my future books.
To use Cuspal Interlinks Theory effectively, one needs to have a
very accurate horoscope. How to rectify the horoscope so that all
the twelve Cuspal positions are correctly placed are dealt in my
book. "True Astrology - Your True Horoscope. "

Appendix I
Table A
Star area in Aries or Leo or Sagittarius

No
Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Enlarged
Table B

No
Appendix-1
Table C
Star area in Gemini or Libra or Aquarius

Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Enlarged
Table D
Starareain Cancer or Scorpioor Pisces

Appendix II

Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Enlarged
Stars, Subs and Sub-Subs
1. Star Ketu: Aries, Leo, Sagittarius 00° 00' to 13° 20'

Appendix-ll

Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Enlarged
2. Star Venus: Aries, Leo, Sagittarius 13° 20' to 26° 40'

Appendix-ll
3. Star Sun: Aries, Leo, Sagittarius 26° 40' to 30° 00'
Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn 00° 00' to 10° to 00'

Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Enlarged
4. Sub Rahu
Sub Sub
5. Sub Jupiter
Sub Sub
6. Sub Saturn
Sub Sub

Appendix-ll
4. Star Moon: Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn 10° 00' to 23° 20'

Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Enlarged
5. Star Mars: Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn 23° 20' to 30° 00'
Gemini, Libra, Aquarius 00° 00' to 06° 40'

Appendix-ll

Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Enlarged
6. Star Rahu: Gemini, Libra, Aquarius 06° 40' to 20° 00'

Appendix-ll
7. Star Jupiter: Gemini, Libra, Aquarius 20° 00' to 30° 00'
Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces 00° 00' to 03° 20'

Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Enlarged

Appendix-ll
8. Star Saturn: Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces 03° 20' to 16° 40'

Kalamsa & Cuspal Interlinks Theory: Simplified and Enlarged
9. Star Mercury: Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces 16° 40' to 30° 00'

Appendix-ll

Index
Abnormal behaviour - 205
Abortion & first born - 261 .
Abroad, service - 322
Abroad, visit - 322
Accident, vehicle - 143
Accidents house combinations - 26
Alcohol (drinks hard), inclination for - 156
Allegations, false - 146
Ambition fulfilled - 96
Ambition unfulfilled - 97
Amsas - 107
Analysis, composite, of chart - 35, 151,281,310,334,338
Acquaintances, unknown - 186
Art, success in - 119
Artist, what is promised - 259
Asc analysing - 39, 73
Asc potential - 95, 133, 154
Asc promise, example - 151, 204
Asc promise, must be backed by Primary Cusp - 144
Asc promise not indicated, how to proceed - 142
Asc shows quantum and quality of energy - 148
Asc strength limits action and strength of other houses -
Asc Sub Sub Lord no link to another cusp - 118
Asc Sub Sub Lord modified by Sign - 133
Asc Sub Sub Lord, energy source - 133
Asc Sub Sub Lord linked to 11th house - 146
Asc Sub Sub Lord not linked to a particular cusp - 146
Asc Sub Sub Lord, promise of - 140
Asc Sub Sub Lord, positional status - 133
Aspects - 20
Attitude - 92

Index
Badhakasthana - 47
Bhagyasthanam - 147
Birth time, accuracy needed - 110
Brain disease, Promise - 358
Birth female child - 371
Body part prone to sickness - 68, 125, 136, 147, 206
Business, private - 92, 145
Business, private money from - 156
Career, impediment in - 120
Chandra Kala - 104
Charan - 2
Chemistry education - 205, 336
Child birth, delayed - 259
Child birth, promise of - 119
Child birth, timing - 261
Child, sex of - 262, 275
Child, son, Jupiter transit - 279
Child 2nd son - 289
Child son born - 321
Change of business, profitable - 257
Change of job - 253
Co-born, separation from - 142
Combustion - 12,20
Commission agent - 157, 182
Communication internal, external and long distance - 147
Communication skills - 156
Communications, earning through - 142
Compatibility - 77
Competition, success or failure - 97
Comprehension and understanding - 197
Computer studies - 205
Conception - Pre Natal - 322
Confidence, lack 0(- 142, 196
Contracts and tenders, 4th house - 165

Correct Ascdt, conditions - 345
Courage and boldness - 156, 196
Courage, lack of - 142
Courtship - 57, 144
Creative Pursuits, 5th house - 144
Criminal activities - 135
Culture - 259
Cusp analysis procedure - 38
Cusp potential - 118
Cusp promise - 119, 124
Cuspal Links Table - 313
Cusps all subordinate to Ascendant - 118
Cusps 4 and 9 indicate father and mother - 119
Cusps linking influence of - 176
Cusps, primary and Asc, promise - 144
Cuspal interlink theory - 108, 112+
Cuspal interlinks for major events - 280
Cuspal Links, meaning of - 112
Cuspal links nature of - 121
Daily events, Sub Sub more important - 285
Dasa and 8th Cusp Lords - 161
Dasa at birth - 299
Dasa Lord, significator, only major events - 308
Dasa Lords connected through Birth Stars - 289, 331
Dasa Lords in transit appear in cusps - 284
Dasa Periods, philosophy - 305
Dasa modified by transit - 304
Dasa period result of planet - 13, 305
Dasa period linked to primary cusp - 309
Dasa periods of gain and loss - 191
Dasa planets, results through Star and Sub Lords - 305, 306, 307
Dasa potential - 122, 140,305
Dasa, problems in pregnancy - 261
Dasa timing events - 296+, 308
Dasa periods in Cuspal Interlink Theory - 304

Index
Dasas for frequency of events - 308
Death, cause of - 137
Death of father - 278, 292, 367
Death of husband - 324, 327, 342
Death of mother - 294, 372
Death mode and place - 48, 137
Death nature - 48, 139
Death timing - 50
Death unnatural house combinations - 26, 50, 139,354,371
Desires fulfilled - 150
Difficulties, struggle, oposition - 145
Direct Linkage - 261
Disease, area of - 155
Disease, analysing - 66, 207
Disease, cure of - 208, 358
Disease, fatal & serious sickness - 135
Disease, houses to consider - 135
Disease, main areas of (SSL of Asc SSL) - 155
Disease, part of the body - 125
Disease, recovery and timing of - 125
Disease, serious, 8th house - 146
Disease, specific indications 6th SSL -211
Disease, theory - 59
Disease, timing and cure - 65, 208
Disease, undiagnosed - 65
Dispositors of Navamsa and Sign & S. S. conjunct in transit - 277
Diversion Theory - 107
Divisional charts illusion - 105
Divorce and remarriage - 231
Divorce, example of - 329, 332, 361
Divorce, favourable for - 123
Divorce promise - 331
Divorce, quick - 329

Drinks, hard, inclination for - 156
Earning capacity - 163
Ears disease of - 53
Education completion of - 314
Education higher - 87, 143
Education higher achieved but not shown - 144
Education higher, Ascendant should show - 336
Education higher, subjects - 122, 147, 198
Education higher, SSL of 4th links to 9th Cusp - 336
Educational Prospects - 55, 195
Educational status - 95, 156
Education, subjects, houses for, table showing - 199
Education, termination of 3rd and & 8th Cusps - 314
Elements - 59
Eleventh house as proxy for other houses - 157
Eleventh house potential - 97
Emigrating - 97
Employment ist job - 314
Employment 2nd job - 316
Employment, journey abroad - 322
Employment promotion - 3.17
Employment, service or business - 123
Enemies, generate - 145
Energy Source - 133
Enlightenment - 147
Enhancement in status - 250
Event, common to all Dasa Lords - 305
Event, dasa periods linked to Primary Cusp - 309
Event happens when - 284
Event promised - 100, 308
Event timing of, - 308, 362
Event timing, sookshma and Prana Lords - 309
Events, daily, Moon important for - 296
Events, daily Sooksma and Prana Lords important - 296
Events, daily, Sub & Sub Sub more important - 285

Index
Events, frequency of - 307
Events, houses for - 101
Events, major Cuspal Interlink theory - 280
Events, major, examine Dasa and Bhukti Lords - 309, 310
Events, Minor, theory of - 296
Events must be strongly linked to Primary Cusp - 309
Events, type of, segregating, DIBI AISIP Lords - 307
Event of operation - 358
Expenditure, house of - 175
Extra-Marital relationships - 73, 147
Fame - 97
Family, separation from - 141
Father death - 278, 292
Father, illness of - 277
Fertile - 260
Financial matters - 162
Financial status - 96, 163
Fixing the Ascdt - 346
Foreign country, going to - 124
Foriegn places, 7th house - 145
Foreign assignments - 253
Fruitfull Significators - 100
Future, perception of - 144
Gains and loss from legacies - 146, 147
Gains and loss in speculation - 269
Gains and loss, timing - 191
Gains and Victory - 145
Gains for others - 189
Gains from lottery - 185
Gains, large - 174
Gains through property - 166
Gains, unexpected - 85, 185
Genitals, 7th house - 145
Grandfather, maternal- 278

Gunas - 63
Hanging, death by - 137
Happiness, domestic - 143
Health affected by planet linked to Asc - 207
Hidden parts of life - 146
Health problems - 141
Health status - 45, 135, 155
Heart disease - 145, 349
Hidden aspects of one's life - 147
Hospital, service in - 183
Hospitalization - 135
House Lordships - 28
House occupancy, planet as sinificatof when has positinal status - 323
House results for all period Lords - 305
House Significators - 101
Houses favourable & adverse - 118
Houses, negative - 163
Houses, supporting - 101
Humour theory - 62
Husband death of - 324, 327, 342
Husband longevity - 327
Impotent, native is - 260
Imprisonment - 99, 150
Income, sources of - 123
Income, unearned - 146
Infant Mortality - 160
Infertile - 260
Information technology, studies - 205
Insurance claims - 146
Introspection, 9th house - 147
Intuition of the future - 57
Intellectual capacity - 92, 95, 197, 259
Jails, sevice in - 183
Journey, break in - 69
Journey hurdles - 146

Index
Journey, long - 322
Journey, short, separation from partner - 124
Kalamsa (Sub), calculation of - 8
Kalatra Sthanam - 69
Kapha - 63
Karma - accumulation of - 147
Kidnapped - 85
Kidney failure -211
Laws ofTattwa, Polarity, Mode of Action - 107
Leather - 182
Legal disciplines - 147
Leukaemia - 212, 215
Life experience as per cusp - 121
Life Short - 137
Life span, assessing at birth from Dasa - 161
Life span, long - 47
Life span, medium - 48, 337
Life span, short for partner - 328
Link absent - 146, 205
Linkages, tabulating - 313
Linked Cusp - 121
Linking Cusps, influence of - 176
Linking houses for Dasa indicated events - 323
Linking houses through Sub Lords - 331
Linking houses through Sub Sub Lords - 314,315
Linking other houses through 11th house - 146
Linking Planet & Cusp - 121
Linking SSL to favourable houses - 118
Linking, Sub of SSL, specific area of activity - 181
Litigation re property - 85
Litigation, success - 53
Long Life - 47

Longevity of Partner - 327, 328, 342
Lords, not in any cuspal position - 304
Lords, Period and house cusps - 331
Losing in competition - 355
Loss or gain - 98
Losses incurring - 146
Lottery, gain from - 185
Love affairs - 57, 267
Maraka - 46
Marriage analysing 7th house - 69
Mariage and Bhukti Lord - 327
Marriage and married life - 218
Marriage and 6th Link - 332
Marriage and separation - 341
Marriage Bhukti Lord strong link to 7th cusp - 326
Marriage can't take'place when - 334
Marriage dasa - 77, 284
Marriage delayed - 72, 157,309,320
Marriage denial - 71, 220
Marriage divorce and remarriage - 231
Marriage, early and delayed - 320
Marriage event - 319
Marriage house combinations - 27
Marriage, how takes place - 75
Marriage, Jupiter theory - 279
Marriage, links of 7the S. S. Lord - 145
Marriage, love - 144
Marriage, how made - 75
Marriage matching two horoscopes - 77
Marriage, nature of - 75, 146,226
Marriage promise - 71, 236, 326, 361
Marriage promised but delayed - 71, 221, 320
Marriage, second - 147,230,362
Marriage, short - 332
Marriage, strongly connected with Prime Cusp - 326

Index
Marriage, sub lord support - 321
Marriage, timing - 73, 125, 229
Marriage, transit of Jupiter, Sun and Moon -281
Marriage, unfavourable for - 123
Marriage, with whom - 146
Married life, happy or unhappy - 221
Married life short, death of partner - 328
Married life short, due to quick divorce - 329
Marry, when not to - 328
Mathematics and Keto - 205
Medicines, dealing in - 182
Medium life span - 48,337
Mental characteristics - 140
Mental suffering - 146, 147
Mind, higher 9th house - 147
Mines, service in - 183
Money, unearned - 185
Moon, no positional status - 27
Mother, danger.of separation from - 143
Mother death of - 294
Mystic initiations - 147
Nadi astrology - 107
Nadiamsa and Navamsa Progression - 374
Nadiamsa, 150th part of sign - 107
Nadiamsa - 107
Nakhatras divisions of - 2
Natal dasa potential - 305
Native, cautious and pragmatic - 156
Native, physical and mental characteristics - 140, 153
Native, general and specific characteristics - 154
Native's potential - 118
Nature, hidden laws of - 146
Navamsa from benefic planets - 279
Navamsa 64th part - 137
Occult Sciences, success in - 99

Old age - 143
Operation ovarian cancer - 333
Opponents, defeat of - 145
Oratorical skills - 51, 142
Organs, removal of - 206
Overseas trip - 322
Pada - 2
Partner direction and locality - 75, 225
Partner indications - 77
Partner, longevity of - 327, 342
Partner physical and mental character - 74, 224
Partner career and fin. status - 74, 224
Partner, death of - 342
Partner, separation from - 145, 146
Partners age difference - 74
Partnership, business - 155
Pita - 63
Planet acts as source - 304
Planet, behaviour of - 20
Planet linking Rahu to cusp - 337
Planet links to cusp - 122
Planet, location of as house link - 318, 319
Planet, modified by transit - 306
Planet, natal & transit potential - 305
Planet not in any cusp - 112, 160
Planet potential - 118
Planet, strength of - 304
Planets dasa results offered by - 304
Planets in transit examined in 2 ways - 306, 307
Planets, results offered by - 304
Planets results during Dasa period shown by... - 13
Planets S. S. arc indicates results of Dasa periods - 276
Planets negative to Ascendant - 73
Plastics - 182
Poison, death by - 137

Index
Political status - 150
Poultry farms - 182
Positional status - 13, 103, 113, 134
Positional status and Sub Lord - 14
Positional status none - 15, 27
Positional status, signification by house occupancy - 323
Potent (able to perform sex act) - 260
Pre natallinkings - 322
Prediction, planets co-ruling dasas - 303
Pregnancy, problems in - 260
Primary cusps and events - 309, 310
Primary houses - 101
Private life, 4th house - 143
Procreation ability - 57, 101, 119
Profession analysis - 91, 96, 239
Profession and As(; - 148
Profession, change of - 256, 257
Profession determining - 123, 240
Profession, houses for table - 241, 242, 243
Profession, impediment in - 120
Profession, Partner - 74
Profession, success in - 148
Professional activities - 149
Professional activities, poor promise - 147
Professional area - 149
Professional success - 92, 148
Profit, house of - 174
Progeny - 57
Progression, Navamsa and Nadiamsa - 374
Promise of Ascendant - 134
Promise remarriage - 361
Promise when not indicated by Ascendant - 142
Promotion, problems in - 317, 318
Property, gain from - 143
Property, litigation, profit from - 167

Property, loss of - 143
prosperity - 141
Prosperity, house links signifying - 163
Public relations - 183
Quarrels - 146
Raliu & Ketu as Star and Sub Lords - 22
Rahu & Ketu gives result of represented planets - 22
Rahu & Ketu linked by planets - 337
Rajasic - 64
Rape - 146
Rectum, 8th house - 146
Religious activities - 148
Reputation, damage to - 146
Research - 150
Research in Occult subjects - 99
Residence, change of - 53
Retrogression - 19
Re - instatement - 253
Robbery - 189
Romance - 259
Rulership of house - 304
Rumours, 3rd house - 142
Sattawic - 64
Saturn, transit of - 277
Second Marriage - 71, 221
Secret activities - 150
Semen, 7th house - 145
Separation of couple - 124
Service, in - 182+
Service Matters - 244
Service, Government - 148
Sex of Child, SS Lord of SS Lord indicates - 262
Sex determination nakshatras - 262
Sex, Multiple relationships - 73
Sexual acts, extra marital/unsocial - 73

Index
Sexual union, 7th house - 145
Shodas verga - 104
Short Life - 137
Sickness and 2nd cusp - 193
Sickness, part played by SSL of 1st house - 125
Sickness, prone to - 125, 145, 193
Sickness, recovery from - 125, 193
Sickness sudden - 86
Sign sub divisions - 104
Significator, fruitful - 18, 100
Significator of Cusp, strong - 103
Signs, violent - 138
Slaughter house, 8th house - 146
Social relationships - 90
Soul, karma of, and target set for, 10th house - 148
Speach, harsh - 156
Speculation - 144, 259, 269
Sport, proficiency in - 120
Sport, taking part in - 120
Star Lord, corresponds to Maha Dasa - 299
Star Lord not necessarily negated by Sub Lord in 1 2th position - 145
Star Lords significations negated - 153
Static significations - 38
Status and success - 135, 141, 148, 155
Sub as Significator - 103
Sub Lord and Positional Status - 15
Sub Lord assessing - 27
Sub Lord of S. S. Lord qualifies and specifies - 163,304
Sub Lord dasa negates Star Lord, example - 160
Sub Lord, Rahu as - 42
Sub Lord supporting Sub Sub Lord - 154
Sub Lord 12th to Star not necessarily negates links - 124
Sub not in any cusp position - 123
Suspension in service - 252
S. S division - 108

S. S linkage, end results - 124
S. S Lord Interlink Theory - 104+
S. S Lord of Asc where fails to link with any cusp - 119
Sub theory - 12+
Sub two fold role - 14
Sub 12th to Star position - 123, 145
Subjects of study, table of - 88+,
Suicide - 97, 346
Sun and Moon, transit of - 332
Surgery, house of 8th - 146
Throat - 141
Timing events, procedure - 308
Timing specific event - 37, 98
Timing Death - 355
Tamasic - 64
Trade - 92
Trading - 157
Traditional laws - 259
Transfer and Promotion - 251
Transit, conjunction of dispositors in - 277
Transit, Cuspal Interlink Theory - 280
Transit, modifies planets signature - 304
Transit Potential - 305
Transit of Period Lords - 310, 343
Transit of Sun and Moon - 281,316
Transits agree or disagree with natal potential - 307 ,
Transits in Sub Theory - 18
Transits major events - 280
Transits minor events - 296
Transits of slow moving planets, S. Land S. S. L important - 285
Travel abroad - 124, 150
Travel, earning through - 142
Twelth House Lords position. Not always negates - 145
Twelth position. Sub to Star - 123, 145

Index
Unsocial acts house combinations - 27, 73, 135, 142
Vata - 62
Vehicle accident - 143
Victory - 145
Violent signs - 139
Vision - 51
Wealth, accumulation of - 163
Wealth concealed - 85
Wealth, depletion - 141, 168, 171
Wealth, for investment - 189
Wealth gain and Loss of ~ 190
Wealth, how spent - 164
Wealth, immense - 174
Wealth timing gain or loss - 190
Wife, sickness of - 278
Winning one's d~sire or object, 7th house - 145
Winning competition - 355
Wisdom - 57
Wisdom divine - 147,259
Work hard - 145
Writing capability - 53
Writing, earning from - 142
Years, favourable - 279
