READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_kp_sharad_joshi_krishnamurthy_padhdhati.json
Dataset number: 237 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 126,535 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_KP_Sharad Joshi_Krishnamurthy padhdhati
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_KP_Sharad Joshi_Krishnamurthy padhdhati
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 95
  • total_words: 22621
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.931
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Krishnamurthy
padhdhati
Nirayan +
Sayan
Author :
§harad C. tJoshi

Preface
Astrology is a mother of all science, and our sages have given their
knowledge in coded language, so scholars like Shri Jivanrao Chitnis,
C.J Krighnaswamy, Sepharial, Alen Leo, B.V. Raman and so many other
had found clues from old granths with their hard efforts and intuition.
Shri Krishnamurti had also put nearly 40 years efforts and with the grace
of God Ganesh, he found some clue in Vimshottari dasa and established
new unique system, today known as “K.P.” Since 1970 onwards it becomes
more and more popular, because of it's scientific implication for Natal
including twins and for Horary.
In Jyotish Bharati, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, at Mumbai, our late
principal Shri Gopalkrishna D. Modi had given permission to start "K.P."
along with Sidereal and Sayan system, and present principal Shri Jinabhai
G. Lad has also expanded three branches course into Jyotish Vishrad and
further for the benifit of the students.
When students get basic of all three branch, in their mind always
preference towards particular branch, and one can try to compare it with
other branch. Students should know that, due to our limitations, they would
prefer particular system than other. It is not a limitation of any systems.
One can see that, Shri Krishnamurti had found clue from Vimshottari Dasa
only, so with the hard efforts and dedicate attitude one can get results.
Since 1979, 1 have been associated with Jyotish Bharati (Bombay
Astrological Society). In Part I of this bock, I have given theory and my
own views for certain topics. Mainly I am follower of K.P. and Sayan,
more elucidare on this two systems.
The Part II of this book is compiled by my friend Manoj Makwana,
from Lectures given by me and my best friend Shri Dilip Dave at Jyotish
Bharati. I am thankful to them.
In Subject like astrology, one can not achive any light, without the
help of the almighty and blessings of parents & our Guru's.
I am grateful to Ms. Bhavika Makwana, Mr. Bijal Manilal Visaria
and my son Chintan, for their computerised work and also thankful to my
wife Jayshree for her cooperation all the time.
$harad tToshi.
February, 2000

Contents
Part I
CHAPTERS
1) Krishnamurthy Paddatti 1
2) Compare Nirayan, Sayan & K.P .7
3) Ruling Planets , 12
4) How to Judge Dasa 16
5) Progression. 18
6) Transit 24
7) Aspects 28
8) Solar Return Chart 31
9) Muhurat 33
10) Cusp Beginning or Middle. 34
11) Horary , 37
12) Horary & Natal Chart 42
Part II
CHAPTERS
1) K. P. Theory - Rectification 44
2) Ascendent 46
3) Second House 51
4) Third House 53
5) Fourth House 57
6) Fifth House 64
7) Sixth House 68
8) Seventh House 72
9) Eighth House 79
10) Ninth House .82
11) Tenth House 84
12) Eleventh House 86
13) Twelfth House , 88
14) Keys for quick Prediction 89

Chapter I
‘Krishnamurti Tadhdhati
What is a Krishnamurti Padhdhati ?
K.P. is a combination of Sidereal and Tropical system, late
Sri Krishnamurti had studied both the system, and found that there is a
no sound system for prediction. He had been inspired by lord Ganesh
and found some clue from Uttar Kalamrita Granth. He studied that, in
Vimshottari Dasa system, Star lord of Moon at birth becomes the Dasa
lord and thereafter sequences follows. So why should not considered all
planets Starlord as consider for Moon.
Then he started studied all planet's results according to its Starlord,
after that, he observed that, when more than one planet in same
Constellation or in trine constellations, Starlord remain the same, even
though results are different. So, further he divided Constellation according
to Dasa-Sub period same as for Moon Dasa follows, and he found the
reason for differentresult, when planets are in the same Constellation or
in trine constellations.
So, far Vimshottari Dasa was used as a time factor, but he had divided
Dasa system as a distance factor, as follows.
Constellation area 13d-20mts. And he worked out distance area
as follows.
Same way he worked out for all planets distance factor in one
Constellation, and it is called sub area. For all planets sub area is as
under, and it remains same in all constellations.

In Vimshottari Dasa, sub period of Dasa lord is first and follows in
sequence, same way it is being used for distance factor.
For Example : Suppose at birth Moon is in Capricorn 17d-45', so
we say that Native is born in Saturn sub period in Moon Dasa. Same
way suppose, Mars is at birth in Gemini 16d-17’,so we have to considered
that Mars in Rahu Star and in Venus sub. This way Krishnamurti had
worked out all planets and their further classification, that each planet is
in which Star and in which sub., and got the result more correctly even
though planets are in same Star or trine to it.
After, he observed that in twin chart, planetary positions remain all
most same upto Star lord and sub lord, than how to proceed further.
Then he divided all cusps in same order, as Vimshottari Dasa pattern. He
thought that only cusp moves fast than Moon, and he observed that only
cusp is responsible to give different result in twins chart, or in bom in
the same or near hours.
Following are the features of KP.
1) Aynamasa : He had used his own Aynamasa, which is based on
AD 291, and same motion of Newcomb, i.e. per year 50.2", and it is
known as K.P Aynamasa, which is 6’lcss than, Chitrapaksha Aynamasa.

2) Cusp Calculation : Instead of equal house div. or Parashari or
Sri Patti. He has used Semi arc piacidius .arc system with the help of
Tables of houses. He has used cusp as a beginning point, and not as a
middle point.
3) Degree of Cusp and Planet : According to Vimshottari Dasa
system, three planets i.e. Signlord, Starlord and Subiord rule each degree.
4) Cusp Judgement : Sublord of the cusp signifies, decide the
matters of the house and how it is connected with the Karak planet of the
matter. So, according to cusp Sublord and Sublord's Starlord, strength
of the cusp is to be judged, (for more details please refer Nakshatra
Chintan part-1)
5) Planet's Judgement : Every planet is bound to give result of its
Starlord and result depends upon Sublord of the planet.
a) Planet is the source of the event.
b) Planet's Starlord indicates the matter.
c) Planet's Sublord indicates result.
For more details please refer Nakshatra Chintan-1
6) Significators : Sri Krishnamurti has fixed the following order to
select the significators for house.
a) Planet in the Star of the occupant in the house.
b) Planet is in the house (occupant).
c) Planet is in the Star of lord of the house.
d) Lord of the house.
e) Planets aspects to above significators (sidereal aspects).
f) Planets aspects to house (sidereal aspects).
7) Matter : Sri Krishnamurti has fixed houses for most of all matters
related to human beings as under.
a) One is the principal house.
b) Supporting houses for the matter.
Please refer more in details in Part II.
8) Aspects : Both sidereal and longitude aspects to be considered.

9) Rahil and Ketu : No sign allotted to Rahu and Kelu, but
following way it represent to planets and houses.
a) Planet conjunction to Rahu-Kctufsidcrcal way)
b) Planet aspects to Rahu-Kctufsidcreal way)
c) Signlord of Rahu-Ketu
Rahu-Ketu cannot aspect to any planet or any house, so these ways
Rahu-Ketu represents all planets and its significance from above category
and also according to K.P. rules it gives results ofStarlord and Sublord.
10) Ruling planets : Sri Krishnamurti has given new concept of
RP. from Brihatjatak. Ruling planets are as under in order.
a) Asc. Starlord
b) Asc. Signlord
c) Moon Starlord
d) Moon Signlord
e) Day lord
Above all, planets in the Asc. or aspects to Moon or any above
Ruling planets also to be considered.
There are three types of Ruling planets as under.
a) Birth Ruling planets.
b) At the time of judgement.
c) At the time of any event.
It is not necessary, that all the time order remain the same.
11) Time factors : Only Vimshottari Dasa system is used to
determine the time of any event. But experienced shows that. Secondary
Progression and Dasa Progression also gives result in K.P.
12) Transit : In K.P. all planets Transit has to be studied by its
Starlord and Sublord position only.
No Sade-sati, no Astakvarga, no Sarvothabhdra Chakra, no Guru
Balam, no asthma Chandra, etc all these systems no need to follows in
K.P. Only planets Transit through which Star and which sub that's all.
All these Transit should be considered from Birth Asc. only.

]3) Yoga : In K.P. except Punarbhoo yoga, not a single yoga is to
be considered. Punarbhoo yoga is formcdby Moon's connection to Saturn
by Sign-Star-Sub or conjunction or aspect.
14) Divisional Charts : In KP. there is not a single divisional
chart is to be used.
15) Horary : In K.P. number system 1 to 249 is used, for more
details refer Nakshatra Chintan-I.
16) Retrograde : In Horary chart, it is to be considered, but not
necessary that it is strictly to be followed, because experience shows
that if chart is more positive, than this conditions can not stop for giving
the results. As per rules it is as under:
a) If planet it self is retrograde, than when it resume direct motion,
and crossed the degree from where it started to move retrograde. Then
only it is possible to get the results.
b) If planet’s Starlord or Sublord or both Starlord and Sublord are
retrograde, than planet is not in a position to gives results according to
its significance.
So, regarding this aspect one has to consider its own experience.
17) Muhurat : According to the chart's significators one has to
select the Muhurat, for any new work or for any religion rituals.
a) Dasa-sub pd-sub sub Pd, according to significators.
b) Major planets Transit should be in favourable positions.
c) Sun and Moon should be Transit through the signifeators Star
and in sub.
d) Asc. at the time of event should be rise according to jointly ruled
by significators.
In short, one can not overlap the judgement step, and one can follow
in scientific manner only, if one can follow as under.
a) Rectification of the Birth time.
b) Judge the approximately longevity. But never disclose to any
body.

c) Judge the Asc. strength.
d) Judge the mental capacity through Ist-3rd-9lh, Moon and
Mercury.
e) Judge the matter through principle and supporting houses.
f) Judge the Karak forthe matter, and its relation with houses under
considerations.
g) Work out the significators for matter.
h) Work out the Dasa-sub pd from the significators.
i) Consider the Transit.
At the time of event, Dasa rulers Transit through Star and sub of
Dasa rulers or significators of the matter. A sc , Sun and Moon also Transit
in the same way.
In, Horary chart follows as under.
a) Complete the chart in one sitting and judge the chart at the same
time.
b) Check the Moon, whether it reflects the question.
c) Check the Asc. Sublord and its strength.
d) Check the principle house and supporting houses Sublord's
significance, whether it indicates positive or negative results.
e) Check 11th house's result.
f) Find out the Ruling planets, selects significators, work out the
appropriate Dasa-sub etc., and match with Transit.
Clue for selecting the significators.
a) According to the significators order.
b) Joint cusp rulers.
c) Planets in Star of joint rulers.
d) Selection from the Ruling planets at the time of judgement.

Chapter II
Compare sNirayan, §ayan and ‘K.T.
Note : N = Nirayan S = Sayan
1) Ayanamsa : N - Different ayanamsa used by followers like CP,
Raman, Revati, Lehri etc.
S -Od ayanamsa used.
K.P. - Only K.P. ayanamsa is used which is 6' less than Chitrapaksha.
2) Rectification : N - Different type of systems applied for rectify
the birth time, like elements birth Star Asc, day lord, ghati-pal system,
Navmasha-Dwadmasha system, etc., and so many.
S - Events system, Prc-Nalal system, Navmasha system etc.,
K.P. - Through Ruling planets.
3) Cusp System : N - Equal house, Sri-patti and Parashari etc.,
S - Placidus, Campanus, Alcabitus, Regiomontanus, Topocentric,
Horizontal, Birth-place house system, Natural Graduation, Poll-equatorial
etc.,
K.P. - Only Placidus arc
4) Bhava : N - Middle of the cusp is beginning.
S - Starting of the cusp is beginning.
K.P. - Starting of the cusp is beginning.
5) Zodiac : N - Fixed zodiac.
S - Moveable zodiac.
K.P. - Fixed zodiac.
6) Aspects : N-Sign to sign, special aspects of Mars-Jupiter and
Saturn, 1/4-1/2-3/4 aspects of other planets. Vedh are also one kind of
aspects.

S - Longitude aspects, Parallel aspects.
K.P. - Sidereal aspects and long, aspects.
7) Constellations : N - Divisional Nakshatra,
S - Fixed constellations.
K.P. - Divisional Nakshatra.
8) Divisional charts : N - Various charts are to be used for different
matters.
S - Dreskana, Navmasha and Dwadamasa chart some followers are
using.
K.P- No divisional chart.
9) Shada Bala : N - Shada Bala is used.
S - It is not considered.
K.P. - It is not considered.
10) Benefic and Malefic : N - Jupiter and Venus considered benefic,
Mercury depends upon connected with which planet, Moon's depend
upon lunar day.
Sun is Krura Graha and Saturn-Mars-Rahu-Ketu considered as
malefic. Panchadha Maittri and according to lord ship.
S - Benefic are Jupiter, Venus, Rahu, Mercury depends upon it is
connected with which planet. Moon depends upon lunar day. And lord
ship is also considered for all the planets. Hyleg oriental, Rising position
also is to be considered.
K,P. - Depend upon Matter, not a single planet is fully benefic or
malefic.
11) Yoga : N - Various yogas are to be considered for the results.
S-yoga based on long. Aspects and parallel.
K.P.- Except Punarbhoo not a single yoga is considered.

12) Father and Mother : N - 9th or 10th house for father, 4th
house for mother.
S - 4th house for father and 10th house for mother.
K.P. - 9th house for father and 4th house for mother.
1 3) Cu sp J udgement : N - planet in house , planet aspects to house,
planet in adjacent house, position of lord of house etc., to be judged.
S - Same as above.
K.P. - Sub lord of the cusp decide the cusp strength.
14) Planet's Judgement : N - Depend upon house position, Sign.
Star, Shodasbala, Astakvarga etc.,
S - Depends upon house, sign, term, Hyleg, rising and setting,
oriental-occidental, cumulating, with any fixed Star.
KP. - Depends upon its Star lord and Snblord.
15) Significators of the Bhava : N - occupant, lord of house, Karak
of matter, planet aspect to above all.
S - Occupant, lord ofhouse, Karak of matter, and planets aspecting
to above all influence to house and its matters.
K.P.
1) Planets in Star of occupant.
2) Occupant
3) Planets in Star of lord ofhouse.
4) Lord ofhouse.
5) Planet aspects to above significators, house and Karak of matter
In addition one can consider cusp rulers and planets in their Star.
16) Group of House : For any matter, there is not any format giver
in Nirayan and in Sayan, but in K.P. clearly given group of houses foi
each matter.
17) Rahu-Ketu : N - Different signs allotted by great scholars a;
lord of sign, exalted and for aspects etc.,
S - No such classifications given

K.P.- Rahu/Ketu represents planets in following ways, but no
permanent allotment.
1) Planet in conjunction.
2) Sidereal aspects of planets.
3) Lord of sign, in which it deposited and according to rule ofK.P.,
its Starlord's result.
18) Degree : N - Sign ruler, Star ruler, and different divisional charts
Lords rulers rule it.
S - It is ruled by sign ruler, term lord, divisional charts rulers and
some degrees ruled by fixed Star's rulers.
K.P. - Mainly it is ruled by three planets, Signlord, Starlord and
Sublord.
19) Uranus, Neptune and Pluto : N - Not considered.
S - All are considered.
KP. - Aspects point of view consideration is applied.
20) Ruling Planets : N - No such fixed term.
S - Rising planet, Hyleg planet. Cumulative or strong planet and
out of this one is to be considered Ruling planet.
K.P. -Asc. Starlord, Asc. Signlord, Moon Starlord, Moon Signlord
and day lord. In addition Planets aspects to Asc , Moon and other Ruling
planets.
21) Matching of Horoscope : N - Asc. Moon; full chart and Gunas
out of 36.
S - Asc, Moon; full chart and longitude aspects and direction.
K.P. - Please refer Nakshatra chintan-1.
22) Time Factor : N-Various Dasa, Transit, Astakvarga,
Sarvothabhadra Chakra etc.,
S - Various directions, Transit.
K.P. - Vimshottari Dasa, Transit.

Note-Solar return chart and planetary periods system is applicable
to all systems.
23) Transit : N - From Moon sign, Astakvarga, Sarvothabhdra
Chakra, Vedha, Sade-sati, Panotti.
S - From Sun sign, Solar return chart, New and full Moon chart,
diurnal chart, eclipse chart etc.,
K.P. - Planets Transit through Star and sub and it is to be observed
in Asc. chart only.
24) Horary : N - Through Number and Time System.
S - Through time system.
K.P. - Through number system. For more details please refer
Nakshatra Chintan - 1 .
Tajik system's rules are applicable in Nirayan and in Sayan. Special
aspects of Tajik applicable in Horary of Tajik only.
Different Sahams also used in Tajik system while Fortuna is used
in all systems.
25) Muhurat : N - Selective Panchang terms for specified Muhurat,
Asc. chart, hora, chowagadia etc., and dinsuddhi.
S - Asc. chart, fixed Star. Aspects.
K.P. - According to significators of the matter from chart.
Dasa, Progression, Transit is common in all systems.

Chapter HI
“"Ruling TIanets
Ruling planets mean particular planet or group of planets controlled
over the chart or on any event or ruling over particular hours. There are
three types of Ruling planets.
1) Birth Ruling planets.
2) At the time of judgement.
3) At the time of any event fructify.
In Sayan, Ruling planet means, planet in Hyleg position or oriental
or elevated or rising or lord of M.C. or Asc. lord, out of which one is
strong by house-sign-aspects-Star.
In Nirayan, there are no such fix rule given, but normally according
to yoga formation one can fixed it, but it is also not possible every time.
In K.P. Following are Ruling planets.
1) Asc. Star lord.
2) Asc. lord.
3) Moon Star lord.
4) Moon sign lord.
5) Day lord.
Above order is in descending order. In addition, one can consider
following planets as Ruling planets.
1) If Rahu or Ketu represent any planet from above Ruling planet,
than it replace it or one has to give importance to Rahu or Ketu.
2) Planet in Asc. or aspect to Asc. [sidereal)
3) Planet in aspect with Moon.
4) Planet in aspect with other Ruling planets.

As per K.P. theory, one has to judge R.P. as under.
1) Consider such planet that is common as significator as well as
RP.
2) If planet is in retrograde motion, than it gives results after it gets
direct motion and cross the zodiac from where it started to move
retrograde motion.
3) If planet's Starlord is in retrograde position, as per theory one
has to reject that planet.
4) If planet's Sublord is in retrograde motion one has to consider it
after it resumes direct, if it is strong significator.
5) If planet's Starlord and Sublord both are retrograde, than one has
to reject as per theory.
6) If planet, its Starlord and Sublord are also in retrograde motion,
than as per theory one has to reject it.
But one has to keep in mind that, retrograde can not always denied
the results, if it is strong significator and another planet is not there to
replace it, and all these considerations depend on case to case.
Now we will see, how one can use Ruling Planets for different
purposes.
1) Birth time rectification.
2) To fixed up cusp or planet's position.
3) To judge, routine events concern with some fixed time frame
like daily events, weekly, monthly or within a year and more then year.
4) To find out significators from Natal or Horary chart.
5) To find out positive or negative influences of the specific moment
or when any one meet first time .
6) To match the horoscope for marriage, business, and relations
among the family members or with friends or with any one .
Now, we will see one by one.

For rectification of birth time and marriage match, please refer
Nakshatra Chintan Part - I .
1) To judge cusp or planet position when it is on sandhi' point, one
has to work out according to given data , then one has to note the Ruling
planets at the time of judgement.
According to Ruling planets, one has to first fixed the sign lord,
Starlord and Sublord. Give importance to sign lord according to strength
ofRuling planets.
Example : Suppose Moon is #.i Libra 29d-59ni58s. Than there is
possible doubt whether due to almanac is there any chance of Moon is in
Scorpio, which is debilitated sign of Moon. From the Ruling planets, we
have to judge whether Venus or Mars, judge according to Ruling planets
order, sign, Star, sub, retrograde consideration or represented by Rahu
or Ketu.
2) Forroutine events or events expected in specific time limits, one
has to work out Ruling planets at the time of judgement and consider as
under.
a} Strength of Asc. Lord and 11th house lord, lord of question
concern house and Karak of the matter, and judged whether it is positive
or negative answer.
b} If Asc. Sign is cardinal than one can expect the result in short
time.
c} If Asc. sign is fixed than one can expect the result late.
d} If Asc. sign mutable, than one can expect the result in normal
time.
e} If Saturn connected with Asc. It indicates delay.
f} If Saturn in Ruling planet or connected to Ruling planets or slow
moving planets in Ruling planets than one can expect delay in result.
g} If fast moving planets, in Ruling planets, than one can expect
result immediately or in short time.

Result in a day one has to move Asc. position from Ruling planets.
Result in a week one has to select which Ruling planet is strong, on
that day one can expect the result, if Moon's Star is from RP.
Result in a month, one has to move Moon from its ruling position,
and Moon should Transit from Ruling planets position on the day of
result expectation and one has to judge the Sun also be in a Star or sub of
RP.
Result in a year, one has to move Sun from its position at the time
of judgement, and at the time of result expectation, Sun should transit
through joint rulers of R.P.
Result more than a year, one has to move Jupiter according to Sun.
4) Ruling planets at the time of particular moment or when first
time you meet somebody. Consider Ruling planets position in your radical
chart, whether that all are significators of positive houses or negative
houses and accordingly one can decide, or how to react at that moment
or how to keep relation with stranger.
5) Relation judgement through Ruling planets, one can judge how
both the persons Ruling planets are connected in each other charts.
Whether it is positive or negative or mixed or one side and that way one
can judge, who is beneficiary through each relation and who is facing
trouble through each relation, some relations are for money matter, some
are for enjoyment-picnic. Some are for study, some are for social, some
are for career etc. so, and one can judge those way signification's.
Note : I have seen that, some astrologers are using Ruling planets
for fun or for lottery or for gambling etc. but Ruling planets are divine
help and it is against the ethics of astrology to use for such purposes.

Chapter IV
Tiow to ?Judge ‘Dasa
Dasa is a time measure, and indicate the shape of events likely to
take place. There are various types of dasas; its number of years and its
judgement system is differing from each Dasa. Here we will study, how
tojudge the Dasa, sub period and sub-sub period ?
Following points to be kept in mind, while judged the Dasa.
1) Dasa's results are depending on the strength of the chart.
2) Dasalord can not give any contradictory result than chart's
promises.
3) Dasa is to be study according to the age of the Native, Deshkala-and patra etc.,
4) Dasa lord can gives results as under:
a) Results of its Starlord.
b) Results of its own.
c) Results of its natural karaktwas.
d) According to its cusp rulers, on the base of K.P.
e) Result ofhouses and planets, on which its aspects.
f) Dasa lord's results influenced by aspected planets, according to
its karaktwa, occupant and lordship ofhouses etc.
5) For sub and sub-sub period rulers are bound to give results
according to same way as mentioned in (4).
6) Dasa lord cannot give results against the cusp's indications.
7) Dasa lord and Bhltkli lord should complete the circle of the results
oriented house.

Example : For abroad journey, houses are to be considered 3,9,12.
Suppose Dasalord is significator of either 3 or 9 or 12, than
bhuktilord should be signs ficator of remain house or houses, out of 3 or
9 or 12th.
8) Dasalord and Karak planet as a bhuktilord also can evaluate the
result.
9) Dasalord and bhuktilord should not be in 6-8-12th from each
other, to get the good results.
10) If Dasalord is duality, than in its own bhukti result one can
expects, if all required houses arc covered by same planet. One can expects
multiple type of results or repeats the same results.
1 1) Antra, Prantyatar and Sukshma lord are supporters to Dasalord
and bhuktilord, and can not go against its results.
12) Planet if in fixed sign or in succedent house or slow moving
planet than its impact of results is more whether it is positive or negative,
while planet is in angle or cardinal or fast moving than its impact is for
shortwhile and fast.
13) If Dasa lord is connected anyway with Asc. one can become
more active during that Dasa, same it applicable to other sub periods.
14) Benefic and malefic of Dasa’s results depend on the chart
position not on natural tendency. At the most natural tendency influence
in the result's intensity.
15) For dasas results, required support of Transit, without
activation's of transits Dasa-bhukti can not give results.
16) Work out Solar return results and match with the Dasa bhukti
of that year and consider the transits, for specific events.
17) Dasalord is good or bad for native, but it can be vice a versa for
the native's relatives.
18) Consider Transit activation as under.
a) Transit of slow moving planets.
b) Transit of Dasa and its sequence rulers.
c) Transit of Sun and Moon.
d) Consider Asc,

Chapter V
Trogression
In Sayan for time factor direction method is being used. Various
types of direction method one can applied like Primary, Secondary, Radix,
Naibod, Fractional, Symbolical etc. but main are primary and secondary.
Direction method mainly based on earth movement. Our one year
means Sun completes full zodiac i.e.360d. Earth rotate on its axis, and
revolve around Sun. Earth rotate on its axis with in a day, and complete
360d. So one can say that one-day is a one- year. In a day, earth move
approximately one degree around Sun, and as above discussed, one day
= one-year, so one can put equation like as one degree = one year also.
To rise one degree 24*60/360 = one degree = 4 minutes. So every 4 min.
after birth = one year and it is called Primary direction.
It's calculations totally based on Spherical trigonometry and it is
not possible for every one to calculate all mundane and zodiac arcs. For
more details please refer our book “Primary Direction" which is worked
out on a single chart of Mahatma Gandhi.
To avoid spherical trigonometry calculations, on the same base,
normally Sun moves average one degree in a day, so in secondary
direction one day after birth has to be considered as a year. It's a
replacement method for primary direction, so it is called a secondary
direction. ^
To calculate, secondary diiection one require birth ephcmeris at
least for 90 days and more, while in primary direction all arcs complete
within a six hours afterbirth.
In direction there are two types of direction, one is direct and another
is converse direction. In secondary one has to move ahead and backward
from birth date for direct and converse direction respectively. In primary
direction not such concept as a direct or converse. If birth ephemeris is
not available to calculate secondary direction, one can use either Radix

or Naibod. Radix based on ldg. = lyr for all planets except Moon, for
Moon 1 3d-()5’ = 1 yr. For Rahu-Ketu and for retrograde planet at birth
one has to move planet in direct directions only.
Same way one can calculate Naibod direction by mean motion of
Sun i.e. 0d-59'-08" for all planets and forMoon 13dg-10'-35" for each
year. In Radix and in Naibod one has to calculate how many years and
months completed and accordingly one has to add arc in radical planets.
For cusp calculation one has to use same arc as above, and add it in
M.C. and according to progressed M.C. one can calculate the other houses
from tables of houses, for birth latitude or for new place.
In secondary direction one has to calculate planets for the progressed
date i.e. number of years completed = number of days to be add in birth
date, which is called as a progressed date.
Example : Birth date 19th Nov., 1919. and suppose one wants to
work out Progression for the year 1984. it means in Nov, 1983 native
has completed the 64 years. And according to system 64 years = 64 days
to be add in birth date to get progressed date. 22nd Jan, 1920 will be a
progressed date, and one has to used this date's planets according to
birth time for progressed chart for the year 19th Nov 1983 to 18th Nov
For cusp calculations one has to find out sidereal time difference of
progressed date and birth date or which date's sidereal time one has
used, and this hrs.min and sees, difference one has to add in birth
R.A.M.C. if birth place and present place is the same. But native has
shift permanently from birthplace, than one has to calculate cusp
according to new place.
To avoid each year progressed date's birth time planets calculation,
one can adopt Noon date or Adjust calendar date as follows.
First Method :
1) Convert birth time in GMT if you are using GMT ephemeris, or
according to ephemeris time.
2) Find out the difference between GMT birth time and next Noon

or Mid nighttime which ever is given in ephemeris. called it is = A
3) Add "A" into sidereal time of ephemeris of birth date = "B"
4) Find "B" in sidereal time column, nearest to that one is an ACD.
i.e. Adjust Calendar Date.
Second Method :
1) Convert birth time in GMT
2) Find out difference between GMT birth lime and nearest Noon
time = A
4) If your GMT birth time is in A.M. and ephemeris time in noon,
then one has to add B + birth date will be ACD. but GMT is in P.M.. then
Birth date-B will be ACD.
Third method :
1) Convert birth time in GMT.
2) Find out difference between GMT birth time and nearest noon
time = A
3) Convert "A" as follows.
24 hrs = 12 mths.
2 hrs =1 mth
1 hr =15 days
4 min = 1 day
Here 360 days has considered for easy calculation purpose.
Now convert "A" in above formula and find out = "B"
4) If GMT birth time is in A.M., then add B + birth date, and if
GMT birth time in PM., then Birth date - B = ACD.
In first and second method one can gel mostly same date, while in
third method either one or two days difference may be there, due to
number of days per year is considered 360.

ACD only replaced the birth date, not of progressed date, only it
becomes easy to considered planets of ephemeris time, one can considered
as a progressed planets. And its effects one can get from ACD to next
ACD like our year count from birth date to next birth date.
Example : 2nd-Jan-2000 Time - 18hrs25mts 1ST, Bombay.
18hrs25mts - 5hrs 30mts = 12hrs 55mts GMT
SID TIME of 2nd Jan 2000 = 18-45-47 Noontime, difference
between GMT birth time and next Noon = 23hrs 05mts.
First Method :
23-05-00 + 18-45-47 = 17-50-47, and this figure in Sid.time. Column
it is on 18thDec. [nearest), so ACD is 18lhDec.
Second Method :
GMT Birth time is 12hrs 55mts as above.
Difference between nearest noon and this time is 00hr-55mts.
Now OOhis 55mts*365.25 days/24hrs.= 13 days 22 hrs i.e. near to
14 days.
GMT birth time is in P.M., so this difference to be deducted from
birth date. = 19thdec.
Third Method :
GMT birth time is 12hrs-55mts as above, nearest Noon difference
is 00hrs-55mts.
As per formula 13days completed and this system all months one
has to considered as 30 days, so 30 + 2 [birth date)-13 days = 19thDec.
is ACD. (GMT Birth time is in P.M., so deducted).
In Progression one has to considered, applying, exact and separating
aspects to compare with Natal chart, and some time events take place
either in applying or exact or separating aspects. It depends upon Moon's
Progression's support for such aspects formation and another factor is
Transit according to it.

Aspects among all planets and cusps i.e. Asc. And M.C. except
Progressed Moon is called primary Progression in secondary direction,
while Moon's monthly Progression's aspects with Natal are called
secondary Progression in secondary direction. Without Moon's support
no events is possible i.e. Moon's progressed support should be similar
to primary Progression.
Then after one can consider Transit to activate these aspects. Only
one-degree orb is allowed in Progression. One is for applying and one is
for separating from exact degree.
How of chart is under :
1) Consider Natal chart in all respect and which events are indicate,
one can expect such events, if Progression or Transit is favourable.
2) First consider Natal and Progression chart, and find out the aspects
formation within a limit of orb of aspect, and note down, it is called
basic or primary arcs in secondary direction.
3) Work out Moon's monthly progressed chart and compare it with
radical chart, and note down the exact aspects with all points.
4) In which months, progressed Moon's aspects form with radical,
one can expects events during the same months, if it is similar to primary
arcs and support from Transit.
5) Consider aspects formed in progressed chart it self.
6) Consider Parallel aspects with progressed and radical chart.
In Transit, activation's from superior planets with same type of
aspects with objects involved either it may be to radical position or
progressed position.
In Transit, which two objects involved from radical and progressed
chart, they may get activation's from Mars or Sun, if superior planets are
supporting for activation.
One has to wait for nearly 3 yr. for expected activation's from Transit,
one is in applying year, and one is in exact aspect year and last is in
separating aspect year.

One has to work out Solar return chart, to confirm the progressed
results for a particular year.
From Moon's monthly progressed chart, one can gets some
important months for expected events in a particular year, one can work
monthly chart as follows.
1) According to degree of Sun in radical, one has to leave the sign,
and only consider deg. Mts. and sec and in all months when Sun reaches
to particular this point or not for all months than one can work out only
months correspondence to Moon's monthly progressed indications. And
for that time one can work out full chart like Solar return chart.
2) One can work out monthly Transit chart, according to radical
lunar day for required month, and see how far it cooperate with
Progression's results.
3) One can work chart at the time of new Moon for those required
months, and find out Asc. Rising and new Moon's degree and see how
far it is effective in radical or progressed chart as activation's point.
4) After consider monthly chart, one can find out Transit of Moon
from 12 houses, from radical or progressed or month chart and one can
consider days.
5) One can work out diurnal chart daily, to find out events likely to
happened in a day.

Chapter VI
Transit
At any time, planetary position plays three different roles. For some
one it is birth position, for some one it is progressed position and for
others it is Transit. Without combinations of above all three factors in a
Nativity, one can not expect any results. Not a single event happens,
without activation of Transit to Radical or progressed. To consider
activation of Transit, each branch applied different rules.
NIRAYAN :
1) Transit to be observed from Moon Asc. I think reasons behind
it, that planetary's first influence on mind, and Moon is Karak of mind.
Another reason is that, most of know their Moon sign, and in south India
most of know their Birth Star also, so, when Native consult without
horoscope, astrologer can work out roughly present Dasa-sub period on
that base and guide to native accordingly.
2) Sarvottabhadra Chakra : There are different types of chakras
have been used based on either 27 or 28 constellations, with lunar day,
alphabets-vowels etc. Main factor is in this system is that Vedha means
special aspects attributed according to motion, directions etc. Mostly
kranti samya is more preferable. One can consider it in Natal as well as
in Transit.
3) Astakvarga : This is a unique system to consider the Transit
according to point benelic or malefic. On the base of the Radical positions,
each planet has some point either benefic or malefic for each sign, and
accordingly it is bound to give results in Dasa factor and in Transit. Here
one has to apply reduction-ekdihipatya and kashya system for better
result. Some scholars work out point according to sign and house both
way and judge accordingly.
4) Saturn : When Saturn Transit 12th-l stand 2nd from radical
Moon sign, it is consider as a Sade-sati and on the base of Moon's position

at the time of Saturn change sign, one has to consider metal base for
above three sign, and accordingly one has to consider the results. When
Saturn Transit 4th or 8th sign from radical Moon, it is considered as a
two and half year panotti, and normally its results considered not good.
So, such types of systems applied in Nirayan astrology, but according
to me one has to consider only birth Asc. for Transit, Astakvarga is not
applicable in twins. And regarding Sade-sati and panotti one can not
expect always-bad results. Actual there are three types of Sade-sati one
has to consider, when Saturn Transit in above position through birth
Asc. it is to be considered as physical-social tension, when through Moon
it is to be considered as a mental tension and when through Sun it is to be
considered as a spiritual base.
SAYAN :
Transit to be observed from Sun sign, and aspects formations are
main clue for results. Then one has to work out Solar return chart, and
one has to compare it with Radical and progressed chart, accordingly
one has to judge the main event likely to happen. One has to consider
new Moon and full Moon chart, chart at time of eclipse and conjunction
of superior planets, one has to work out diurnal chart for daily event.
If in radical chart Moon and Saturn in conjunction or square or in
opposition than native always suffer this influence life time due to Transit
of Saturn average 12d yearly and progressed of Moon 12d yearly, so
position remain the same throughout life.
If in radical chart, aspects formations like conjunction or square or
opposition or semi-square between or among planets or with Asc. or
M.C. than for such native between 42 year to 49yr. is very trouble some
in all respects and it may be danger to life also, particularly by heart
attack or accident. Reasons for that one has to consider Transit of superior
planets and Progression of Asc, M.C, Moon and Sun. it is as under.
Asc. M.C. and Sun average move Id per yr. in progressed chart, so
at the age 45yr, it is semi-square with their radical position. Moon
progressed one zodiac i.e. in 28th year average, so at the age around
42nd year it is in a opposition to its radical position.

In superior planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and also node
Transit as follows.
Jupiter takes 12yr to complete full zodiac so at the age of 42nd and
48th it is in opposition and conjunction to its position.
Saturn takes 30yr to complete full zodiac, so at the age of 45th it is
in opposition position.
Uranus takes 84yr to complete full zodiac, so at the age of 42nd yr.
it is in opposition position.
Neptune takes l68yr to complete full zodiac, so at the age of 42nd
yr. it is in square position.
Rahu takes 18yrto complete full zodiac, so at the age of 45 th yr. it
is in opposition position.
Above motion is average for each planets, and in radical chart,
suppose with superior planets and above four progressed points involved
with such aspects than it is sure dangerous and one has to cautions.
In medical science also seven-yr. cycle is considered for such
changes in physics point of view and for women menopause period is
normally between 42 to 49 yr. If eclipse point afflict any radical point or
progressed point than one has to consider.
One has to consider orb for Transit, also one has to consider
retrograde and stationary position of planets during Transit because its
impact is more. Reason for it is that, before planet move retrograde
becomes stationery then it moves retrograde, again it becomes stationery
and then it resume direct motion, so in such situation when superior
planet involved with sensitive point of the radical or progressed than
one has to be careful.
When chart of full Moon and new Moon, degree of that and Asc.
rise if fall on any sensitive point of radical or progressed chart, than one
can expects some result during that month, and with the help of the diurnal
chart one can find out the result's day.
With the help of planetary period, one can find out the aspects
formation with the radical chart, and one can expect event according to

radix. In this system one has to move one house per year from birth as a
Asc. for particular year, for example for 19thyr., one has to consider 7th
house as a Asc. and proceeds further.
One can work out parallel Transit, and expects the results.
K.P.:
In this system, whether it is radical or Horary or Transit, one thumb
rule is that each planet is bound to give results according to its Starlord
and good or bad depend on the sub of that planet.
1) In this system, one has to observed slow moving planets, and
according to their Transit through Star, they are bound to give results,
one can expect common results from the above transits, same way one
has to study and observe all planets Transit through Star lord and one
can get results according to house signify by Starlord in radical chart.
2) One has to observed daily Moon's Transit, see that Moon Transit
through which Star, and accordingly one can expect, events on particular
day.
3) One has to observed Sun's Transit, because its regular motion,
normally one can expect small or big events happened during particular
month, normally Sun remain in one Star nearly for 13 days and in that
according to its Transit through sub, one can expect event according to
Starlord ofTransit Sun ifMoon's Transit also match with it.
4) Transit through Asc. only to be observed.
5) Common significators from slow moving planets and Dasa-sub
period results one can expects.

Chapter VII
Aspects
Aspects play very important role in predictive astrology.
Any kind of combination of planet to planet or with cusp called
aspects. Different type of aspects system applied by Nirayan, Sayan and
Tajik branch of astrology. We will study main object of it.
NIRAYAN :
In this branch following types of aspects considered.
1) AH planets aspects to seventh sign from its placement.
[ One can not consider this aspects for Rahu and Kctu.).
2) Additional aspects to be considered for Mars-[4th & 8th),
Jupiter-[5th & 9th) and Saturn-[3rd & 10th).
3) In granths scholars have given minor aspects like 1/4, 1/2, and
3/4th but mostly follow above aspects.
4) Transit vedh is also one kind of aspects.
5) Sarvottabhadra Chakra also based on aspects from one Navamash
to another Navamash, which is called vedh, according to planet's motion
and direction etc.
6) In this system, full sign or house involved, through aspect of
planet.
In this system, even planet is not aspecting to any planet, but each
planet bound to aspect 7th sign or additional aspects if it is, so one can
read planet's results as under.
1) If Saturn aspects to Venus, by 3rd aspect, than in Saturn Dasaor
sub period one can expects the results of house where Venus is deposited,
where Venus rules and its karaktwa in addition to its own.
2) If Saturn aspects to 10th sign, from its placement, than in Saturn
Dasa one can expects the result of IOtli house results according to Saturn's
position, even there is no planet in 10th sign from Saturn.

3) If Saturn aspects Venus, by 3rd aspect, than in Venus Dasa, results
of Venus in a chart will be influenced according to Saturn's placement,
house rulers and its karaktwa.
Planet's aspects are good or bad is depend upon chart's position &
not according to its natural benefic or malefic consideration. Only this
tendency influence to results but terms of good or bad will remain as it is
according to chart & matter under consideration
SAYAN:
In this system, aspects on longitude distance and parallel. Here also
some common judgement that some aspects are benefic or malefic
according to distance, but it is not for always. Reason is that, any kind of
aspects shows its influence on any event, as well it shows path of event,
or it shows easiness or hardship during particular time or for particular
event. But promise of event is decide by the house involved.
Normally following distance aspects are considered.
There are other aspects also considered as follows.
Navamash - planet aspects 40d distance planet or cusp.
Grand trine- planet's placement approx. 120d from each other,
here minimum 3 planets involved, and planets sign element remain the
same. It is main important and its effects like trine house.
Grand Square- Planet's placement approx. 90d from each other,
here minimum 4 planets involved, and planets sign nature remain the
same. It is main important factor and its effects like angle house.
“T” formation.- In this aspects Three sign involved of same nature,
two planets in opposition and one is in angle to these both planets. It is
also important due to same nature of sign and angle effects.

“Y’ formation- In this case two planets in opposition and third
planet is in sextile to one planet and trine to another planet, show its
effect to opposition aspect.
Fan formation- In this condition, planets are in sextile to each other
like in lst-3rd-5th-7th 9th etc. this is also supportive aspects to the chart.
In direction, there are two type of aspects to be considered, one is
zodiacal and another is mundane. If birth is on higher lat. approx. 45d,
than suppose one planet is in Asc. and one is in 10th cusp, but in such
case zodiacal aspect is trine, while mundane aspect is square. So all such
factors to be considered in direction application.
K.P.-
Inthis system one has to applied both aspects, for house or planets
significators point of view, one has to applied Nirayan aspects. While
influence point of view or support or obstruct point of view, one has to
consider longitude aspects. Rahu and Ketu's significators one has to
considered by sidereal aspects.
Special note for longitude aspects:
Conjunction means unity, when two planet cooperate for specific
significance, it is good, but when contradict, it a malefic effect.
Conjunction like symbol of Sun.
Opposition means one is confused in attraction or in illusion or in
Maya, so there is a confusion factor in a native for such combinations,
can not able to take decision which is correct. It is like a Moon symbol
Karak of Maya.
Trine means with support of purva punya and fortune one can get
benefit or easiness, with little efforts, it is like a Jupiter.
Square means mentally and physically, one has to puthard struggle
and gel the result, so it is ruled by Mercury and Saturn.
Sextile means with efforts and some one supports, one can gets the
positive results. It is ruled by Mars.
Above classifications shows that, longitude aspects are some how
connected with planet's and sidereal divisional charts, that what I
understood.

Chapter VIII
<§olar ‘"Return Chart
As we are doing ingress chart for Mundane astrology, same way
for individual we can work out Solar return chart. There are two systems
given in the granths.
1) Add particu larhrs-mts, for a specific year, in a birth time to erect
chart.
2) Work out Solar return chart for the Sayan longitude of Sun birth,
for every year.
Mostly scholars follow 2nd method, for Nirayan chart, one has to
convert Sun longitude in Sayan, and according to that longitude one has
to erect a chart for the required year, and deduct the aynamasa for Nirayan
chart.
Solar return chart indicates events concerned for a year, but one
cannot expect any event, which are not promised by Natal chart. To find
out events from Solar return chart one has to follow.
1) Events according to Nativity.
2) One has to work out progressed chart and see which type of
events expected during that year.
3) Afterstudied the Natal and progressed chart, one has to concentrate
on SRC. as under.
A) Sign rising in SRC, one has to see where this sign fall in Natal
and in progressed chart, and according to that house matters reflect during
that year.
B) If any planet rising in Asc. of SRC, then according to that planet's
karaktwa and houses ruler, one can expect the events during the year.
C) If rising sign of SRC, is a sign of angle ortrikonc house of Natal
than it indicates some good events.

D) If rising sign of SRC, is a sign of 6-8 or 12th house in a Natal or
progressed than it is not good.
E) If lord of 6-8 or 12th of the Natal chart, rising in SRC, than also
it is troublesome year.
F) If lord of SRC's Asc. is in 6-8 or 12th house in Natal or in
progressed chart, also indicate some problem.
G) Planet rising in the SRC, according to karaktwa and house ruler
ofNatal one expects the results.
H) If lord of Asc. of SRC is afflicted in SRC and or Sun is also
afflicted in SRC than also it indicates hardship.
After.considerall such points, events expected during Transit of
superior planets with major aspects, with Asc or Asc. lord of SRC. One
can match Moon's monthly Progression for more specific time factor
with this Transit.
In SRC, ASC + Asc lord, M.C.+ M.C. lord and rising planets are
important.
Note: One more experienced 1 have done, that erect the chart for
progressed Sun longitude's for that year. Many clues from this chart is
available. 1 have observed as under.
SRC's results are always based on birth and progressed chart is for
a particular year, progressed Sun is more important and if we erect the
chart for this progressed Sun, than it can directly shows effect it with
radical aspects as well as mutual aspects formed in progressed chart and
then this progressed Sun's aspects in Transit in SRC. Second point is
that, if native has shifted to new places from birthplace, than it effects
more.
Third factor is that, mostly birth longitude of Sun falls in near by
birth date. While in this system due to progressed Sun's longitude one
can not get date nearby birth date in SRC and this can be match with
monthly chart by Sun longitude[progressed), lunar month
chart[progressed) and one house for every month from Asc. to I2thhouse,
and one can consider new Moon and eclipse points in this progressed
Sun's SRC. In this system one has to consider year not from birth date to
birth date but progressed date and respective year to next year.

Chapter IX
‘Muhurat
Muhurat or election of time is a separate branch of astrology as
well as one can use as a remedial measure. Our all Sodas Sanskars as
well as all religion rituals performed according to specific muhurats. All
these muhurats are given by our Rishis for the benefit of humanities.
In our granths muhurats are based on panchang. 1) Nakshatra 2)
Yoga (one is Sun+Moon yoga another is specific combination of tithinakshtra-day-month etc.) 3) Tithi (lunar day) 4) Karan 5) Day.
To perform religion rituals, our sages have given some specific
muhurats, so one can use it with the help of Nativity and according to
chart, one can select the Muhurat, and those who do not have their chart,
onecanuse common Muhurat or according to Horary. In Indian panchang
almost common muhurats are there, so one can selects according to their
cast and customs.
In Sayan one can select the time according to direction, longitude
aspects, and fixed stars for specific Muhurat, and mainly they concerned
with lunar day. Transit and hora hours.
So according to birth chart one can select with aspects, Transit of
superior planets, lunar day and hora hour.
In K.P. according to significators of the matter, one has to see Transit
of Dasa rulers, Sun-Moon and Asc. rising from the significators only. If
birth chart is not there, one can use Horary for such purpose. One can
use hora and sub hora also.
In K.P. one can go upto minute for Muhurat, suppose for specific
work if Dasa rulers are not according significators, but one can select
the Moon's Transit from the significator’s Star and sub, Asc. also
according that significator's Star and sub, one can get positive results.
Even if day Star is not according to significators but it is needed to
select time for specific work, one can go according to hora hour, and
with Asc. rising from the significators which is possible, or even one
can go according to only sub rising only. Muhurat will help only, if Natal
chart shows positive for specific event.

Chapter X
Cusp beginning or TVliddle
When students study Sidereal and Sayan both the systems, most of
the students get confused, whether rising degree is to be considered as a
middle of cusp or beginning of cusp. In Sidereal it is a middle point and
in Sayan it is a beginning of cusp. According to me it may be as under.
If we study the history of astrology, we can understand that, the
vedic astrology based on nakshtras in ancient as well as today also. Our
all muhurats, religious functions and shodas sanskaram based on nakshtra,
lunar day, yoga, karan and daylord. And all these are accord ingto native's
cast and customs, for their welfare and prosperous life. In vedic astrology
signs were not used. But later stage signs have been used.
We all know that, our constellations are two types, one is fixed star
and one is divisional nakshtras of ecliptic. And today also we are using
this divisional nakshtras for all-purpose as well as fixed stars also.
If we go through all nakshtras name, we get main 24 nakshtras.
While today we are considering 27 nakshtras. In nakshtras particularly
Falguni, Shadha and Bhadrapada nakshtras divided in two parts and their
name are Purva Falguni, Uttra Falguni, Purva Shadha and Uttra Shadha,
Purva Bhadrapada and Uttra Bhadrapada. So from 24 to 27 nakshtras
have been used.
Middle cusp concept based on the nakshtras systems, because 12
houses have 2 points one is beginning and one is middle point, while
end point is the beginning point for another cusp. So such 12*2=24 points
of houses.
Another point is to be considered that, celestial objects and our
Solar systems, including our earth and Moon also moving in a particular
orbit around each other due to one of the force is gravity. This gravity
force is always attracts bodies towards the center of the object, so all
celestial objects move around each other due to gravity force of each

other. The gravity force is always centripetal. Our house system has
main four points, rising horizon, setting horizon, zenith and nadir. We
all know that when Sun is on meridian it is more powerful and its rays
arc also straight and more heat that time than other hours of the day.
Another point is that, all our longitude aspects arc based on
geocentric and not on Topocentric, next point is that, for high tide when
Moon is on the meridian of that place, i.e. Moon is always in 4th or 10th
house during that time, and this is a center point of two horizon. So from
above discussion, center point is more important, another factor is that
our sidereal horoscope based on fixed zodiac, which is a divisional
nakshtras based, and in any division center point is main. Next point is
to considered that, we arc considering aspects 3 ways, applying- exact
and separation, and experience shows that influence of aspects more
powerful when it is in exact. Astronomical phenomena like Solar eclipse,
and Sun rise time is given inpanchang when Sun's disc half rise over the
horizon.
In middle point of cusp, there is no need to consider any orb, and
planet near to mid point is more powerful than, it is in beginning of the
cusp or in end of the cusp. And one can work out comparative ratio on
the based of planet deposited in the house and its distance from middle
of the cusp.
For beginning of the cusp, 1 think following points are in
consideration. Our year is mean full zodiac of Sun, and in a year there
are 12 months [Solar months), and 12 lunar months, so twelve equal
division of ecliptic is a sign. When fixed zodiac and moveable zodiac
were same, description of sign based on the constellations in each sign,
but due to precession of equinox at present moveable zodiac has not the
same constellations as described. As well as when we see in night during
the sky observation, that shape of sign given in our granths are to be
studied by considering the divisional nakshtras and fixed stars in that.
When ecliptic divided in equal 1 2 division, it has one starting point
and one is ending point. Sign resembles to cusp in natural terms, so
rising degree here considered as a beginning point of cusp. When planet
entered in a sign its effects started. Same way when planet entered in a
house its effects start. For cusp 5dg orbs is considered and for hyleg

different orbs is to be considered. So planet in end of 1 2th cusp and near
to 1st cusp, its effect more to Istcusp than to 12th house, and not only
for orb consideration but in future it will progressed to 1st house sign
from 12th house.
In our ancient granth, planets avastha have been given for odd and
even sign, here I have marked that, yuva avastha is in center of sign 12d
to 18d.So this also indicate that for planet, center of sign is more important
than its beginning.
One more point we can get from Horary rule is that, we can not
give answer, when Moon or Asc. is in the beginning or in ending degree,
sign is a resemble to house, but not always equal, so this also indicate
that beginning point is not that way important as middle point.
In K.P., as per law when we say that, all planets are bound to give
results of its Star lord, we considered where Starlord ruler planet is
deposited, and that Starlord ruler planet rules which house as a sign lord.
But as per its defination it is wrong, because when we use term Starlord,
we should considered Starlord ruler for the cusp also not as a sign lord.
For example : Suppose Sun is in Venus Star, so we will say that Sun is
the significators of where Venus is deposited and house ruled by Venus
as a sign lord. i.e. On which house Vrishbha and Libra sign falls, but this
is not the correct as per terms, we should considered where Venus rulers
nakshtras falls i.e. Bhami-Purva falguni and purva Shadha. If out of
these three nakshtra fall on any bhava one has to considered that bhava
first than sign rulers.
If time will permit in future, I will put my observations on this
point, and one has to consider middle or beginning of cusp according to
the system they follow. But according to me middle point is more
weighted.

Chapter XI
"Horary
Horary is a separate branch of astrology, one can use it as a separate
tool for the answer of any query or as a supporting tool with Natal chart.
There are two systems followed by scholars l)by time and 2) by number.
In time system, one has to erect the chart, when any querist asked
any question, or one can read query in a letter-fax-email etc. or hear
query over the phone etc. So according to that time one has to erect the
chart. Sometime querist gives the time, place and date when first time
query comes in his mind. Actual Horary system is that, whenever any
question rise in his mind, that is the actual time for Horary chart.
But most of people don't know this rule of Horary and according to
their suitable time they approach to astrologer and asked the question,
and astrologer has no choice but he has to cast the horoscope according
to that time. And this is a main limitation oftime system.
In number system, querist has to give one number, either within
108 or within 249, or unlimited digit number (refer nakshtra chintan
part-1) and this number indicate fixed Asc degree of query. Astrologer
has to cast the chart according to his convenient time and place, but he
has to finished chart working and judgement of the chart in the same
sitting.
In this system cusps are according to fixed Asc, according to number
given by querist, this Asc. is to be adjusted on the latitude where astrologer
cast the chart, and according to that, he has to work out other cusps.
Astrologer has to insert planets of that time when he starts working in a
chart, then one has to take judgement.
If for some reason there is any disturbance during calculation and
compulsion to leave it, then one has to cast the chart again when one sits
for judgement, cusp remains the same mostly if one is on the same place,
but planets get change according to new time.

In Nirayan and in K.P. number system is there, but in Sayan no
such system.
Before proceeds in the chart, particularly in Sayan, one has to
consider following points.
1) If rising Asc. deg in beginning of a sign, matter of queiy is in
beginning stage or querist is not that serious about query, so one can
avoid to answer.
2) If rising Asc. deg in end of a sign, mailer of query is in last
stage, so there is no need to go further and one can avoid it.
3) If malefic planets are rising, one has come with not good
intention, so one can avoid it.
4) If Moon is in beginning of a sign, particularly first Navamash,
querist is not serious about query, so one can avoid it.
5) If Moon is in end of a sign or in a last Navamash, querist has lost
all hopes for his query.
6) If Moon is in a void of course i.e. before leaving a sign, if no
aspect formed by Moon to any other planet, matter's status remain as it
is, and one can avoid it.
7) If Moon is between Libra 15d to Scorpio 15d., one can avoid to
give answer, in these zodiac malefic fixed stars are existed.
8) If malefic planets are in 7th house, one can avoid the answer,
because 7th house indicate astrologer, and querist will not be satisfied
with the answer.
9) If more duality indicates in Asc or with Moon, then querist has
approached to other astrologers for the same query, so importance of
this chart has lost, so one can avoid such query.
10) If Saturn in Asc or with Moon, indicates that querist is hiding
some thing or providing less information's regarding matter, so there is
no need to give reply.
11) If Moon is not reflecting the question by house or sign or aspects

or Karak, than one can avoid the answer.
12) One has to match the querist description from Asc. and if it
match then only one-can proceeds further.
So, astrologer has to check all above conditions then only proceeds
further as follows.
One has to consider significators and promittars as follows.
Asc. lord or lord of house regarding for whom querist has asked the
question, and another significator is Moon.
Promittors arc lord of house regarding for which matter question is
concerned, planet deposited in a that house and Karak of matter.
So one to fixed this two planets, one is significator and one is
promittor. Then < >nc has to find out who is fast moving planet out of this
two, and its degree is in applying condition to other planet, one can
consider positive reply.
If fast moving planet is ahead in degree than other planet, one can
not expect positive reply.
If fast moving planet is ahead in degree and before change of sign
its move backward, and apply to another planet, one can expect positive
reply.
If fast moving planet is in applying condition to another planet, but
before aspects fulfillcdanother planet change the sign, reply is negative.
If fast moving planet is in applying condition to another planet, but
before aspects fulfilled, fast moving planet turns retrograde, hopes of
results lost at last stage.
If fast moving planet is in applying condition to another planet. But
before aspects fulfilled, another fast moving planet than this two aspect
with out of this two planet results is prohibited due to this third planet as
a house ruler or its karaktwa becomes the reason for this negative result.
If fast moving planet is already in ahead condition than other planet.
But beforUit leaves the sign, any another planet which is fast than this

two, apply first to slow moving planet and translate or collect its light
and approach to first fast moving planet, then one can expect the positive
result. It will be fulfilled by support of this third planet as a house ruler
and Karak.
In Sayan, time factor is considered as follow.
Applying planet's sign and house position to be considered
Directions of houses and sign as usual.
In K.P. one has to follow as under to judge Horary.
1) In one sitting one has to finished the chart and judgement. If
there is any disturbance during work and compulsion to get up, one has
to insert the planets of new time. If place remain the same, there is no
need to cast the cusp again, but place of working is also changed, then
one has to consider new place lat. for cusp according to given number.
2) Judge the Moon, if it reflect the query, then one can proceed
further.
3) Judge the strength of Asc. Sublord, and also it indicates the query
& efforts.
4) Judge the main house Sublord for the particular matter, and see
whether it becomes the significator or not.
5) If Sublord is retrograde and Star lord is direct, than one can not
give negative answer, if it is a significator.
6) If Sublord is in direct motion and its Starlord is retrograde, than
answer is negative as per theory, but it is not fixed rule, it depends upon
case to case.

7) When retrograde planet resume direct, one can expect the result,
when it crossed the longitude, from where it started the retrograde motion.
8) Check other supporting houses Sublord, how far it is positive.
9) Check 11th house Sublord, and see whether it is a significator of
required houses, if yes than answer is positive otherwise negative.
10) Asc. Sublord shows querist's efforts to fulfilled desire.
11) Expected result depends on the mam house Sublord, 11 th house
Sublord, planet in Asc. or in the 1 1th house, and all these factors decide
the time factor.
12) Find out Ruling planets at the time of judgement, to select the
significators .
13) As per Dasa systems one can measure time factor. If it is expected
in short duration , one can depend on Transit only.
14) If 7th house Sublord is afflicted one can avoid to give the answer.
15) If planet Mercury is connected with 7th house, querist send
reminder for his query.
So, one can work out Horary either by time or number system. In
Tajik most of the same rules are given as in Sayan, with different names
like lthasal, Israf,Nakta etc. like 16 yoga's are there, and for judgement,
one has to consider different aspects like Pratyaksh and Gupta for Sneha
and Shatru Darishti.

Chapter XH
sHorarycy\nd "Natal Chart
Horary astrology is a separate branch, but one can use this branch
as a supportive too] with Natal chart or also when native's data is not
known, then one can use it. There are different systems for Horary and
rules are also different to follows. There is always one kind of comparison
factor rise in mind which is to be followed, because some scholars give
importance to only Horary or some are giving importance to Natal. So
here I have tried to compare both the branch.
1) In Natal chart, correct birth data required, particularly correct
birth time, even today most of doesn't know which is correct birth time.
So this is a very important point in Natal chart, and without correct
rectification one can not proceed further. In primary direction difference
of 20" in birth time gives I Month difference in time factor, while in
Horary this problem can not arise, because as per Horary rules astrologer
has to cast the chart.
2) In Natal chart, one can get general life trend and also specific
events with the help of using different divisional charts . Compare different
types of time judgements like Progression, Dasa, periodical planetary
system and Transit etc While in Horary one has to study the chart for
specific question with the system's rules.
3) In Natal chart, astrologer is able to judge the native's past, present
and future trend of life, with the help of time factors, while in Horary it
represents only immediate past present and future for question.
4) In Natal chart one can work out epoch chart, and also one can
read chart in more details with the help ofboth chart, while in Horary it
is not possible.
5) In astrology, there is a thumb rule that according to Desh-kala
and patra. so from birth data astrologer is able to judged Desh-kalapatra's position, when native born and native's development influenced

by these factors, while this factors is not possible to judged from Horary
except present one.
6) From Natal chart, one can get parent's position, which is not
possible through Horary, while parent's position is more influenced on
native's development.
7) For matching of horoscope, whether for marriage, business or
relations among family members. Natal chart is more important, than
Horary. While Horny can give answer yes or no and some more details
pertaining to present life and future prospectus of that relation.
8) Natal chart any one can present by family members or friend or
also even those who are not blood related. While in Horary chart one can
cast if native himself or herself present by personal, or by letter-faxemail, or by telephone or by blood related person in his or her absence,
or in special case some time by partner or friend as a well wisher.
9) When person consult to astrologer, in Natal chart Moon and Asc,
of that time will signify the query. While in Horary one has to cast the
chart for that time or according to number and one has to check Moon,
whether Moon reflects the question or not, if Moon reflects question in
Horary chart then only one can proceed further, while such restriction is
not in Natal chart.
10) Planet's consideration is different when it is retrograde in Natal
than Horary.
11) There are sets ofrules to judge the Horary chart, while for Natal
different rules given in each granth but not so specific as it is for Horary.
So, from above discussion, I believed that Horary chart can be used
as a supportive tool for Natal as well as separate when it is needed, but
Natal is more important in all respect.

part 2
CK. T. Theory - '"Rectification
Krishnamurti Padhdhati (KP) is a theory of houses, in other words
a theory of group of houses, signifactors & Ruling planets.
Whenever any chart present to an astrologer, they have to check
whether it is rectified or not with the help of RP (Ruling Planets) at the
time of judgement. The astrologer must check the Asc . degree or rectify
according to RP & for further detail please refer chapter - 7 of
‘Nakshtra Chin tan’ Part I.
Rectification is an Astrologer's Ethic before analysis prediction of
the chart, which should be 'Astrologically Rectified' by an Astrologer.
There are different opinions regarding correct birth time to be considered.
1) First Cry,
2) First Breathe,
3) Head Coming Moment (Shirshodaya),
4) Baby Come Out Completely (Bhupatana),
5) Cutting Nadi,
To overcome above complain, rectification of birth time is primary
& essential process in 'Astrology' work. The error in casting of the
horoscope due to non-availability of watch, lack of awareness, improper
watch & different opinions about birth time consideration. There are
some postulates for rectification.
1) Asc , should match & coincide with the time of judgement.
2) Dasa bhukati match with the Ruling planets.
3) Question reflection. [Signifactor Question should match with RP]
While doing rectification, it is essential to consider various point
just like time, place & family background etc. First find out Asc. point.

then with the help of RP adjust the Asc. point & then with the help of
calculation find out the rectified time.
1) Asc. Star Lord.
2) Asc. Sign Lord.
3) Moon Star Lord.
4) Moon Sign Lord.
5) Day Lord.
All above RP are in descending strength, if any planet are retrograde
or in the star of retrograde becomes weak but not to neglect completely.
Rahu-Ketu becomes stronger than any other planets.
Rectification should not be done again for the same chart.
Rectification should be done with crystal clear mind, because confused
mind creates confusion for the native and an astrologer.

^scendent
The most sensitive & important point is the Asc. It is very naturally
energetic & imparts. Its influence to the connected houses. Hence the
native's attitude, behavior & nature are influenced by this point. To
understand the potentiality & probability of the situation as well as the
native, we can get maximum output with little efforts & less obstacles in
this manner. We can avoid wasting of energy against nature & utilizing
the energy in constructive way.
Asc. fundamentally signifies longevity, head, physical body,
livelihood, potentiality, nature, soul & control over horoscope.
Longevity : Longevity decides from 1-3-8 HS. (house).
1st HS. - The native.
8th HS. - Longevity.
3rd HS . - 8th to 8th (Bhavat Bhava).
Saturn. - Karka of longevity.
3D are danger for health.
6th HS. - Disease
8th HS. - Danger
12thHS. - Defect
If combination of 1-8-3 are -Ve, then 4th HS, is - Ve. If 1-8-3 are
+Ve, then 4th HS, is +Ve.
Sun, Moon & rising planet in Asc. are to be considered for hcalth.(for
both male & female).

There arc three categories 1) Short, 2) Medium, 3) Long., Short -
up to 33yrs, Medium - 33 to 66yrs, Long - above 66 yrs.
For short longevity: 1-3-8 SL (Sublord) signifies Badhak & Marak.
For medium longevity: 1-3-8 SLsignifies BadhakMarak & positive
houses.
For long longevity: 1-3-8 SL signifies positive HS.
If 1-3-8 SL are with Badhak Marak & 6-8-12 also, it reduces
longevity. The (>-8-12 shows negative for the health. It depends on dasas
also.
3rd Dasa, 5th Dasa & 7th Dasa is Negative for Short, Medium &
Long longevity respectively.
POTENTIALITY : Physically health can be considered by
studying 6 & 8 HS. In human life there may be number of opportunities
& ambitions, but lack of 6 & 8 HS., support-consideration. The native
can not succeed due to physical/mental problems. Hence body can be
controlled by proper way of life-style, yoga, diet & medicine.
NATURE : Nature of a native is to be decided from 1-3-9 HS,

Try to come up with family support,
through education.
Try his luck from a place away from his birthplace.
Success in sports, Mars-Jupiter with airy
or fiery sign.
Failure by doing daring.
Mental tension.
Love affairs. Finance (2-5: issue, 2-11: finance,
2: family).
Residential based business.
(4-8: homely atmosphere, 7: customer,
1 1 : benefit).
Discipline, police, soldier (Connected to Mars).
Indisciplined.
Estate agent (3: Deal (4th 12), 7: Customer,
11: Commission, profit).
Manufacturing, Profit in business.
Loss.
BUSINESS : When Asc. SL is with 7HS, then the native has
tendency to do business. 1 & 10 SL are also connected to 7 HS, & not to
6 HS. It is very essential that 7 SL is connected to 7-2-5-11 HS.
If 7 SL is connected to 5-8-12 HS then loss is sure.
BUSINESS PARTNER : 7 SL should be connected with 2-5-1011 HS. If 7 Cusp has duality & connected to 9-3-5 HS, Then there is
possibility of different partners. If it is connected with 6 HS, then opponent
will break the partnership. 12 HS, connection indicates the native will
himself break the partnership.
DARING: lstSLwith3 HS, : Daring.
1-3 : Self confident. Daring
1-3-10 : Come forward for daring.
3-6-10-1 1 : Daring & self-efforts make him successful.

Third cusp SL should be connected with Mars, 1-3-11 HS, then
native has daring & gets success. But if it is connected to 12 HS, then the
native becomes coward.
Opponent is afraid.
Success in daring.
Failure in oaring.
Success by self-effort.
Strategy for any scandal. Saturn,
Neptune, Mars & Rahu as karaka.
If 3rd SL is Mercury/Jupiter in airy/fixed sign, than the native will
think twice before act.
If Asc. SL is connected with 6-8-12, then chart becomes weak &
we can not expect any heroic deeds from him & again 3rd SL connected
to 9-12 HS, then he will not able to complete any work with satisfaction.
IstSL is with :
2-6 : Effort for existence, finance.
6-10 : Effort for development.
10-11 : Development is an achievement.
2-11 : Finance is an achievement.
2 Finance, 6 Efforts (service to other), 10 Active. Karma, llSuccess.
THIRD HOUSE : Third house for proper communication.
Astrologer should have strong 3rd HS. i.e. good in communication. In
any Natal chart Asc. 3-9 HS & Moon-Mercury should be strong.
3rd HS. Sub-conscious mind (Prakruti), parakram, courage, what's
in mind, enthusiasm, confidence. If there is fear, then one will lose
confidence. If there is balance of mind, then one may succeed 8-12
problem, 3-11 overconfidence.
If 3rd HS is defective, the advantage of a strong IstHS is nullified.
NINTH HOUSE : Conscious mind, good behavior, reading,
observation, interest, and knowledge.

9th is with 1 1 HS , then success. If 3rd HS weak, means confidence
is weak. If 9th HS is weak & 3rd HS is strong, it shows success. If 1st
SL is with 11 HS, but 3rd Hs is negative, then there will be problem.
I f the combination of SL of 3-9 are same or connected with each
other, then whatever the native thinks in his mind, he will work in same
direction. If they differ, the native will try to get the same results by a
different approach.
MOON : Mind, thoughts, grasping power, likes & dislikes.
Mind energy is thousand time higher than body. Hence if Moon is
not supporting to 3-9 HS, then the native can not progress properly.
MERCURY : Mind is basically unstable in nature, but with the
support of Mercury, the native is able to take proper decision.
Hence Asc. 3-9 Moon & Mercury indicate the potentiality of mental
development.

§econd "House
Second house fundamentally signifies family, wealth, face, speech,
eyes, memory, learning, comfort, taste etc.
FAMILY & DOMESTIC HAPPINESS :
If 2nd SL Saturn or with it, then native has to take responsibility. If
2nd SL connected to 6-8-12 HS; then the native will not be happy. If
Mars connected, quarrels will take place. Jupiter makes him apart
peacefully & Mercury gives expertise in documentation &
communication.
2nd SL with 6 HS., quarrel take place, but gains through family.
With 8 HS., mentally lose of peace & with 12 HS., gives lose & may
have to leave family.
VOCAL :
If 1st SL with 6-8-12 HS., 2nd SL with Mercury & with Rahu or
Ketu, & Starlord or SL of 2nd HS . in mute sign (watery sign), then there
is possibility of dumb.
If 2nd SL Saturn, indicates stammer. And with Rahu, Mercury causes
much stammering. If 2nd SL connected with Mars, then the native will
talk very fast.

TASTE :
Sun - Bitter & pungent.
Moon - Saltish.
Mars - Chilly & sour.
Mercury - Mixed.
Jupiter - Sweets.
Venus - Sour.
Saturn - Bitter.
Rahu - Bitter & pungent.
Ketu - No taste.
EYES:
If 2nd SL with 6-8-12 HS. & Karaka also connected to 6-8-12 HS.,
then there will be sight problem.
2nd HS for right eye & 12th HS for left eye, Sun, Moon & Venus
are Karak . Sun is karak for right in Male chart and Moon is karak for left
eye and vice versa for female chart.
12thHS indicate any defect or hospital treatment. If Mars or Saturn
are afflicted, then the native has to lose his eye by an accident or by
Ratnadara. It is connected with Aquarius sign.
If 1st or 8th SL with 8 HS & Mars, then there is possibility of
operation. When 12th HS SL signifactor of 6-8-12 HS., Then only in
combined Dasa of 2nd & 12th, there will be possibility of damage to eye.
WEALTH :
Consider 2-6-11 HS for wealth position & its combined Dasa
improve wealth position.
If 2-11 SL are connected to 8-12-5 HS., then the native loses his
wealth.
Progress in business, promotion, Re-joining can be considered from
2-6-10-1 1 HS. If 7 SLis the signifactor of 2-6-10-1 1 .then its Dasabhukti
gives business & success.
If 10 SL is connected to 2-7-11 HS., then its combined Dasa give
independent business. But if it is connected to 3 or 9 HS, there will be
partnership in business.
For materialistic positive HS are 1-2-3-6-10-11 & Karak Jupiter- Venus.

Third "House
Third house fundamentally signifies courage, brothers, parakram,
anger, ears, skill, neighbour, short journey, subordinates, heroic deeds,
letter, communication, writing & longevity of life.
SUB CONSCIOUS MIND :
3 SL is not afflicted, then the native represent his thoughts very
well. If afflicted then internal thoughts & external representation will be
different.
3 SL is connected with 9 HS in any manner then thoughts &
representation will be same, otherwise it will be different.
HEROIC DEEDS :
3SL is not afflicted & not connected with 8-12, then the native will
be success. If afflicted with Mars & Jupiter, then fail.
ATTITUDE :
3rd SL with-1, then Importance to own intellect, mentally ready to
do anything, difficult to explain / convince them, obstinate.
-2, Emphasis given to wealth, family & speech.
-3, Ready for any kind of daring by overestimating one self, mix
with people, leadership, addicted to any bad habits.
-3 & 10, 1 am only right tendency.
-4, Busy with his own activities only in homely atmosphere, thus
dislike to go away from home, potentially, good concentration,
-5, Moody, irresponsible, is interested only in speculation, love &
affection.
-6, Ready to do work, service, production line, surround by enemies,
wants success.
-7, Interested only in business, publicity, travel, has daring to insult
any body.

-8, Taking risk, suspicious mind, protecting legacy, custom of family
& due to that profit or loss, interested in technical work.
-9, Attitude towards religion, knowledge & justice, truth seeker,
professor, preacher, teacher, longjourney, religion, father.
-10, 1 am only right, work, business, politics, and status.
-11, Fulfill of desire.
-12 Bad habits, investment (depends up on 12Hs), avoid
responsibility,
BROTHER :
If 3 SL with 3-11 HS, connected to Mars then good relation with
brother, but with 8-12 HS connection spoil the relationship.
If 3 SL with 2 HS, then younger brother will have some problem.
If 3 SL with 2-4-10-1 1 HS, then the native will gel good support
from younger brother, but 6-8- 12 connection gives problems from them.
If 3 SL is afflicted from Mars - Problems for Property, Saturn -
Problems for Legacy, Venus & Moon - Problems after marriage, with
them.
NEIGHBOUR :
3 SL with
Profit good social relations.
Quarrel.
Not good neighbour.
Good Neighbour.
Loss.
SHORT JOURNEY :
3rd SL is with :
No problem during travelling.
Luxurious travelling.
Accident during travel, but at the same
time 8 SL should be with 3-8-12 HS.

3 SL is with Venus & afflicted then ornaments will be missing.
Venus is afflicted in female chart & with 8-1 2, then take care when
she travels.
If 3 SL is with 1 -7-8- 1 2 HS , then court problem will arise for nothing
& also connected with Mercury & Jupiter.
SALES MAN :
3id SL is with 2-10-1 1 HS, then profit in salesmanship, travelling,
salesman.
10th SL with 3 HS travelling, salesman, commission agent,
brokerage & also connected with Karaka, Mercury & Moon.
10th SL with 3 SL & vice versa., with Karka also the profit in
salesmanship, commission, brokerage contractor.

WRITER / PUBLISHER :
3 SL is with 3-9-10-11 - Mercury, Mars & Jupiter.
LOTTERY :
3 SL is with 2-6- 10-11 & Jupiter, but not with 5-8-12 HS .
If 3 SL is with 6-1 1 HS, then accept the appeal.
EXPRESSION :
3 SL is Saturn -
Sun
Moon
Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Mars
Rahu
Ketu
EAR:
If 3 SL is with 8-12 & Saturn, then there will be defect in ear. At the
same time 1 SL should be with 8-12 HS. along with afflicted Mercury.
Less but to the point.
In limit but impressive.
Excited.
Over limit.
Seriously.
Like actor ( with hands & legs ).
Threatened, argumentative.
Improper.
Can not express as wan..

"Fourth "House
Fourth House fundamentally signifies mother, education, home,
vehicle, farmhouse, boreweli, heart, end of life, end of things, culture.
MOTHER
If 4 SL is not with Badhak - Maraka from mother's HS (4th HS.),
then there will be good longevity of mother.
If 1st SL is with 4th HS & vice versa, then there will be good relation
with mother. Moon also considered.
If 4 SLis with Asc. & also afflicted, then it spoils the relation with
mother.
4 SL is with 3-6-8-12 HS, then happiness from mother is less.
4 SL is with 1-2-5-11 HS, then good relation with mother. Also
possibility that mother is doing job.
4 SL is with II HS, Badhak - Marak from 4 HS, then there is
possibility of early mother's death.
STEP MOTHER :
Father's remarriage & 4th SLis with 8 HS.
If 3 Or 4 SL is afflicted then possibility of stepmother. ( 3 HS is 7th
from 9 HS & 12th from mother's house.)
Many times 4 SL is not afflicted but possibility of stepmother is
there, then her nature will be good.
If 3 HS is with duality then possibility of step mother. ( When
mother's longevity is short, remarriage of father. Moon is afflicted.)
3 or 4 HS with duality, then father will re-marry. ( Father’s marriage
life disturbed & shows divorce.) Mother & stepmother both are present.
CULTURE - SANSAKARA :
It is given by mother & if 4 HS is afflicted then there is deficiency
in culture or the native does not getting proper sansakara from mother.

EDUCATION
1 & 4 SL with 3-8-12 HS, then not possibility of education.
ADMISSION :
If 4 & 6 SL with 4-6- 1 1 HS , then the native will get the admission .
If 12 HS also connected then strength of 11 & 12 HS will decide the
situation. If 11 HS stronger, then the native will get admission. 12 HS
indicates donation.
4 & 6 with 3 & 9 HS then through reference.
4 HS duality ( in Mercury/ Jupiter star or sign ), then initially the
native won't get the admission where he applied first, but he will get in
other institute / school. For that 4 SL should be connected 1-4-6-11 HS.
If Saturn is with 4 HS then it delays matter orthe native will get admission
due to somebody's cancellation.
MEDIUM OF LEARNING :
If 1-2-3 SL with Mercury, Jupiter & Rahu, then English Medium
will do. But if above combination is not there then admit the native in
Vernacular Medium.
GOOD EDUCATION :
When Asc. SL is not afflicted & not with 3-5-8-12 HS & also 4 SL
is with 4-6-9-11 HS., & Mercury / Jupiter, then the native will have good
education. 4 SL with 3-5-8-12 HS., then there will be break in education.
4 SL with Saturn, then the native will forget in Exam - hall.
4 SL duality & with 3 or 10 HS., then the native has to change the
school OR institute due to change of residence or due to parent's job
location changes.
Moon with 8-12 HS & afflicted from sign, house & aspect, then
grasping power will be less. But support from sign, aspect & from Asc,
then the native will come out from bad / dull periods.
Moon strong & in 10 HS, then capacity is good. He likes social
status, interested in extra activities.

Moon in 5 HS, then the native is clever but he is in overconfidence.
FACULTY OF EDUCATION :
4 or 9 SL with :
Mercury / Jupiter
Sun
Moon / Venus
Mars / Saturn
Mercury
Jupiter
Mars / Venus
Saturn / Venus
Mars / Jupiter
Herschel / Mercury / Saturn
Mars / Moon or Mars / Neptune
Saturn / Venus / Mercury
Mercury / Venus / Moon
Mercury / Venus /
Herschel / Neptune
Herschel / Mercury
Saturn / Moon
Saturn / Venus / Sun
Chemical point of view
Aviation / Electrical
Venus / Moon with 4, 6 HS
Law, Commerce, CA, 1CWA,
CS, Accounts, Marketing.
Medical ( Sun in 4 HS.,
in ashwini nakshtra ).
Art.
Engineering. Civil - Mcch-cngg.
Commerce, Accounts.
Finance. Law. Economic.
Automobile, Electrical,
Plastic, Architect.
Architect, Computer, Electrical.
Production engg.
Aeronautical engg.
Marine engg.
Computer Hardware engg.
Computer Software engg.
Computer Software engg.
Meteorology.
Space Technology,
with 3, 9 HS & airy sign.
Chemical engg.
Plastic, 'Textiles.
4-8-12 HS or watery sign.
3-7-9 HS or airy sign.
Catcring/Hotcl management.
4 SL with earthy sign, also with 3-10-5-6-11 HS. then private course
will do & be master in it.

When 4 SL with 3-5-8-12 HS, then there will be break in education,
but if with 6-11 HS, then he will get good marks in examination.
4 SL with 1-3-5-6-12-1 1 HS, then the native will try to copy & get
success.
When 4 SL with 3-5-10 HS, then the native will get extra marks
due to his NCC or NSS activities.
ABROAD FOR EDUCATION :
12 SL with 3-4-9-12 HS, or 4 & 9 SL with 9-12 HS & karaka also,
then there is possibility to go abroad for education. Dasa bhukati support
must be necessary.
HIGHER EDUCATION :
Admission problem to be judge from HC.
9 SL with 6-9-11 HS, the native will seek admission for higher
education.
9 SL with 3-8-11-12 HS, then institute will be at longer distance
from residence.
9 SL with 6-9-11-12 HS, then there is possibility of studies abroad.
9 SL is with
Sun Jupiter
Sun Mercury
Sun Saturn
Sun Saturn / Venus
Sun Saturn Venus Moon -
Sun Saturn Mercury
Sun Mars
Sun Jupiter Venus
Sun Rahu
Sun Herschel
Sun Neptune Moon
Sun Jupiter Moon
General practitioner.
General Consultant.
Orthopedic / Dentist & 8 HS.
VDS, Skin.
Eye specialist.
Skin disease, ENT,
Speech therapist.
Surgeon, Heart specialist.
Gynecologist.
Anesthetist.
Sonography, X-Ray,
Scan, Angiography.
Psychology.
Child specialist.

Sun Venus
Sun Scorpio / 8 HS
9th SL is Mercury
Jupiter
LLM Jupiter Mar
Saturn
Venus
Sun
CA Mercury with Saturn
Jupiter
Mars
Sun
- Cosmetology.
- Pathology.
- C-A., Cost accounting.
- Management, MBA, LLM, Law.
- Criminal Lawyer.
- Estate Law / Insurance.
- Matrimonial law.
- Government, public prosecutor.
- C-A & good in Auditing.
- Financial consultant.
- Production, analysis.
- Account factor.
SWEET HOME
4 SL with 3-5-8-12 HS, then the native can't make own home.
4 SL with 4-11-12 HS., along with karaka then the native can
purchase home. 6 HS connection indicates loan facilities forhome.
4 SL with 4-8- II & 8 SL with 4-6-11, then the native get hereditary
property.
4 & 10 SL with 3-5-10 HS & 4 HS with duality, then frequently the
native has to change residence.
4SL with 6 HS & Saturn, the native has to live as a tenant or purchase
in resale or hereditary property.
When 8 SL with 4-11 HS.,& karaka then through legacy the native
get house.
4 SL with 7 HS, Mercury, Jupiter then there is possibility of court
case due to property.
Purchase home - 4 SL = 4-11-12 HS with karaka Mars & Saturn.
Sale of home- 10 SL = 3-5-10-ll-Profit.3-5-8-10-12-Loss.
LOCATION :
4 SL is with Sun - Government colony.
Moon - Market area, sea -shore.

Mars
Mercury -
Jupiter -
Venus
Saturn -
Rahu
Industrial area.
Market place.
Near school, temple.
Posh area.
Lonely place, slum area, distance place.
Mosque, church ( Pray house).
4 SL with Earthy sign or Saturn - Ground floor.
Rahu - Upper floor & Comer.
Others - Upper floor.
9-4 SL not afflicted, its direction is good.
TENANTS :
6 SL with 2-4-1 1 HS , then there is no problem. But if its with 3-812 HS, then there will be problem.
9 SL not with 5-8 HS, then problem from Tenant.
12 SL with 3-9-12 HS, fixed sign, 4 SL afflicted then the native will
settle away from birthplace.
4 SL with 8-12 HS & afflicted then insurance is must.
4 SL with duality then property keeps on two names.
Repairing :
4 SL with Mare-Satum & with 8-12 HS, then possibility of repairing.
VEHICLE
When 4th SL in moveable or dual sign & 4-11-12 HS indicates
vehicle & also connection with Venus.
4 SL in dual sign or human sign then the native will drive two
wheeler. For self-driving Saturn connection is must. Jupiter connection
shows driver.
4 SL in bestial sign, it's indicate four wheeler. Scorpio sign indicates
heavy transport vehicle. ( More than four wheeler ).
4 SL strongly with watery sign indicates ship, launch, boat, shipping
vehicle.

4 SL strongly with airy sign indicates helicopter, airplane.
4 SL with 6 HS indicates loan for vehicle or use for his career.
4 SL with dual sign.& also 3 HS, then the- native frequently changes,
vehicle.
4 SL with 3-8-12 & afflicted & 8 SL with 4 HS then possibility of
accident.
4 SL with fixed sign or strongly with Venus indicates luxurious
furniture, electronic items, wheeler furniture in home.
4 SL with 3-8-12 HS & not with 6-11 HS, then possibility of missing
the vehicle.
FARM HOUSE
4 SL with earthy sign also with Moon & Jupiter then the native get
benefit of farmhouse.
If 10 SL with 2-4-11 or 4 SL with 2-6- 10-1 1 HS, then the native get
profit from farm house.
BOREWELL
4 SL with watery sign & also with Moon, Venus & Jupiter then
water will be in borewell, but before use of water, first check out.
4th SL with Sun - more % of Calcium.
Mars - more % of Sulphur.
Saturn - more % oflron.
Jupiter - more % of Phosphorus.
Venus - more % of Magnesium.
Moon - more % of Salt.
END OF LIFE
4 SL afflicted then some problem at end of life. But connected with
Venus, Mercury then end of life is happy & harmonious moment.
1 SL afflicted & strongly connected with 12 HS, then after death,
the native's body will not found.

"Fifth "House
Fifth house fundamentally signifies first child, purva punya, i.e.
The karma of previous birth, Mantra-tantra, learning, intellect,
speculation, love affairs & memory, art etc.
PURVA PUNYA :
When5SLwith 1 (self ), 9 ( Luck ), 10 (Own efforts )HS indicates
good purva punya.
5 SL with 6-8-12 HS indicates deficiency in purva punya.
5 SL is with :
6 HS : One has to do service for society without getting adequate
reward or suffer through health condition.
8 HS : One has to suffer through accident, without any support of
good fortune & also no support from the family members, in particular
father or teacher or guru.
12 HS : One has to suffer due to hardship, handicapped mentally or
physically or stay away from family members.
PITRU DOSH :
5 SL & Sun afflicted & Rahu-Ketu with 5 HS shows Pitru Dosh.
Same way one has to consider for other planets i.e. Venus - sister or
female
REMEDY :
Jupiter, Asc, & 9 HS combination give success in remedial action.
Jupiter must be with Asc, & 9 HS. in some respect.
SPECULATION :
1 SL with 5-8 HS & Leo sign indicate speculative tendency.
5 SL not with 12 HS or vice versa, then the native is not interested
in investment, but in promises ( Badla ).
If 5 SL with 2-5-6-11 HS,then the native will make profit, but if it
is with 8-12 HS, then it indicates loss. Mixed combination gives mixed
result, according to Dasa bhukati.

12 HS indicates investment as well as loss. Hence if 12 SL with 26-10-11 HS, then it is profitable, otherwise there will be loss.
LOTTERY :
3-5 SL with 2-6-10-11 HS & Jupiter's connection indicates profit
& 5-8-12 HS shows loss.
CHILDREN
ADOPTED CHILD :
When 5 SL with 2 HS & 2 SL with 2-1 1 HS. Jupiter also connected
with 2-11 HS. Then only the native can go for adoption of child.
Horoscope of adopted child :
1) Afflicted 4 HS.
2) 4 HS with duality.
CHILDREN :
When 5 SL with 2-5-1 1 HS & Jupiter in fertile sign, Then the native
gets happiness from children in watery sign, there is no problem. If 5 SL
in barren sign ( Aries, Gemini, Leo, Virgo ) gives problem regarding
issue.
5 SL connected duality then there is possibility of twins.
If 5 SL with 1-4-10 HS, then the native may have no issue or not
getting happiness from children. In female chart 5 SL & in male chart 11
SL should be connected with 2, 5, 1 1 HS & the combined Dasa of 2, 5,
11 HS gives child.
Fertile Planets
Disturbing Planet
Miscarriage
Delayed
Total negatives
Partially negative
Moon, Venus, Jupiter, Sun & Mars.
Rahu.
Ketu.
Saturn
If 5 & 1 1 SL with 6-8-12 HS, then there is very less possibility of
issue. But if 6-8-12 SLwith 2-5-11 HS, then with the help ofMcdical
Treatment there is possibility of issue.

5 SL with 4-8-12 HS connected with Ketu or Rahu indicates abortion
or stillborn child.
5 SL with 1 1 & 12 HS, also with 2-1 1 HS, some connection with
Rahu & Ketu - deformed child.
SIGN OR PLANET COMBINATION :
Mars, Sun, Jupiter - Male child.
Moon, Venus - Female child.
Saturn, Mercury - According to sign / planet combination.
Rahu, Ketu - According to they represent.
LOVE AFFAIR :
When 5 SL with 5-1 1 HS, Venus, Mars & Moon. Then love affairs
will take place. If 12 or 4 HS is also connected, then in significator’s
Dasa bhukati of 12 HS, it breaks the relation. If it is with 6 HS, then
opponent will break the relation.
5 SL with 5-11 & 8 HS it gives strain relationship.
LOVE MARRIAGE .
The inter-connection of 5 & 7 HS indicates love marriage. When 7
SL with 2-5-7- 1 1 HS, wife karaka Venus & husband karaka. Jupiter is
also supporting then there are chances of love marriage. If 5 HS SL is
duality & also connected then the native may marry but also having
external affairs. ( Dual sign with 7 HS )
If 5 SL with 4 & 6 HS , then opponent will break the relation. But if
it is with 12 & 4 HS, then the native himself will break the relation.
5 SL indicates duality & with 2-11-3-7-9 & also with 4-6-10-12,
then the native will break the relation & develop another relation.
7SLwith5 HS &5 SL with 2-3-7-1 1 HS with duality but not with
4-6-10-12 HS, then even after marriage the native keeps other relations.
MANTRA - TANTRA
5 SL with Rahu indicates the native interested in tantrik & connection
with other planets indicate Satvik pooja.
Sun - Surya pooja.

5 SL with Barren sign & afflicted, then the native will not get positive
result.
Moon - Saturn combination give faith.
If Jupiter & Moon afflicted, then the native should not take interest
in Tantra.
SIDHHI :
If 5 SL with 5-10-11 HS, then there will be sidhhi & connected
with Ketu, Saturn & Jupiter.
INTELLIGENCE :
5 SL with 1-3-9 HS and good connection Mercury, Jupiter, Moon
& if these planets are not afflicted, it indicates good intelligence. Earthy
sign & Airy sign gives strength.
SPORTS :
1 SL with Mars or Jupiter with airy, fiery sign, 3-5 HS, then the
native interested in outdoor sports. At the same time, 5 SL with 2-6-101 1 HS, the native will get success in sports.
5 SL with Mercury, Moon, Venus, Saturn, Airy, Watery sign, then
the native interested in indoor sports.
5 SL with 10 HS & vice versa, then the native try to make career in
sports. But 5 SL with 4-8-9-12 HS, then not success in sports. ( e.g.
Vinod Kambli ).

§ixth House
Sixth house fundamentally signifies services, pet animals, loans,
disease, servant etc.
SERVANT :
6 SL with 2-4-6-10-11 HS, then the native will bebenefited by
engaging servant. If 5-8-12 HS, then loss to the native from the servant.
6 SL is with Badhak - Marak from 1 HS and 6 SL or 6 cusp with
natural malefic planets, then avoid keeping a servant.
When a person approaches to find out, if he can engage a servant, if
Ruling Planets ( RP )are beneficial to the natives chart ( signifactorof 23-4-10-1 1 HS.), then the servant can be engaged.
In case of Income Tax or other raid, 6 SL with 8-12 HS, then one of
the employees should have given information to the authorities concerned.
6 SL with Jupiter - Employee from Finance / Legal Dept.
6 SL with Mars - Estate Dept. / Security staff
production department.
6 SL with Mercury - Accounts /Correspondence.
6 SL with Moon, Venus - PRO / Administrative.
6 SL with Saturn - Labour union, Audit,
control department.
10 SL with 2-3-6-10-1 1 HS, then good support from Employer.
10 SL with 5-8-9-12 HS, then not advisable to join that Employer.
6 SL with 2-3-1 1 indicates good relation.
6 SL with 8-12 indicates bad relations.
PET ANIMALS :
6 SL with Earthy sign & 2-3-10-1 1 HS, then advisable to have pet
animals & good income. If connected with 4-5-8-12 HS, creates problems.
If 6 SL with 7-8-12 HS, Jupiter & Mars's combination, there will
be legal problem & financial loss.

For Horse racing requires 5 SL is with 2, 6, 10, 11 HS indicates
benefits. ( Same for farmers.)
LOANS :
SLofthc 6-8-11 with2-3-6-ll HS,thenthe native will get the loan.
5-8-12 HS negative for loans.
If 3-9 HS operates, then talk between two parties only.
8 SL with Saturn - will get loan lesser then applied for.
8 SL with Mercury - will get loan on installments basis.
8 SL with Jupiter - will get more loans in future also.
8 SL with 5-8-12 HS - will not get the loan from the first source,
has to approach another source,
if 6 & 11 indicate positive in HC.
Repayment of loan can be seen from 12 HS.
12 SL.with 5-8-12 HS, then loan will be complete.
RECOVERY :
8 SL with Sun
8 SL with Moon,
Mercury or Venus
8 SL with Mars
8 SL with Saturn
through influence of big person
through compromise & peacefully.
through threatening,
less recovery & delayed.
Same condition one can apply for payments with 12 SL.
COMPETITION :
1 SL with 6 HS & 6 SL with 1 or 1 1 HS indicates success.
6 HS positive for competition life, business. But negative for
marriage life, disease, family etc.
MATERNAL UNCLE :
6 SL with Mercury, Jupiter, Moon, Venus with 2-11 HS, shows
good relation with maternal uncle side. If it is with 8-12 HS, indicate
spoiled the relation.
DISEASE :
The combined Dasa of signifactor of 1-6 HS, gives disease to the
native.

If 6 SL with Asc. 6-8-12 HS, then during its Dasa bhukti native
suffer from disease.
SL of 1 & 6 HS connected with those HS, signs & planets indicate
the type of disease the native will suffer from, For e.g. 10 HS indicates
left side of the body - heart problem.
If 8 or 12 SL with 1-6-8-12 HS & karaka Mars, then after long
treatment, the native gets permanent defects. If it is also with Badhak -
Marak Dasa bhukati, then the native will die. Mars is karaka for operation.
6 SL with : 1 HS = headache, general weakness & Aries sign.
PLANETS :
Sun - Bone, heart, pitt;t, eyesight, resistance.
Moon - Left eye, white cell, liquid in the body, chest,
digestive system, diabetes, cancer.
Mars - Blood, red cell, injury, habits, blood pressure, pitta,
genetic organ, vitality, monthly period for female.

Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn
Rahu/Ketu -
Fiery Sign :
Earthy Sign :
Airy Sign :
Watery Sign :
Gas, brain, breathing, lungs, nervous system,
skin disease.
Blood, productivity, liver, pitta, kidney,
indigestioft heavy meal, diabetes, cancer.
Eyesight, habits, sanjivani, sexual, cosmic energy.
Muscle, bone, long term disease, paralysis,
hereditary disease.
Rahu / Ketu's deposited sign, disease of those planets
which are represented by Rahu / Ketu. But it indicates
very complicated. Take more than one doctor's
opinions before treatment.
Inside parts of the body , energetic &
productivity parts of body.
Main parts of the body, heart, kidney, structure of body.
Nervous system, organization parts ofbody.
Blood, red cell, shortage of water, chemical in body.
6-8-12 HS negative for health.
Positive HS = 1-5-9 HS for Movable sign.
1-5-11 HS for Fixed sign.
1-5-9-11 for Common sign.
Signifactor of positive houses will decide which type of treatment
will be helpful.
Signifactor
Sun, Mars, Jupiter
Saturn, Moon
Venus
Jupiter, Moon
Mercury
Type of Treatment
Allopathic.
Ayurvedic.
Homeopathy.
Allopathic, Naturopathy.
Always changes treatment.
Remedial planets should not be connected with negative HS & not
be afflicted.
6 SL connected with Rahu, Ketu, Uranus, Neptune then there is
wrong diagnosis for disease.

§eventh "House
Seventh house fundamentally signifies marriage, public life, court
matter, business partner, partnership, theft, second child.
MARRIAGE
7 SL with 2-5-7-1 1 HS indicates promise for marriage life.
If 7 SLstrongly with 1-4-6-10-12 HS &barren sign. Karaka afflicted
then not promise of marriage or no marriage.
7 SL with 7-2-5-11 HS then its indicates very easy & early marriage.
Thus happy married life indicates. At the same time SL of 2-5-11 HS
also should be with positive HS.
2 HS = Family, finance.
5 HS = Love, issue.
1 1 HS = Permanent friendship, fulfillment.
When 7 SL is with 6 & 12 HS, then disturbance in marriage life.
6 HS = Quarrel, argument, career.
12 HS = Defect in the native himself, not interested in
marriage life.
If 7 SL with 4 & 10 HS.then problem will arise in married life due
to joint family, issue or career.
4 HS = Lack of settlement, not affection, mother, nature, home.
10HS = Ego problems, status, mother in law, career.
If 7 SL with 6-8-12 HS then difficulties in married life.
If 7 SL in dual sign, dual planet or any kind of duality & with badhak
- marak also then due to partner's death, the native re-marries, if 2 SL
also signify 2 or 11 HS.
If 7 SLnotwith badhak - marak, but with negative HS, duality, then
there will be divorce & remarries. If 2 SL promises.

7 SL with its badhak - marak, from 7 HS, then possibility of shod
longevity of partner.
7 SL with 6-10-12 HS, then divorce.
7 SL with 4-6-10-12 HS then disturbance & Dasa with 2-5-7-11
HS, then possibility of short separation. If Dasa strongly with 6-10-12
HS, then possibility of long term separation.
After divorce give advise about re-marries, after start of new
Mahadasa or new sub period which is good signifactor for marriage.
If after divorce balance Mahadasa period is long, then give advise
of re-marries in that sub Dasa which is connected with 2-5-7-11 HS &
give hint about his / her marriage life.
For divorce Dasa period is with Mercury, Jupiter or 7 HS then case
will enter in the court.
When 6-10-12 HS Dasa is running, then don't give advise for
marriage.
5 & 7 HS is not with each other, but 5 HS is with 4-6- 12, then there
will be break in relation.
4-12 HS = The native himself will break relation.
6 HS = The opponent will break relation.
7 HS with 5 HS , but 5 HS not with 7 HS & also not with 4-6- 1 2 HS ,
then relation will not break but can not marry to same person.
In male chart 7 SL with Saturn, then much more age difference
between the native & the opponent. And possibility of partner may elder
than the native.
7 SL with Rahu / Ketu, then the partner will come from out cast or
some abnormal condition in partner's nature, physical structure.
7 SL with Moon, Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Sun then age difference
is normal.
Running Mahadasa of the planet must be signifactor of 2-7-11 HS.

SOURCE FOR MARRIAGE :
2 - Through family.
3 - Neighbour, advertisement, letter, communication,
younger brother/sister.
3&9 - Marriage bureau, journey.
4 - Near to house, mother.
5 - Childhood friendship, sports, picnic, entertainment.
6 - To avoid marriage, maternal uncle / aunt,
through service.
If the native is jailer or doctor then he / she may select partner from
same profession, colleague, career.
7 - Public life, marriage occasion, offer from opponent.
8 - Awkward situation.
9 - Proper planning, advertisement, senior»college mate,
court marriage, father, guru.
10 - Himself find out, work place, nearby work place.
6 & 10 - Through job / business.
11 - Friends, uncle or aunt ( Father's side ),
elder brother / sister.
12 - Travel, unknown person, international travel,
hospital, jail, longjourney.
PARTNER'S LOCATION :
7 SL in angle house, indicates partner will be from same city or
same location.
7 SL with 9-12 HS, indicates partner will be from distance place or
abroad.
7 SL with 3 HS, indicates partner will be from near city or village.
In male chart, 4 SL if with 4-8-12 HS, indicates partner will be
gainfully employed. If with 3-6-1 lHs, indicates partner will be not full
time employment. Part time employment or unemployed.
10 SL with 10-3-5 HS & with also Mercury or Jupiter, then partner
is educated.

In male chart, 8 SL with 2-6-1 1 HS , indicates good dowry & much
more financial support from the partner's family.
8 SL with Jupiter or Mercury - liquid cash, shares.
Venus or Moon - Ornaments, electronics items,
vehicle, luxurious items.
Saturn & Mars - Fixed assets, estate.
In female chart, 8 HS indicates partner's family size, 8 SL with
Jupiter, Moon, Mercury indicates large family. If with Saturn indicates
small family & orthodox.
8 SL also indicates the general tendency of partner's family. If 8 SL
with 2-3-5-7-10-11 HS, indicates partner's family will be co-operative.
If with 6-8-12 HS, indicates disturbance through in-law‘s family
members. If with 6-8-12 HS & female planets indicate disturbance will
be from female members. Same possibility from male planets.
If 7 SL with 3-6-10-1 1 HS , indicates possible separation from family
from career point of view.
If 2 SL with 3-9 HS, indicates the partners will remain separate &
not withjoint family.
TO FIND OUT THE ASC. OR RP OF THE PARTNER :
Suppose 7 SLSun deposited in Taurus sign & Sun's Starlord Moon
is deposited Aries. '
Now possibility of.Leo, Taurus-Libra, Cancer, Aries-Scorpio.
In Leo
In Taurus
In Libra
In Cancer
In Aries
In Scorpio
Venus star.
Sun star, Moon star, Mars star.
Mars star.
No star available
Venus star.
No star available.
There is second way to find out the Asc . or Moon sign of the partner,
through the Dasa. Suppose the native is having Jupiter Dasa & Moon
sub Dasa of the signs of Jupiter, is there Moon star? No. In Moon sign, is

there a Jupiter star? Yes. Partner will have Asc. or Moon in cancer sign
as a RP & Punarvasu star. According to fruitful significator's of 2-7-1 1
& their star & sign combinations.
MATCHING OF HOROSCOPE :
1) Study of individual chart :
a) Longevity,
b) Health (physical & mental),
c) Promise of marriage life,
d) Finance condition
e) Issue
f) Dasa.
2) RP with rectified chart.
3) Mangal Dosh.
4) Position of 7 SL.
Please refer chapter - 4 of Nakshtra Chintan - 1.
COURT CASE
Dasa of 7 HS signifactor or Dasa lord with 7 HS or with Mercury
or Jupiter, then the native will have problem of court.
4 HS indicate for house, 4-7-8 HS indicates for marriage etc.
If 7 SL with 2-3-6-10-11 HS, indicates winning the case & with 58-9-12 HS indicate loss of case.
IN HC :
3 SL with 5-8-12 HS - then change the advocate.
9 SL with 2-6-10-1 1 HS, - then opponent's advocate will help the
native.
10-11 SL with 2-3-6-10-11 HS, - then judgement positive forthe
native.
10-11 SL with 5-8-9-12 HS, - then judgement negative for the native.
10 SL with duality - then case will transfer from one to another court.
7 SL with 3-5-9-11 - then possibility of compromising.
7 HS - Opponent.

3HS - Native's advocate.
9 HS - Opponent's advocate.
10HS - Judge.
COMPETITOR
7 HS indicates competitor.
7 SL with 3-6-10-11 HS, indicate the native will be successful, while
5-8-12 indicate loss.
Same thing for sale & purchase matter. Any matter where
competition is involved.
DOCTOR
RP should be with 1 & 5 HS.
If 7 SL dual & connect with 6-8-12 HS, then change the doctor. It
should not be with Badhak - Marak.
PUBLIC LIFE
1 - Personal.
3 & 5 - Sports, cultural activity, art.
5&9 - Education point, religions.
9&10 - Politics.
7 SL combination with 5-8-12 HS will not give success.
THEFT
7 HS indicates the thief & 7 cusp indicates thief-related matters.
7 SL with :
1 HS - Native & thief know each other.
2 HS - Thief from family members.
3 HS - Younger brother/sister or neighbour persons,
father-in-law.
4 HS - Mother.
5 HS - Children, student, finance.

6 HS - Servant, maternal, uncle's side, pet animal.
7 HS - Business or life partner, competitor.
8 HS - In-law ‘s family members.
9 HS - Father, guru, unknown person.
10 HS - Person in authority, career or any govt, person,
mother-in-law.
11 HS - Friends, elder brother/sister.
12 HS - Enemy, unknown person.
7 SL with duality, then more than one person involved in matter.
1 & 7 SL strongly connected with each other, then the native may
be responsible.
7 SL with 2-8-11 HS , then for taking benefit of insurance .
7 SL with 3-6-9 HS, then thief is away from the city, & with angle
HS then thief is in the same city.
1 SL with 3-8-12 HS, then the person has misplaced the thing some
where, no question of theft.
lfAsc. SL& 11 SL are with 2, 6, J 1 HS indicates recovery.
Theft things related with angle HS then it will get from the nearest
place.
If The Question Is for :
Liquid cash or ornaments - 2 SL with 2-6-11 HS indicates
recovery. At the same time, we have
to see the 6 & 11 SL for recovery.
Documents - 3SLwith6& 11 HS. If connected
with 3-6-11 HS, then recovery possible.
Vehicle - 4-6-11 SL with 2-6-11 HS
recovery is possible.
10 SL with Mars & also with 6-1 1 HS, then police will help in
recovery.

Eighth "House
Eighth house fundamentally signifies native's longevity, insurance,
wealth of partner, mode of death, in-hereditary property, pension,
accidents, operation.
Eighth HS is the most important for ENT, Eye sp., Dentist, Marine
Engineer.
MODE OF DEATH :
8 SL with malefic planets, Herschel, Neptune or with Badhak -
marak then possibility of unnatural death.
8 SL with badhak - marak & 1 HS afflicted then the native have
suicide tendency, but with positive 5-11 HS &duality also then the native
will save, Second time the native will success.
8 SL - With fiery sign - Death from fire.
Earthy sign, Neptune, Rahu, Ketu - Death from poison.
Airy sign, Saturn, Rahu, Mercury - Death from hanging, a high
altitude.
Watery sign, Moon, Venus, Neptune - Death from drowning,
overdose of drugs.
4&6HS
5 HS
HANG:
- Sick & die at home.
- In hospital.
- Accidental death.
- During journey.
- During picnic, entertainment.
- Protect the native ( except char lagna ).
8 SL with badhak - marak, Saturn and Rahu, 12 HS & Jupiter, sun
then the native will hang. ( Jupiter - law. Sun - government ).

ATTACK :
8 SL with badhak - marak. 7 & 8 SL with each other, afflicted then
possibility of attacks. 8 SL with badhak - marak & 7 SL with 8 HS &
positive HS of longevity also then the native will safe & other will die. A
man who died in attacks, his & attacker RP match with badhak - marak
of the person who died.
ACCIDENT :
SSL with Asc.-8-12 HS.
Asc. SL also should be with 8 HS.
8 SL afflicted & 3-4-9 SL also afflicted &with badhak - marak then
possibility of accident during journey & death also. 5-11 HS connection
save the native. ( II HS except char Asc.)
OPERATION :
8 SL with Asc-6-8-12 HS.
RETIREMENT BENEFIT :
8 SL with 2-6-11 HS, then the native will get easily. If 8-12 HS also
connected then after some harassment, native will be benefited.
If 8 SL Duality with 2-6-11 , than adopt Pension, otherwise PP. is
good.
INSURANCE :
8 SL with 2-6-11 HS indicate benefit.
ForShop - 10 SL with 2-6-11 HS.
For Medical - 8 SL with 2-6-11 HS .
For Vehicle - 4 SL with 2-6-11 HS.
WEALTH OF PARTNER :
8 SL if with 5-8-12 HS , then partner is a rich person. If 8 SL with 26-11 HS, then the native will be benefited from partner's wealth.
IN-HEREDITARY PROPERTY :

8 SL with 2-4-6-11 HS & with Mars or Saturn, in period of 4-8-1 1
HS signifactor's Dasa, get fixed property.
8 SL with except than Saturn - Mars & 4 HS if,
Jupiter - Liquid cash.
Mercury - Shares, bonds.
Venus, Moon - Ornaments.
Venus - Luxurious items, vehicles.
Venus in fixed sign - Furniture.
If 8 SL with duality, it indicates that the native will get part of the
property. If with duality & connected to 3-4-10 HS, then the native will
sell property & get money.
8 SL with 4-12 HS, then the native will get full property, but will
have to pay some money to get the property.
8 SL is with 6- 1 1 HS , then the native will get the full in hereditary .
8 SL with Mercury, Jupiter & 7 HS, then the native has to face the
court for legal process to get the inheritance.
8 SL with 5-8-12 HS, then no property. After going for legal process
connection to 5-8-12 HS including 6-1 1 HS, the native may get partial
benefit.

"Ninth "House
Ninth house fundamentally signifies religion, father, guru, long
journey, Siddhi, higher education.
RELIGION :
When 1 SL with 9 HS & vice versa with karaka then the native has
faith.
9 SL with 4-8-12 HS - forbhakti marg.
2- 6- 1 0 HS - for karma marg .
3- 7-11 HS - for reading, preaching.
1-5-9 HS - for meditation, mantra, self-development.
1 & 9 SL with 3-7 HS, then the native demand proof about religion.
9 SL with Saturn - The native will follow family tradition.
Jupiter - The native will give education approach in
religion or with religious institute.
Jupiter, Mercury - The native will leam as well as give religious
preacher/ lectures, pravachan.
Venus - From charity point of view, native will play
musical instruments for charity.
Venus, Saturn - Will go for construction of temple, ashram etc.
CHANGE OF RELIGION :
Due to Rahu & afflicted Jupiter.
GURU:
9 SL with 5-9-10-1 1 HS & with Ketn & Jupiter.
SANYASHI :
A) Asc. SL with Ketu, Saturn & 9 HS indicate spiritual progress. If
it is also with 3-9-12 HS then becomes sanyashi.
B) Asc. SL with Ketu & 9 HS & have good combination of Mars &
Venus, then at home the native will behave like sanyashi.

CRITIC 1ZER :
9 SL signifies 2-6-10 or 3-7-11 HS connected to Mars, Mercury &
Herschel.
FATHER :
9 SL with Badhak - Marak from 9 HS indicates short longevity of
father.
9 SL with 8 & 12 HS indicates not much support from father. If
connected 2-6-7-10-1 1 HS, then frill support from father for career.
If 1 & 9 SL with 4-8 HS & afflicted Sun will spoil the relation with
father.
FORTUNE :
9 SL with 1-2-3-6-10-11 HS indicates early & easy career
development. If with 5-8-12 HS negative for fortune.
YATRA :
LONG JOURNEY :
9 SL with 4-9 HS & also with Mercury, Moon & Jupiter. It indicates
long journey for education purpose.
5 - Entertainment.
9 Religious purpose.
6- 10 Service.
7- 10 Business.
7- 11 Venus- Marriage.
I -• 6 - 8 Health point of view.
8- " 12 Problems during journey..
S1DDHI:
II SL with 5-10-1 1 HS & Saturn, Jupiter, Ketu.
If with 8 HS & Rahu connection for Tantrik.
MANTRA SIDDHI :
5 SLs with 5-10-11 HS & Saturn.

Tenth "House
Tenth house fundamentally signifies status, politics, sale property,
karma etc.
STATUS :
1 & 10 SL with 1-2-3-6-7-10-11 HS & supported by Sun & Jupiter
indicates good status.
10 SL with 8-12 HS - then chances of raid, set back in career.
10 SL with 5-9-12 HS - then always changes in career.
10 SL with 5-9-12-8 HS- then dismissal from job. But if 10 SL with
5-9-6-11 HS then suspension from job
sometime, but will be reinstated
with full benefits.
If 10 SL with 6-11-10 HS & also with fixed or earthy sign & also
with Saturn then the native will have a steady job.
1 SL with 5-9-3 HS indicates the native not interested in any activity.
SL of 1-11-10-6 HS strongly with 3-6-10-11 HS then the native
will achieve success in life.
SALE OF PROPERTY :
10 SL with 3-5-10 HS the native will able to sell property. If 10 SL
with 3-5-10 & 7 HS also then the native will face some litigation while
selling property.
10 SL with 2-6-11 HS then profit from sale of property. For
reinvestment check 12 SL. If 12 SLis with 2-6-1 1 then benefit & with 58-12 indicates loss.
10 SL with 8-12 HS then loss.
If 10 SL with 6-2-1 1 HS as well as 5-8-12 HS then the native will
invest in property or leave the property without benefit.

POLITICS :
1 SL with 3-7-10 HS Mars, Sun & Jupiter, Mercury, it indicates
interest in politics.
10 SL with 9-10-1 1 HS - then the native enter in the politics.
10 SL with Sun - The native will reach higher post in
politics e. g. Minister, CM, PM etc.
Mars - Will reach higher position in politics
through military / police.
Jupiter - Through religion, law, finance etc.
Saturn - Through trust.
Mercury, Venus, Moon - The native will be at corporate
level only i.e. MLA.
If 10 SL with 5-8-12 HS then failure in politics.
If 10 SL with 9-10-1 1 as well as 5-8-12 HS also then possibility of
ups & downs in politics.
CAREER :

Eleventh "House
Eleventh house fundamentally signifies success in life. Elder brother
/ sister, friends, savings, social circle, paternal uncles.
SUCCESS :
I & 11 SL with each other then life will succeed & positive houses,
then signifies success in early life.
II SL with 4-5-8- 1 2 - HS then will not succeed in materialistic life.
1 SL with 3-6-10 HS indicates get success through efforts.
I SL with 5-8-12 HS & get support from 11 HS then the native
success through wrong way.
I I SL with 2-4-6- 1 1 HS then get support from elder brother / sister.
If with 2-3-6-10-1 1 HS get support from friends & society. And with 58-12 not get support, loss in dealing, on wrong way through friend circle.
IN IIC :
1 1 HS indicates fulfillment of the desire of person or not.
Positive HS for Career - 6-10-11 HS.
Marriage - 2-7- 11 HS.
Education - 4-6-9-11 HS.
In He, 11 SL should signifies positive HS. of question related HS,
then it indicates positive answer for He.
RELATION WITH PUBLIC LIFE :
If with 2 HS
9 HS
5 HS
HS then public life is good.
Through finance.
Through religion, education & ambassador.
Social club, trust.
Through business, karma.

FRIEND / SOCIAL CIRCLE :
1 SL & 1 1 are connected with each other or 1 1 SL with 2-3-10-11
HS, then good support from friends. If with 8-12 HS then loss from
friends.
If 1 1 SL with Mercury / J upiter & 4-9 HS , then good support from
friends in education.
II SL with Venus, Mars & Moon & 3-5 HS, then friend circle only
for picnic or enjoyment.
If 1 1 SLwith 3-7-1 1 HS then social relation with friends & with 26-10-11 HS, then get support in career.
SAVINGS :
2 & 11 SLwith 2-6-11 HS indicates the native have good savings.
But if with 5-8-12 HS indicates negative result.

Twelfth "House
Twelfth house fundamentally signifies investment, abroad, prison,
deep occultism, hospital, bhoga - yoga, blame, misfortune, defect in organ.
INVESTMENT :
1 2 SL with 2-6-11 HS indicates benefit, but with 5-8-12 HS indicates
loss.
ABROAD :
12 HS or 12 SL with fixed sign 3-9-12 & if 4 HS afflicted, then
permanent will stay at abroad. If with 11-3-9 HS, then return to home.
12 HS in fixed sign, then permanent stay, cardinal sign - 1st time &
dual sign - frequently travelling.
12 SLis with- 7 HS
4-9HS
5 HS
For marriage purpose / business.
Educational.
Entertainment / child.
Career.
Health.
Afflicted Jupiter & 3-8-12 HS - Run away from country to protect
himself from legal procedure.
PRISON :
If 12 SL with Rahu & 3-8-12 HS then possibility of prison.
If 12 HS SL with fixed sign indicates long term & other sign for
short term.
If 12 SL with 7-10 HS
2-8HS
Indicates bail.
For politics & business.
For financial.
For criminal.

"Keys "For Quick "Prediction
1 . Longevity
2. Accident
3. Health
4. Missing Person
Missing thing
5. Financial loss
6. Table talk
7. Lottery
8. News
9. Expected News
Badhak Maraka, K - Saturn.
K - Mars, Saturn, Rahu-Ketu.
K - Sun, Moon.
C - Short period,
F - = Long period, M - More than
K - Jupiter.
MH - 3, Sun, Moon, Venus, Jupiter -
True,
Mars - Saturn - Joke, Uncompleted,
Mercury - False.

K - Mercury.
10. Contract
11. Meeting
12. Editor
14. Agency
15. Vehicle
16. Property Mortgage -
17. Education
Scholarship
Education In Abroad -
18. House
19.1ssue
K - Mercury. Moon, MH - 11, PH - 3, 10,
MH-3 , PH - 11, K - Mercury.
MH - 3, PH - 1 1 . K - Mercury - Saturn.
MH - 3, PH- 11. K-Mercury.
K - Venus. C & M Sign.
MH - 4, PH - 6, NH - Fixed sign.
K - Mercury, Jupiter.
3, 8, 12, K - Mars, Saturn.
K - Saturn. *
Barren Sign - 1, 3, 5, 6 sign.
Semi barren sign - 9, 10, 11.
Fertile sign - 4, 8, 12.

28. Business
29. Service + Business
30. Politics
31. Fame & Progress
32. Ticket
33. Advertise
34. Abroad
35. Jail
36. Investment
K-Jupiter- Mercury.
Second Marriage - MH - 2, PH - 2, 11.
K - Jupiter, Mars.
Saturn, Mercury.(4-8-ll - Good for
retail Shop, not for wholesale).
Business loss - MH - 7, NH - 8, 12.
Partnership -MH- 7, PH -5, 11,
K-Sun, Mars, Jupiter & SAturn.
K-Sun.
MH-ll.PH-3.
9,3- Good response.
K - Moon, Mercury & Jupiter.
