READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_k_p_basics_of_nakshatra_padhathi_mk_viswanath.json
Dataset number: 229 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 279,471 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_K.P._Basics of nakshatra padhathi_MK Viswanath
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_K.P._Basics of nakshatra padhathi_MK Viswanath
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 294
  • total_words: 50609
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.93
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Basics of Nakshatra
Pad hath i
(Marriage, Profession & Health)
Author:
MK Viswanath
Jyothisha Visharadha
(Editor - ASTROVISION E-Journal)

OM UCHISHTA MAHA GANAPATHEYA NAMAH
Esteemed Readers
I am extremely thankful to my
preceptors who had taught me the
basic anatomy of Astrology, a divine
science.
I had a flair for writing from
childhood, but probably was not
encouraged enough to continue the
writings.
Belonging to the Nair community
of Kerala, traditionally the community
torch-bearers did not have much
background in the Astrological field in the past; nor anyone in my
ancestor's family ever had practiced it.
But I had somehow got the notion of learning Astrology and
offering predictions to people around me. In the course of same, I
had learned Vedic and KP Astrology, besides, the Prashna "Kavadi"
Shastra of Kerala.
At this juncture, expressing the gratitude, I should thank one
and all, blessings of my parents, M.K Nair and Smt, K Janakyamma,
for this important event, and also the support rendered to me by
all in order to complete compilation of this wonderful and divine
subject.
While always at the feet to my gurus, Mr. Venugopal Sarma,
Mr. K Babu Rao, Mr. PVK Punneswara Rao and Mr. Kameshwara
Prasad, I acknowledge the consideration given to me by Mr. Rajendra
Nimje, IAS, and fondly remember the cordial association with KP
International Astro Forum at Hyderabad.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
I sincerely thank my Astro-friends Mrs. Paripati Vijaya Reddy,
Mr. Kanak Bosmia, Mr. R. Balaji, Mr. OVN Murthy and Mr. VGR Pavan,
who have always encouraged me in my astrological pursuits.
The support and the encouraging words from Mrs. Shwetha
Chary from USA are praiseworthy.
The encouragement from Dr. N.S. Pillai, a Homoeopathic Doctor
and also an Astro researcher, is worth noting. I do acknowledge
the guidance, confidence and encouragement instilled into me
during the last two decades by my father-in-law, Mr. P. Narayanan
Nair, who also had initiated me into the world of spiritualism and
Occult Sciences.
Finally, I thank my elder brothers, MK Subhash Chandran, PK
Chandran and PK Madhusudanan who have helped me in many
ways in my life and my sisters, MK Shanta, PK Subhadra and MK
Sujatha who always have special bonding, care and attention toward
me. My wife P. Sreekala and my sons Vishnu V. Nair and Vinayak V.
Nair have always supported and assisted me in my humble
endeavours.
Considering myself always as a student; at the lotus feet of
Uchishta Mahaganapthi and Gurujans.
Yours truly
MK VISWANATH

Index
S. Description P
No. No.
Preface .vii
1. Stellar System in Astrology 1
2. Significations of Nodes 5
3. Marriage and Dasha Vidhana Ponthanam .8
4. Other Miscellaneous Points 11
5. Placement of Stars in Rashi Chakra or Zodiac Wheel 13
6. Dasha Vidhana Ponthanam 15
Table of Stars, Star Lords, Yoni, Gana, Nadi & Rajju 17
Dina Ponthanam 18
Eka Nakshatra Ponthanam 19
Gana Ponthanam 20
Rashi Ponthanam 22
Graha Maitri Ponthanam 22
Stree Dirgham 23
Mahendram i 25
Graha Maitri 25
Vedha 26
Rajju 26
Yoni Porutham 28
Nadi Porutham 29
Vashya

x Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
S. Description P
No. No.
7. Vadha Vainashika Dosha .31
8. Dasha Sandhi 33
9. Matching Points for Stars 34
10. Marriage Matching .37
11. Sahams or Sensitive Points .41
12. Timing of The Marriage .47
13. Kuja (Sevai) Dosha or Manglik. .52
14. Jupiter, Rahu and Saturn .62
15. 7th Lord With 6/8/12 Connection 65
16. Venus Position and Ketu Connection 67
17. Longevity 69
18. Papa Kartari Yoga 84
19. Divorce and Dual Marriage 85
20. Unconventional Marriages 104
21. Love Marriage 120
22. Multiple Marriages 128
23. Extra Marital Affairs 144
24. Denial of Marriage 153
25. Children or Progeny. 165
26. Delay in Birth of Children 175
27. Absence of Progeny. 178
28. Death of Spouse 185
29. Sanyasa Yogam or Ascetic 192
30. Wealth or Dhana Yoga 198
31 . Charity or Spendthrift 213

Index xi
S. Description P
No. No.
32. Profession 218
33. Disease & Illness 235
34. Lunacy and Mental Illness 247
35. Blindness 254
36. Alcoholism by Spouse 258
37. Misfortunes 262
38. Imprisonment or Jail Yoga 275
39. General Observations 281
40. Marriage Matching 288

Stellar System in Astrology
The Stellar or nakshatra padhathi is based on an astrological
practice, which advocates that a planet placed in a particular star
will give the result of the star lord of that star.
For example, if Venus is placed in Jupiter's any of the stars
such as Punarvasu or Visakha or Purva Bhadrapada, Venus will
give the result of Jupiter. This applies to both in natal or in transit
chart.
As regards the stars and their lords, please browse through
the following table, which is traditionally called Navakam:
In the above table, all the 27 stars have been illustrated. They
have been divided into 9 divisions based upon the star lords. Stars
Aswini, Makha and Moola are ruled by Ketu, while Bharani, Purva
Phalunr and Purva Ashada are ruled by Venus. The sequence
continues in this fashion as per the table above.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Any planet posited in any of the stars of Venus will give the
result of Venus. Same way, other stars shall be taken.
Now just see below horoscope chart for the native born on 27
Aug 1980 at 8-30 a.m., Hyderabad, India: (Chart No. 1)
From the charts above, the chart at left is South Indian chart,
which should be counted clockwise, while the chart at the right
side is North Indian diamond chart, which should be counted anticlock wise.
It is seen from the above example chart that Jupiter is placed
in the 12th house at 23 deg. 33 min. in Leo and is posited in the
star Purvaa Phalguni. Purva Phalguni is ruled by Venus.
Here Jupiter is lord of Sagittarius and Pisces and hence becomes
lords of 04th and 07th house. Jupiter is posited in 12th house in
Venus star. Hence Jupiter becomes an agent of Venus. Venus is
lord of 02, 09 and occupant of 10th house.
Hence Jupiter will give result of 04, 07, 12, IQ, 02, 09 houses.
It is also seen that Mars is posited in Libra at 05 deg. 09 min.
in Chitra star ruled by Mars himself. When counted from Asc, Mars
becomes lord of 03 and 08 and occupant of 02nd house. Mars is in
own star. Hence Mars will give the results of 03, 08, and 02nd
houses.

Chapter 01: Stellar System in Astrology
Given below is a signification table for the above chart:
SL=Sign lord, PSSL=Planets posited in starofsign lord, OCC=Occupant,
PSO=Planets posited in star of occupant, Asp=Aspect on house,
Asp=Aspect on planet; Conj=Conjoined with.
Explaining the above table, 1 st house (lagna) falls in Virgo.
Hence Sign lord (SL) is Mercury. Stars ruled by Mercury are Aslesha,
Jyeshta and Revati. Only Rahu is posited in Aslesha star. Hence
Rahu is placed in column "PSSL" against first house. The occupant
of 1 st house is Saturn. Hence Saturn is placed in column "OCC"
against first house. Stars ruled by Saturn are Pushya, Anurada and
Uthara Bhadra. There are no planets in Saturn's stars. Hence column
"PSO" is blank against first house. Same way, the signification chart
has to be filled for other houses.
In other words, house-wise planetary signification is given
below:
Sun signifies 12, Ke» 05
Mar signifies 03, 08, 02, Ma»

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Heaith)
These are some of the basic principles of Stellar System.

Significations of Nodes
There is no celestial body called Rahu and Ketu. In Astrology,
they are called shadowy planets. The following diagram may be
observed, which illustrate as to how Rahu and Ketu are defined:
Earth revolves around Sun. Moon, being a satellite of Earth,
revolves around Earth. When the apparent paths of Earth and Moon
touch, the Nodes are created.
The Nodes are Rahu and Ketu, who are considered North Node
and South Node respectively will, function as agents of other planets.
The Nodes will give the result as stated below in the following
order:
1 ) Planets conjoined with .
2) Planets aspected by.
3) Lord of the star in which Nodes are posited.
4) Finally, the result of the sign lord in which Nodes are posited.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Let us see the following example (Chart No. 2):
Rahu (North Node)
In the reference chart under consideration, Asc is located in
Aries. Hence the significations Rahu (North Node) shall be as follows:
a) Rahu is conjoined with Moon.
b) Rahu is posited at 25 deg. 33 Min. in Sagittarius, which
corresponds with Purva Ashada star, which is ruled by Venus.
c) Rahu (North Node) is posited in Sagittarius, which becomes
09th house when counted from Asc.
d) Rahu is posited in the sign of Jupiter and hence represents
Jupiter.
e) No planet aspects Rahu.
Hence the significations of Rahu are deciphered from the above
as follows:
a) Rahu is conjoined with Moon. Moon is lord of 04, posited in 09
and is in the star of Uthara Ashada, ruled by Sun. Sun is lord
of 05, is posited in 1 0th house and is in the star of Mars
(Dhanishta). Hence Sun will also signify 01, 04, and 08 houses.
b) Rahu signifies Venus, who is lord of 2 and 7 and is posited in
1 1th house. Venus is in the star of Mars (Dhanishta). Hence
Rahu will also give result of 01 , 04, and 8.

Chapter 02: Significations of Nodes
c) Rahu signifies 09th house. 9th house from Aries (Sagittarius) is
ruled by Jupiter. Jupiter is lord of 09 and 12 and is posited in
the star of Rahu in 1 1 th house.
Culminating, Rahu will give result of 01 , 02, 04, 05, 07, 08, 09,
10, 11 and 12 houses as per the example chart.
Ketu (South Node)
In the reference chart under consideration, Asc is located in
Aries. Hence the significations Ketu (South Node) shall be as follows:
a) Ketu is not is conjoined with any planet.
b) Jupiter (by 5* aspect) and Saturn (by 1 0th aspect) aspect Ketu.
c) Ketu is posited at 25 deg. 33 Min. in Gemini, which corresponds
with Punarvasu star ruled by Jupiter.
d) Ketu (South Node) is posited in Gemini, which becomes 03rd
house when counted from Asc.
e) Ketu is posited in the sign of Mercury 'and hence represents
Mercury.
Hence the significations of Ketu are derived from the above as
follows:
a) Ketu is aspected by Jupiter. Jupiter is lord of 09, 12 and is
posited in Aquarius, which becomes 11th house. Jupiter is
posited in Rahu star.
b) Ketu is also aspected by Saturn, who signifies 10, 1 1 06. Saturn
is in the star of Moon, who signifies 04 and 09.
c) Ketu signifies 03rd house. 03rd house from Aries is Gemini,
which is ruled by Mercury. Mercury is lord of 03 and 06 and is
posited in the star of Sun in 10th house. Sun is lord of 5 and is.
in 10th house. Hence Ketu will give result of 03, 05, 06, 10,
and 1 1 th houses.
Culminating, Ketu will give result of 03, 04, 05, 06, 09, 10, 11
and 12 houses as per the example chart.

Marriage and Dasha Vidhana
Ponthanam
From the period of ancient civilization, there are eight types of
marriages known to humans from time to time, viz:—
1 Gandarva vivaha — Love marriage.
2 Prajapathya vivaha — Requesting girl's father for consent.
3 Daiva vivaha — Girl's father donating girl to purohita
as dakshina for performing yagna.
4 Brahma vivaha — Girl's father inviting for daughter's
marriage with all religious
ceremonies. (The best one).
5 Harsha vivaha — Marriage by donating cows to girl's
father.
6 Asura vivaha — - Purchasing the girl and marry.
7 Rakshasa vivaha — - Kidnapping and marrying.
8 Paisachika vivaha — Rape and marry.
From the various types of marriages practiced right from the
ancient times, some of the marriages are still prevalent in many
parts of the world.
While the various types of marriage are acquainted with,
following are the important points to be considered for marriage
matching in the traditional system, which were advocated by the
ancient sages.
Lagna — Asc, which is referred to the time of
birth, signifies self.

Chapter 03: Marriage and Dasha Vidhana Ponthanam

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Charity or Overspending It needs to be seen whether the
person is charity oriented or
overspending type.
Once the Astrologer has checked all these points in the chart
of the girl and boy, and satisfied with them, he / she could clear it
for marriage.

Other Miscellaneous Points
Vishakanya Yoga
There is another aspect called Visha kanya yoga for girls born
with the following combinations;
1 ) On a Sunday and in Satabhisha star on a Dwadashi thithi .
2) On a Sunday and in Krutika star on a Dwadashi
3) On a Tuesday and in Visahka star on a Sapthami
4) On a Saturday and in Aslesha star on a Dwithiya
5) Or having Benefic and malefic in Asc.
6) Or having two malefics in 6th house.
7) Or Sun in 5th and Saturn in Asc and Mars in 9th house.
It is suggested to avoid marrying such girls, because of the
disturbance and violence resulting in unhappy marital life is
expected, unless the above dosha is nullified when 7th lord is a
powerful benefic and posited in 7th house and 7th house if not
afflicted and 6th lord should not become more powerful than 7th
lord.
Maha Nakshatra
Following are the maha nakshtras either for girl or boy. The
ancients said that generally no matching is required for these stars,
which are»Mrigashira, Makha, Swati, Anuradha, Uthara, Hasta,
Uthara ashada, Uthara Bhadrapada

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Ganda Nakshatras
Following are considered Ganda Nakshtras our troublesome
stars:—
Moola
Aslesha
Jyeshta 1 pada
Visakha
Other Factors
There are other matters which are required to be considered:—
a) Whether the family is financially sound or not.
b) What respect the family gets in the society.
c) Is there any mentally retarded person in the family or not.
d) It is also required to check the diseases aspect such as Heart
diseases, Cancer, Diabetes, etc., besides one's mental condition.
e) In some communities marriage between same gothram is not
allowed.
f) Is the spouse a physically handicapped person or not?
g) Is the spouse is having problem of night blindness?
h) How is the character of the prospective spouse as to whether
the person is habit of intoxication, or dual marriage, multiple
marriage, or chart indicates any mishaps for him or her, or
how is his / her profession or health condition, etc. Do we
need to check these aspects or not?
— bad for Father in law. (if Ketu is well
placed then it is good).
— bad for Mother in Law (If Mars is well
placed then, it could be cleared).
— bad - for husband's elder brother.
— Bad — for husband's younger
brother.

Placement of Nakshtras in
Rashi Chakra
The ancients have selected 27 important stars and they are
spread in all the 12 signs of the zodiac, which are also called solar
mansions. The longitude of each star is 13 deg. 20 min. each.
Hence 13-20 x 27 = 360 deg. totally forms the entire zodiac.
The placement of all the 27 nakshatras and its padams (charan)
are as per the chakra given below:

Basics oINakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
One nakshatra is divided into 4 parts, which are called padams
(charan). There are 12 Rashis in the Zodiac and one rashi each has
got 9 nakshatra padams, i.e., 2 1A stars form one sign. It is seen
from the above that Ashwini 1,2, 3, 4 padams, Bharani 1,2, 3, 4
padams and Kruthika 1 padam forms Aries (Mesham) = total 9
padams, which is 2 V4 stars.
Kruthika 2,3,4 padams, Rohini 1,2, 3, 4 padams and Mrigashira
1,2 padams form (Taurus) Vrishabham = total 9 padams (2 14
stars). Mrigashira 3,4 padams, Arudra 1,2, 3, 4 and Punarvasu 1,2,3
padams form Gemini. Punarvasu 4th pada, Pushya 1 ,2,3,4 padams
and Aslesha 1 ,2,3,4 padams form Cancer.
Stars in other Rashis may be continued similarly as per the
chart given above.
The following table articulately states about the longitude of
each nakshatra in the zodiac in degrees and minutes:
ARI=Aiies, TAU=Taurus, GEM=Gamini, CAN=Cancsr, LEO=leo,VlR=Virgo,UB=Libra, SC0= Scorpio, SAG= Sagittarius,
CAP=Capricorn, AQU=Aquarius, PIS=Piscas.

Dasha Vidhana Ponthanam
The ponthanam / porutham is an alignment between two
particular natives i.e., a boy and a girl. Here the astrologer is trying
to see if there are alignments between 12 important and particular
points between the stars of the girl and boy, which were dealt by
the Indian ancients, although a total of 20 important alignments
are dealt with.
The 12 important points are:—

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Although, there are twenty points which are to be checked
when marriage compatibility is being checked; normally 10 important
points are only verified.
The general points granted in South India are 36 points,
especially in Andhra Pradesh, etc. In Muhurta Chintamani there
are 36 points totally given. In places like Tamil Nadu there are total
of 50 points allocated. In Kerala they take only 10 points for the
total 10 kootas, and eliminated Nadi and Varna kootas. If 50% of
the above marks are achieved, then it is found to be in agreement
and Astrologer could give go-ahead signal as far as the stars are
concerned.
In Ancient times, out of the 4 sections of the society such as
Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vysya, and Shurdra importance given to the
kootas for them as follows:—
Brahmins — Dina or tara is important.
Kshatriya — Ganam is important.
Vysya — Rashi is important.
Shudra — Yoni is important.
The Rajju is taken as very important for all the so-called castes
and hence apart from the above important porutham, Rajju is also
taken.
Note: The system of caste segregation is done away
with in modern times, and is not being attached
importance. In some parts of India, the consultants do give
importantce to this.

Chapter 06: Dasha Vidhana Ponthanam
Table of Stars, Star Lords, Yoni, Gana, Nadi &
Rajju
Fa easy reference, the following table is illustrated below,
which gives all the 27 stars and the corresponding Yoni, Gana,
Nadi, and Rajju allocated to them.
Star Star
No. lord
Horse (M)
Goat (F)
Snake (M)
Snake (
Aadhi (1) Paada
Madhya (2) I Ooru
Rakshasa I Anthiya (3) Naabhi
Manushya I Anthiya (3) Kanta
Madhya (2)[ Siro
Bull (M)
Buffallo(M)
Tiger (M)
Jupiter I Tiger (F)
Saturn | Deer (F)
Mercury Deer (M)
Aadhi (1) Naat
Aadhi (1) I Kant;
Rakshasa | Madhya (2) | Siro
Rakshasa I Anthya (3) I Naabhi
Deva | Madhya (2) | Ooru
Rakshasa | Aadhi (1) I Paada
Paada
Rakshasa
wmrnsummmwmimi
Manushya Anthya (3) I Naabhi
Jupiter I Lion (M)
Saturn | Cow (F)
Manushya
Mercury Elephant(F) Deva Anthya (3) I Paada
(F) = female yoni, (M) = Male yoni.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Dina Ponthanam
Dina or tara means the star of the native. The astrologer needs
to check if there is agreement between the stars of the boy and
girl.
The procedure is that the astrologer should count from the
star of the girl up to and including the star of the boy.
For example, if the star of the girl is Aswini and star of boy is
Rohini, count from Aswini upto Rohini. The result is 4, in which
case dina porutham is available.
If the boy's star falls beyond 9 stars from girl’s star, (e.g, girl's
star is Aswini and boy's star is Anuradha), in that case count from
Aswini upto Anuradha, the result may be divided by 9. If the
remainder is 4, 6, 9 or 2, 8, then accept it. If the remainder is 3, 5,
or 7, then there is no dina porutham.
If the result is: 4, 6 or 9, then it is best. If the result is: 2, 8, it
is middling. If the result is 3, 5or 7, then there is no dina ponthanam.
This is because of:
If the boy's star happens to be the 3rd star from girl, reject if it
is first pada and Astrologer can take 2, 3 and 4th padas.

Chapter 06: Dasha Vidhana Ponthanam
Eka Nakshatra Porutham
The meaning of Ekanakshatra is one star. Suppose the star or
janma nakshatra of the boy and girl is one, then it is called Eka
Nakshatra.
Can eka nakshatra be matched?
Ancients advocate that Astrologers can match the following
Eka Nakshatras:
a) Sun stars such as Kruthika, Uthara, and Uthara Ashada
b) Mars Stars such as Mrigashira, Chitta (Chitra) and Dhanishta.
c) Venus star Purva Ashada.
d) Jupiter star Punarvasu.
e) Moon star Hasta.
f) Saturn star Anuradha.
g) Mercury star Jyeshta.
The following eight Eka nakshatras are not specifically
considered for matching:—
1) Bharani, (2) Aslesha, (3) Swati, (4) Jyeshta, (5) Moola, (6)
Dhanishta, (7) Satabhisha (8) Puiva Bhadra.
If the stars are same for both boy and girl, but if they are
falling in different signs, the matching can be done. When counted
from girl's star upto boy's star, if the pada is 88th one, then it is not
suitable, since it is falling in 6 / 8 rashis.
In Eka Nakshatra porutham (alignment), the pada of the star
of boy should be greater than that of girl's. But the ancients also
say that the rest of the stars are not considered for Eka Nakshatra
porutham. If the pada and star of both boy and girl are same, then
matching cannot be done.
However, there are different opinions among authors with
regard to eka nakshatra porutham.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi ( Marriage , Profession & Health)
Some consider the transit of Saturn over natal Moon as very
important and during this period of 7Vz years natives face some
unknown problems.
When transit Saturn reaches the 1 2* sign from natal Moon
(Janma rashi), the saade saath commences and it will be continued
for 7Vi years until Saturn reaches 03rd house from Moon.
Hence some Astrologers do not consider matching between
boy and girl of same star or same rashi.
Gana Ponthanam
There are three gana such as Deva gana, Manushya gana and
Rakshasa (Asura) gana.
1 . Deva Gana
Persons with Deva gana are supposed to be well behaved,
affectionate, soft and good natured with good character and
high values.
2. Manusha Gana
Persons of manushya gana shall be said to have all the good
and bad qualities of humans. Their behaviour is good but they
also tend to show their anger, enmity at times.
3. Rakshas Ganam
Persons of Rakshsa gana shall be said to have behavior, nature,
and character to be aggressive, rude and rough.
It is difficult for them to co-operate with others. They can
upset others by their unpleasant behavior and talk. Many times
they will think they are right and others are wrong. But they are
also good sometimes.
Stars are classified into three different ganas. The gana of the
boy and girl should be same. But in some cases, this is not achieved.
The Ganas allocated^ each star is given in the tabular form
in the beginning. However, for the convenience of the readers, it is
repeated below:—

Chapter 06: Dasha Vidhana Ponthanam 21
Hence if both are Deva or Manushya Gana they agree for an
alignment. In case the gana of the girl is Deva and that of the boy
is Manushya it agrees as secondary. If both are of Rakshasa they
do not agree. This agreement confers general happiness of marital
life.
If the stars are beyond 14, then Rakshasa and Manushya can
be matched. Matching between Deva gana and Rakshasa gana, is
not at all good.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Rashi Ponthanam
The sign occupied by Moon is called Janma Rashi or Moon
sign. The alignment between the Moon's position between the boy
and girl is a mandatory point, which is called Rashi Porutham.
The procedure is that counting is to be done from the girl's
Moon sign upto and including the boy's Moon sign, and if the result
is:
2) - It is death and cannot be matched.
3) - It is misery and sorrow.
4) - It is poverty.
5) - It is widowhood.
6) - It is loss of children.
7) - It is prosperity and long life.
8) - It is many a children.
9) - It provides immunity from widowhood.
10) - It is wealth.
11) - It is happiness.
12) - It is long life.
The best position is 7 / 7, which is called Samasapthama, i.e.,
from Aries to Libra or from Aquarius to Leo, etc.
6 / 8 is called Shashtashtakam i.e., when counted from the
girl’s janma rashi upto boy's janma rashi, if it is 6, then when
counted from boy's to that of girl's rashi, then it is 8. For example,
from Taurus to Libra is 6th sign and from Libra to Taurus is 8th sign.
The general concept is that 6/8 should not be matched. But
in practical there are no problems if 6 / 8 rashis are matched.
Graha Maitri Ponthanam
As far as the graham maitri is concerned, it is nothing but the
relationship between the planets. The relationship such as friends,
neutrals, enemies etc. are given via table below:—

Chapter 06 Dasha Vidhana Ponthanam
From the above, you will observe that no planet treats both
Jupiter and Mars as enemy.
However, it is felt that there are lesser significations for the
above aspect in a natal chart, while applying Stellar System, since
the planet will more predominantly give the result of the star lord
of the star in which it is posited.
Stree Dirgham
Many people mistake this particular point "Stree Dirgham" as
the longevity of the spouse.
Stree dirgham is nothing but, the distance of stars by number
from that of girl to that of boy.
Ancients proclaim that sthree dirgham shall be good, if the
star of boy from the star of the girl is beyond 13 stars. In such
cases it is treated as having sthree dirgha. Let us see an example:
The girl's chart (No. 3) is given below:

24 Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
The girl is born on 27 Oct 1980 at 22-42 hours at Hyderabad,
India. She is born on Mrigashira star 3rd pada in Gemini.
The boy's chart No.4 is as follows:
In the chart of the boy, born on 12 Aug 1976 at 12-52 pm
Near Kottayam, Kerala, star is Purva Bhadrapada 02nd pada in
Aquarius sign.
Now, in order to find the sthree dirgha, students may count
from Mrigashira upto Purva Bhadrapada. It is 21st star. Hence the
star of the boy is beyond 1 3, the Stree Dirgha point is achieved.

Chapter 06: Dasha Vidhana Ponthanam
Mahendram
In Astrology, Kendra means quadrants, which are the houses
1, 4, 7, and 10. Mahendram means maha kendram. Maha means
great.
Counting is from the girl's star upto and including boy's star. If
the boy comes as 1,4, 7, 10, 13, 16, 22, 26 they agree for
Mahendram porutham.
For example, if the girl' star is Rohini and boy's star is Uthara,
count from Rohini upto and including Uthara. Uthara shall be the
9th star from Rohini. Hence in this case Mahendra Porutham is not
achieved.
Suppose the girl's star is Mrigashira and the boy's star is Makha,
count from Mrigashira upto and including Makha. The result is 7,
which has achieved Mahendram.
It is advocated by Ancients that Mahendra porutham confers
wealth and children for the couple.
Graha Maitri
The Jama Rasi or Moon sign for both the girl and boy should
be agreeing to each other. This confers mutual affection between

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
If the girl's janma rashi is Cancer, agreeable boy's chart for
Graha Maitri are Sagittarius and Scorpio.
Vedha
Vedha means affliction. This koota agreement wards off all
evils and pit-falls in marital life. A happy and prosperous married
life is assured.
Certain stars are mutually anti or opposite to each other. The
star of boy and girl should not be mutually anti to each other. They
are as follow:
From the remaining stars, Mrugashira, Chitra and Dhanishta
are mutually vedha to each other. This vedha agreement is very
important like Rajju agreement. Happiness cannot be obtained if
they are in Vedha.
Exception: If guru balam is available for star or star lord, then
it can be matched.
Rajju
All the 27 stars have been classified into 5 types of Rajju.
Rajju bestows on the girl living happily with the husband for
the long time. It is considered as the most important of the ten

Chapter 06: Dasha Vidhana Ponthanam
kootas as it ensures a long life for the husband. The table below
shows the different Rajjus allocated to the stars:
Another method of seeing the Rajju allocated to each star is
as follows:—
From Aswini to Rohini they are arohana Rajjus and from Arudra
to Aslesha, they are Avarohana Rajjus. For example Kruthika is
Arohana Nabhi Rajju while Punarvasu is Avarohana Nabhi Rajju.
Fa other stars the diagram will be similar from Makha to Jyeshta
and from Moola to Revathi. All the Mars owned stars such as
Mrigashira, Chitta and Dhanishta are always Siro Rajju only, and
they are not classified either as Arohana or Avarohana.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
If both the stars of the boy and girl fall in the same portion as
foot or head or neck etc. there is no agreement (Rajjus of the boy
and girl should be different from each other). If they happen to be
in the same line as head, the husband will die, if in the neck, the
wife will meet with death, if in the middle loss of children, if under
thigh extreme poverty and if under foot pitiable wanderings. This
is a very important agreement.
Yoni Porutham
The yoni allocated to each star is given above in the beginning.
If the yoni of the boy and girl is same, then it can be matched.
Bhinna or different yoni is also could be matched.
The table of stars and their yoni are given below:
Stars
No.
Ashwini
Bharani
Kruthika
Rohini
Arudra
Punarvasu
Pushyami
Aslesha
Makha
Pubba
Uthara
Hasta
Chitra
Swati
Visakha
Anuradha
Star
lord
Ketu
Venus
Sun
Moon
Mars
Rahu
Jupiter
Saturn
Mercury
Ketu
Venus
Sun
Moon
Mars
Rahu
Deer (F)
Saturn
Deer (F)

Chapter 06: Dasha Vidhana Ponthanam
Note: M=Maleyoni, F=Femaleyoni.
No matching is allowed between Shatru or enemy yoni.
In these cases the yoni porutham is not available.
Nadi Porutham
Nadi, which means pulse, is classified with reference to the 27
stars into 3 types such as Aadhi nadi, Madhyama Nadi and Anthya
nadi.
The nadi allocated to each star is given above in the tablular
form in the beginning. For convenience of the readers the nadi
allocated to each star is once again given below:— •

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession <&. Health )
If the star of both boy and girl falls in different Nadi, then
there is nadi porutham. For Example: Aswini star is Aadhi nadi
whereas Rohini is Anthya nadi. Hence Nadi porutham is achieved
between the stars Aswini and Rohini.
Vashya
The table below shows the Rashis and the vashya rashis:—
For example, for a person born in Mesha (Aries) rashi, the
vashya rashi are Leo and Scorpio.
Similarly, for a person born in Leo sign (Simha), Libra shall be
the vashya rashi.

Vadha Vainashika Dosha
Vadha Vainashika dosha is considered in some parts of India
only. When counted from girl's star upto and including boy's star, if
the result is 7, then it is said to have vadha vainashika dosha. For
example, if the girls star is Anurada and if the boy's star is Dhanishta,
count from Anuradha upto and including Dhanishta. The result is
7. When counted in reverse order i.e., from Dhanishta upto Anuradha
the result is 22, which is said to have Vadha Vainashika dosha.
Hence 07 / 22 stars alignment is acceptable.
Readers may see the chart below which are having 7/22
result and confirms vadha vainashika dosha:—

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)

Dasha Sandhi
Dasha sandhi indicates end of a particular planetary operating
period and beginning of a new operating period at one point of
time in one's life.
If such a situation takes effect both for husband and wife,
then it is called dasha sandhi.
Astrolgers generally see the malefic planets' dasha sandhi such
as Saturn, Mars, Rahu and Ketu.
The concept of considering dasha sandhi to cause death to
either of the couple cannot be considered as a reality.
If malefic planets have got connection to ardha houses and
punya houses, one shall not have any problem during dasha sandhi.
However, it is seen dasha sandhi happens from a benefic planet to
a malefic planet and at that time if saade saath period operates,
one undergoes various problems in life.
This particular method is seen mostly in some parts of South
India.

Matching Points For Stars
The following table shows the matching points obtained for
each star, which could be used as a ready reckenor for finding out
as to how many points are achieved.

Female
Female Male Rasi & stars
Ari Tau Gem
Mesh Vrshab Mitfiun
EaBiEaEaEaEaEaEaEaEaaEaEatgiaBBBiEgBBtaianiaEaBiggaaa
CTTOiinfEimnnuTiiinFTagiaimiFaFiiinTiinFnpg^iF^itaFaBaniFiiFCTraFiMMMMM
lEHHIBBIEIBli
BMEnCTjgjanaBiiiTOBlBlflaifliaiCTCTtMiH
33!3ElBE3E!3E3E3nElEl!Iil!il3ElSlEIElBI
Fl^im^FTlFinifnfflPTIfnfBFIl^l^RlFTlRin
g El S3
I1E3E1
DEI 03
iRiraraicimini
BlRlPIWIiMbt
3BE3BtBB
EIE3D3E3EJE3
EnsnasEiEi
mmm
IB
3SB1B3
gjgltqpsigiiriiBiBinciBiBiHiiBigiraiTMBiinig
BSIEIfIJE3BI0BiBIEIElSISll3!BEIBIEiIEl
Emm
Sign
Female Male Rasi & stars
umm
10ESE1
SISEIE8
3E3E3E0
iaaagaaEgB3BiaEaBEiBiigiaisaaBaaEi
SISglHSlEaElElEillEIEIEaiaSlEiBaBlIIElB
HEJ33E1S1EE1
Eii^®aaiiaEi00Ei30S3a3aa0Si
iiiiiiiiiSiaiii
gKnnMtgmfPifnpiffimfnmfntnfPitnPEi[i!;HEiFi,^i
IH53IE9B131EirciE*lESlESlESlEEBEElEElS105BmmEElEjP
^ 333[UEIlE3E3ElE3[aaEI3asgaE3aa
snaiara
SlfJliVJIE?
II BUGS SI
mmm®
®®wm
HE3E3S3
mmm®
mmmm
':?»«■ gragg
mm.
SEUSHeMBBI
0E10E351B1I
pnantaj
mmm®
lllglSIE3EiEgEIBBffl

Marriage Matching
Let us do the matching for the following couple, who got
married on 09 May 2004.
The girl (Chart No. 05) is born on 27 Oct 1980 at 10-42 pm
at Hyderabad, India, with birth star Mrigashira star 4th pada in
Gemini.
Aa: 24Ga59 Su: 10US7-BK Mo: 4G91S-GK Ma: 17Sc39-AmK
The boy (Chart No. 06) was born on 12 Aug 1976 at 12-52
pm near Kottayam, Kerala, India, with janma star as Pun/a Bhadra
star 2nd pada in Aquarius.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
m
m
EH
m
5TS26-DK Ve:
12Aq04 GL:
14Cn53-PK
6Sg08
Pancha Bhuta
Pakshi
Colour
Caste

Chapter 10: Marriage Matching
Muhurta Chintamani gives 36 points. Minimum requirement is
that 50% of the points should be achieved.
Pot-utham or Stars Aliqnment
SI. Poru- Girl
No. -tham Mrigashira
01 Dina 05th star
Vashyam
07 Mahendram
08 Yoni Snake(F)
09 Rajju Siro Rajju
10 Veda No Veda
11 I Nadi Madhya

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
The matching has achieved 06/10 points as per the Kerala
system, while 29 / 40, 36/ 50, 26/36 points as per other systems.
But the couples have been at logger-heads right from the
beginning of marriage, though they are living together as of July
2010 i.e., after 06 years of marriage. They are blessed with a
daughter too.
The main reasons for the marital discord have been identified
are as follow:
Girl's Chart
Moon is posited in the lagna and aspected 07th house. Moon is
in the star of Mars, who is lord of 06 as well as occupant of 06th
house.
Boy's Chart
Venus is lord of 07th and is posited in Ketu star Makha in 10th
house. Ketu, in turn, is posited in Venus star Bharani in 06th house.
During Mercury (in Venus star Purva) dasha and Ketu bhukti, the
oouple had lot of difficulties between them including temporary
separation.
Vairaghya or enimity is brought about by Saturn, who aspects
Ketu. Moon in 4th house, gets the aspect of Mars, who signifies
06th house, will cause mental conflict and aggressiveness. From
Moon sign, Ketu being placed in Venus star in 03rd house will also
signify 3 and 4, making the person moody. Lord of 1 1 (Mercury)
and lord of 12 (Venus) are conjoined, making the person not having
control over spending, which also caused rift in marital life.
Since, Jupiter, lord of 02 and 05 (romance, love, etc.) is posited
in 07th house, it is felt that boy will not be able to get a divorce.

Sahams or Sensitive Points
Sahams are sensitive point propounded by Sage Parashara.
There are many sahams. In the question of marriage and child
birth, one could see vivaha saham and putra saham.
Let us check the sahams in the following chart no.07.
Vivaha Saham (One rule for day or night birth)
Longitude of Venus minus longitude of Sun plus longitude of
Lagna.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
The saham corresponds with Leo at 25 deg 49 min., which is
in Venus star Purva.
The marriage of the native took place on 1 1 Apr 1988 when
the transit Jupiter (vivaha karaka) was in Jupiter star Bharani,
corresponding to 07th house of the native. Since Venus signifies
01,08,10,04,05 the marriage saham is average, but not detrimental.
Putra Saham (For Male or Female)
Putra saham or a sensitive point in a horoscope chart generally
considered for progeny is formed by a mathematical calculation,
Day Birth
Longitude of Jupiter minus Longitude of Mercury + longitude
of Lagna.
The putra saham falls in 10th sign, 03 deg and 42 min, which
means, it falls in Aquarius sign at 03 deg 42 minutes corresponding
to Dhanishta star ruled by Mars. Mars signifies 02, 07, 12, 10, 08
houses. 12th will signify loss and 08th will signify impediments. 10th
will negate 1 1 lh house. But houses 02 (addition of a member) and
07th (second issue) are favourable houses. Hence although there
was initial disappoint with reference to progeny in this case,
ultimately favourable houses helped the matter.
Night Birth
Long, of Mercury minus Long, of Jupiter plus Long, of As c.

Chapter 1 1: Sahams or Sensitive Points
Note: This case is of day birth.
Bija Sputa
In order to assess the fertility aspect of the boy, Bija Sputa is
calculated. The Bija Sputa is a sensitive point in the horoscope,
which is arrived at by adding up the longitude of Jupiter, Sun and
Venus.
It is not desirable for the Bija sputa to fall in 06, 08 or 12
houses when counted from Ascendant.
The Bija sputa longitude falls in 05 signs, 02 deg. and 03 min.
This falls in Virgo at Sun star Uthara. Sun is posited in 1 1 th house,
although Bija sputa fall in 1 2th house from lagna, its signification of
1 1th house (Sun) is considered as good.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Kshetra Sputa
In order to assess the fertility aspect of the girl, kshetra Sputa
is calculated. The kshetra Sputa is a sensitive point in the horoscope,
which is arrived at by adding up the longitude of Jupiter, Mars and
Moon.
For Kshetra sputa, take the following chart no. 08 of a female,
who is born on23 Dec 1966 at 7-00 am 1ST, Vaikom, Kottayam,
Kerala:
It is not desirable for the Kshetra sputa to fall in 6, 8 or 1 2
houses when counted from Ascendant.
The Kshetra sputa falls in 09th sign, 08 deg. and 04 min.,
which is at Capricorn at Sun star, Uthara Ashada. The bhava
becomes 02nd house (addition of a member) from lagna, which is
good.
Note: Kshetra sputa is taken in the case of females only.

Chapter 11: Sahams or Sensitive Points
Note: Sperm Count And Some Remedies To Increase
It
A low sperm count (oligospermia) is one cause for male
infertility. Although it takes only a single sperm to fertilize an egg
(ovum), the odds of a single sperm reaching an egg are very low.
Normal sperm count is 20 million or more per milliliter of semen.
In order to father a child 60% of those sperms should have normal
shape, including standard forward movement (motility)
Some of the reasons for lack of sperm count is given below:—
1. Infected semen, tight underpants, bathing in very hot water,
sitting for long hours, over weight in which fat layers sag on
testicles reduce sperm count
2. Very frequent semen ejaculation also lead to lowered sperm
count and man may become effectively infertile. Hence
maintaining a gap of 3 days between two consecutive
ejaculations keeps a man more fertile.
3. Smoking, excessive alcohol intake, Over exertion physically
and mentally, zinc deficiency, Infections present in prostate
gland, mal-formed genital organs, Anabolic steroid use.
Following are some of the points to be taken care to increase
semen count:—
1. Have sex & masturbate less often - the more times you
ejaculate, the less dense your semen will be. Maintain a gap
of 3 days between two consecutive ejaculations.
2. Refrain from habits like smoking, alcohol consumption, etc.
Alcohol affects your liver function, which in turn, causes a
dramatic rise in estrogen levels. Even two drinks a day will
have long-term effects on sperm production
3. Exercise regularly. Exercising your PC muscle can help you
shoot further than ever before.
4. Eat Nutritious Food - Diet that's low in fat, and high in protein,
vegetables, and whole grains is good for your health and for
your sperm. Avoid bitter, astringent and spicy foods. Reduce
caffeine intake.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
5. Avoid heating of testicles - Wear loose, cotton boxer shorts,
Avoid hot baths and saunas
6. Lose any excess weight, which tends to cause testosterone /
oestrogen imbalances
7. Reduce stress levels by learning relaxation techniques - Keep
your mind and body healthy by regular practice of YOGA and
MEDITATION.
8. Try supplements - Certain natural supplements promise to
increase sperm production,
9. Make love in the early morning or afternoon. Sperm levels are
often highest in the mornings.

Timing of the Marriage
When is my marriage? This is a frequently asked question
(FAQ) by a consultant who comes for consultation with an Astrologer.
An event will take place when the pertinent planets' operating
period (dasha, bhukti, antara) operates and when the transit agrees.
For the marriage, Astrologer could take houses 02, 07, and
1 1 . 07* house is the main house for marriage. 02nd house stands
for addition of a member and family sthana). 1 1 th house
stands for long time relationship, friendship and fulfillment of desires.
Take Jupiter and Venus and planets, who stands for marriage and
child birth. The following couple got(Ria(!ii$f&apn 09 May 2004:
Girl's Chart (No. 09):
The dasha / Bhukti / Antara (D / B / A) running at the time of
marriage was Jup-Sat-Rah. The significations of DBA lords are as
follow:

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Rahu :: 02, Mo, Me. (Mercury signifies 07th house through
Jupiter).
Jupiter signifies 07th house. Saturn and Rahu signify 02nd and
07th houses. Hence the DBA planets agreed for marriage.
Boy's chart (No. 1 0) :
Me: 19 Le57- MK Ju: 5 Tp 26 DK Ve: 11Le26-GK Sa: 14Cn53-PK
The marriage took place in Sat-Rah-Sun period.
Saturn signifies :: 03, 04, 09 and is in own star.
In this chart, dasha lord Saturn is not connected to any of the
houses of marriage. Bhukti lord, Rahu signifies 07th house through
Venus. Antara lord, Sun is lord of 1 1 th house. But, Saturn is conjoined
with Sun, who signifies 1 1 th house. Hence dasha lord agrees for
the event.

Chapter 12: Timing of the Marriage
The planetary positions at the time of marriage are given below:
Note: ** In the. natal chart of the girl, Venus is conjoined with
07th lord Jupiter. Jupiter and Venus do play a dominant role in
marriage.
Hence the dasha / bhukti / antara as well as the planetary
positions coincided and signified the houses required for marriage.
Enagement and Marriage
Betrothal or engagement shall take place during the VIVID
periods of 07, 03, 09 operating and when transit agrees.
Fa marrage, take houses 02 (addition of a member), 07
(marriage) and 1 1 (long time relationship). Marriage shall take
place when dasha, bhukti, antara and transit agree.
The native, whose, horoscope is appended below (chart
no.ll)is born as the eldest daughter of an employee of a Public
Sector Undertaking.
Date: November 07, 1984 Time: 2:15:00 pm Time Zone:
India, Lunar Yr-Mo: Raktaaksha - Karthika Tithi: Sukla Chaturdasi
Vedic Weekday: Wednesday Nakshatra: Aswini Sunrise: 6:20:48
am Sunset: 5:38:39 pm Janma Ghatis: 19.7583 Ayanamsa: 23-3843.85 Sidereal Time: 17:05:49

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Enagement
The betrothal took place on 21-Jun-2009 during Sun-Mar-Sat.
The betrothal is an agreement between the boy's and girl's parties.
Since the agreement is connected to marriage, take 7th house.
Agreement is seen from 3rd house. Hence take 3rd house. 7th from
3rd signifying opposite party is 9th. Also 9th becomes 3rd from 7m
house, signifying 3rd house of opposite party.
Sun signifies 7th house. Mars is lord of 3rd house. Saturn is
posited in 9th house. Hence engagement took place in Sun dasha,
Mars bhukti and Saturn antara.
For marriage take 02, 07, and 1 1 houses. The marriage took
place on 30-Aug-2009 at 10-00 a.m. Marriage took place during

Chapter 12: Timing of the Marriage
Sun-Mar-Sun period. Sun is lord of 7th house. Mars is posited in
Sun star Uthara ashdada. Hence Mars signifies 07* house. Hence
the marriage took place during Sun-Mar-Sun period, under the
transit chart given below:
a) Sun is lord of 7th house was posited in 7th house from lagna.
b) Moon was in Moola star in Sagittarius which becomes 1 1 th
house
c) Mars was in Rahu star Arudra. Rahu signifies 7th house through
Sun.
d) Mercury was in Sun star in Leo - 7th house - Sun is 7th lord.
e) Jupiterwas in Dhanishta ruled by Mars. Mars signifies 7th house.
f) Venus was in Saturn star in Cancer. Saturn signifies 11th house
due to its placement in Visakha star.
g) Saturn was in Sun star and signifies 7th house.
h) Rahu was in Sun star and signifies 7th house.
i) Ketu was in Saturn star and Saturn signifies llm house.
Hence on the date of marriage all planets signified either 02
or 07 or 1 1 as per the natal chart.

Kuja (Sevai) Dosha or Manglik
Mars is a planet of logic, violence, aggression, quarrels and
accidents, and is termed as the celestial executioner by astrologers.
Hence Astrologers from ancient times do attach much prominence
to the Kuja dosha (evil effect of Mars) while evaluating the horoscope
for marriage matching.
If Mars or Kuja happens to be placed in 1 , 2, 4, 7, 8 or 12th
houses when counted from Ascendant, Moon or Venus, then the
native is said to have Kuja Dosha. However, there are exceptions
to this rule. Kuja dosha is being given more weightage in places
like Kerala and matches are not cleared unless the balancing
placement is found in both the horoscope charts of boy and girl.

Chapter 13:Kuja (Sevai) Dosha orManglik
The charts illustrated above with Kuja dosha (evil effect of
Mars) may be perused.
1) In Chart 5 above, Mars is placed in 4th house from Asc, while
in 2nd from Moon and Venus.
2) In Chart 6 Mars is placed in 7th house from Asc.
3) In Chart 7 Mars is placed in 1 2m house from Asc.
4) In Chart 8 Mars is placed in 8th house from Asc.
These combinations are treated as having Kuja Dosha or
Manglik.
The exceptions to Kuja dosha given are:
a) When Mars is yogakaraka (for Cancer and Leo born people).
b) When Mars is posited in its own house (Aries or Scorpio).
c) When Mars is posited in the sign of its friends like Sun and
Jupiter, which means Mars when posited in Leo, Sagittarius or
Pisces, there is no kuja dosha.
d) Some Astrologers also opine that when Mars is posited in
moveable signs (Aries, Cancer, Libra, or Capricorn), there is
no Kuja dosha.
e) If lagna falls in the houses of Venus.
This rule should be applicable, if Moon or Venus are placed
either in Cancer or Leo, since Kuja dosha is counted not only from
Asc, but also from Moon and Venus.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
If Venus is in 12th house to Mars, there is no Kuja dosha. If
Venus is very strong like Uccha, Moolatrikona, there is no Kuja
dosha. If Venus or Jupiter or a benefic is placed in 1 0* house, then
there is said to be having no kuja dosha.
The combinations for Kuja dosha, as per Vedic Astrology, are
illustrated in few examples below: —
In the example no. 8 above, Asc is posited in Libra while Mars
is posited in 1 2* house. According to Vedic Astrology, this contributes
to Kuja dosha.
In the example no. 9 above, Asc is in Capricorn and Mars is
posited in Aries in own house (in 4th house). Hence this does not
contribute to Kuja dosha.

Chapter 13: Kuja (Sevai) Dosha or Manglik
In the example No. 18 above, Asc is Cancer while Mars is
posited in 7th house in Capricorn. Mars is exalted in Capricorn.
Hence it amounts to no Kuja dosha.
This chart is similar to that of Lord Shri Ram of Ramayana
fame. But he had problem in marital life such as Sita was abducted
by Ravana of Lanka and later Lord Ram himself abdicated her. Is it
because of Kuja dosha? Some Astrologers claim so. But in effect, it
is not because of Kuja dosha that his wife was abducted and later
given up by him. Other combinations also are required to be seen
in the chart for divorce or separation. Mars dosha does not alone
contribute for separation in marital life.
The subject of abduction or restriction of movements is dealt
separately in later chapters.
In the example chart no. 19 above, Asc is in Libra and Mars
is posited in Virgo being 1 2th house and is in 2nd house from Venus.
As per Vedic Astrology, this is termed as Manglik or having Kuja
dosha.
In the example chart no. 20 above, Asc is not specified.
Mars is posited in 1 2* from Venus, but is exalted in Capricorn.
Hence there is no Kuja dosha as per Vedic astrology.
In the example chart no. 21 above, Asc is in Libra. Mars is
posited in 2nd from Lagna, but is in own house in Scorpio. Hence
there is no Kuja dosha as per Vedic astrology.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In the example chart no. 22 above, Asc is not specified.
Mars is posited in 4th from Venus, in Taurus, which is a fixed sign.
Hence this amounts to Kuja dosha as per Vedic astrology.
In the example chart no. 23 above, Moon is in Libra. Mars is
posited in 7th from Moon, in Aries, which is own sign. Hence this
amounts to no Kuja dosha as per Vedic astrology.
But the Astrologer has to see in practical as to what is the
lagna in cases like this. Lagna is always stronger than Moon sign or
Venus sign.
In the example chart no. 24 above, Asc is in libra. Mars is
posited in 8th from Lagna in Taurus, which is a fixed sign. Hence
this amounts to Kuja dosha as per Vedic astrology.
But Mars being lord of 07, posited in 08th house will contribute
some impediments in marital life since 08th house stands for

Chapter 13: Kuja (Sevai) Dosha or Manglik
impediments, disappointments, etc. When Mars is posited in 08th
house, .it aspects 02nd house (speech). In this case Mars becomes
lord of 02nd house also. When Mars is posited in 08th house, the
person speaks logically and harshly and argues well, besides sadistic
to a certain extent, because of the characteristics of Mars.
In the example chart no. 25 above, Asc is in Pisces. Mars is
posited in 2nd house from Lagna in Aries, which is own house.
Hence this amounts to no Kuja dosha as per astrology.
It is concluded that just because of Mars is posited in 1,2, 4,
7, 8, or 1 2 either from Lagna or Moon or Venus does not contribute
to Kuja dosha, irrespective of Mars's position in its places of
exemption allowed.
Astrologers say Mars is a Killer.
Let us examine the following chart No. 26: A female born on
21 -Feb-1 972, Monday, Time 22-30-00 hours, Hyderabad, India,
Longitude 78-27-00 East Lat 17-23-00 North.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
The native's husband died on 20-Dec-2001 during Rahu-VenusSun-Mars period. Death is seen from Bhadaka, Maraka, and
Mokashakaraka planets during their periods.
Maraca will be 02 and 07 houses while Badhaka is 1 1 , 09, 07
for Moveable, Fixed and dual signs respectively. Moksha is always
seen from 12* house. Astrologers need to consider all the planets
signifying these houses into consideration such as (a) Lord (b)
planets posited in the stars of lord (c) Occupant (d) Planets posited
in the star of occupants, (e) Take Nodes (Rahu and Ketu)
significations also.
If the chart promises longevity, even if there is Kuja dosha,
the person will live long.
As per Stellar System, if a planet posited in "X" star, will also
give the result of that star lord. For example, if Venus is posited in
any of stars such as Punarvasu, Visakha or Purva Bhadra ruled by
Jupiter, Venus will give result of Jupiter also. Same way, one could
take for other stars and planets.
The longevity of spouse should be reckoned by rotating the
chart 7th house. 07th lord is Mars, who is in Aries in Venus star
Bharani. Hence Mars will give Venus results. Bhadhaka for Aries
(Moveable sign) is Saturn. Maraka for Aries is 2nd and 7th lords,
which in this case is Venus. Mars is in Venus star and will give
result of Venus. Planets posited in 2nd house from Aries are Saturn
and Moon, both of whom are in Sun star. Sun is Badhaka being
occupant of 1 1 * house.
Sun is in Rahu star and will signify Rahu. Rahu is in Moon star
and will also signify Saturn. Both Saturn and Moon are Maraca.
Mars (signifying lagna lord for husband) is in between Maraka
planets and also signifies Maraka and Moksha. Because of these
combinations Husband's longevity is only medium. Hence the period
of Rahu-Venus-Sun-Mars really tantamount for the significations
connected for death of husband.
Although Mars is posited in 07* house, since it is in own house,
there is no Kuja dosha. But many students get doubt raised in their
mind as to whether really Kuja dosha exists or not, since Mars is
posited in 7* house.

Chapter 13: Kuja (Sevai) Dosha or Manglik
The explanation given in the previous paragraphs about early
death of husband is sufficient enough to say that it is not due to
Kuja dosha.
Following chart no. 27 belong to a married couple:
Female was born on 23-Dec-1966 at 7-00 a.m. near Cochin,
Kerala. i
In the chart above of a female, Mars is posited in the 1 0*
house from lagna and Venus, while it is in 06* from Moon. Hence
there is no Kuja dosha.
The chart No* 28 below is that of husband of the above
female:
Ra: 3te11*AK Ke: 3Aq11 HL: ISScSD GL: $Pi36

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In the chart of husband mentioned above, Mars is posited in
12* from Lagna in Virgo indicating Kuja dosha for him, whereas
wife is not having Kuja dosha. But the couples are happily living
together for the past two decades.
Chart No. 29 below appended belongs to Ms. Jacqueline
Kennedy, wife of former US President John F Kennedy.
Fa evaluating the aspect of spouse, astrologers need to rotate
the chart to 07* house, which means take 07* house as lagna.
President Kennedy was shot dead on 23-Nov-1963 during
Jacqueline's Moon-Jup-Sat period. Moon is posited in 12* for
husband (07* house), becomes moksha. Jupiter is posited in Moon
star and hence signifies 12* house— moksha. Saturn is badhaka
for Taurus.
Lord of 07th (for husband) Venus
becomes lagna lord. Venus is posited
in Mars star Mrigashira. Mars is lord of
07 and 12 — maraka and moksha
respectively. Hence lagna lord Venus
become significator of Maraca and
moksha.
In this case Mars has got killing powers
due to maraca and moksha lordship.
But the dasha / Bhukti / Antara lords
were not connected to Mars.
Jacqueline Kennedy

Chapter 13: Kuja (Sevai) Dosha orMangSik
Hence this cannot be construed as Kuja
dosha as per Vedb system.
Unless Mars has got connection to lagna, 06* and 08* houses,
injury through accident cannot be caused. In such a situation, if
the dasha/ bhukti / antara running at that time have got connection
to maraca, badhaka or moksha, then it will be a serious matter of
life threatening.
In this case referred above, Mars is posited in Venus star Purva.
Hence Mars become a significator of 01 (self), 06 (Injury). Jupiter
(08— accident) is posited in Moon star, but is in lagna and is
conjoined with lagna lord Venus, who is posited in Mars star,
Mrigashira.
From the 07* house, significations of planets are:
Hence it is felt that students need to take care before delivering
reading based on Kuja (Mangal) dosha.

Jupiter, Rahu and Saturn
Rahu Connection
In northern side of India and in Kerala it is said that they give
importance to Rahu / Ketu Dosha. Rahu / Ketu affliction is treated
as having V2 dosha in some parts of South India.
Rahu / Ketu axis in Asc, 2nd house, 4* house are to be viewed
carefully. When Rahu is in Asc, Ketu will be in 7* house or vice
versa. If Rahu is in 2nd house, Ketu will be in 8* or vice versa.
Asc and 7* signifies self and spouse respectively while 2nd is
family and 8* is family of spouse. 4* is home environment.
Equal balancing of Rahu / Ketu is required for the above
combinations in both the charts of boy and girl.
If Rahu or Ketu is conjoined Asc, 2nd, 4*, 7*, 8* lords then
also the above rule is applicable.
But in effect there is no such dosha is found. The roles of
Nodes have to be taken as per the significations of them explained
in in previous paragraph.
Saturn Connection
If Saturn is connected with Moon, it is said there will be
disappointments in marital alignments, fixation or during
celebrations.
If Saturn is connected with 7* house or 7* lord by aspect or
conjunction or otherwise, the marriage is likely to be delayed. In
that case Saturn only will give the marriage during its dasha or
bhukti or antara periods and when transits agree.

Chapter 1 4: Jupiter, Rahu and Saturn
In the chart (No. 30) mentioned below, 07* lord is Jupiter,
who is conjoined with Saturn.
The marriage took place in Jupiter dasha, Saturn bhukti, Rahu
antara on 09 May 2004 in her 24* year. Marriage did not take place
in Jup\Jup due to conjunction of Saturn with Jupiter. Hence Saturn
gave marriage in its bhukti.
Jupiter Strength
Jupiter's strength is considered as quite important in a chart,
especially for female charts when it comes for marriage. Jupiter
signifies vivaha karaka, putra karaka and even considered as
husband. If Jupiter is lacking strength or placed in papa kartari
yoga, or in adverse house, care may be taken to analyze this
particular aspect.
According to ancients, if a well-placed Vivaha karaka Jupiter is
having connection with martial houses or lord, then the affliction
level is supposed to be minimized.
However, in the female chart No. 31 illustrated below, if Jupiter
is placed in 7* house when counted from Lagna, then she will get
a husband who could be a person who either suspects her or
discouraging her.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Readers may go through the chart of female nativity illustrated
above, in which Jupiter is placed in the 7* house from Asc. The
native is found it very difficult to push along with the marital life,
because of the unsteady behaviour of her husband. In this case,
lord of 07, Moon has got placed in the 06* house, which is a
negating house to 07* house. This point, of course, has also to be
considered.
Another example chart no. 32 may be perused:
In the chart erected above too, the native, female, had to
encounter untold miseries from the husband, such as separation,
litigation, etc., but did not divorce.
Hence care is required to be taken while evaluating the chart
of the female too.

Connection
07* lord bestows marriage. Take supporting houses like 02
and 1 1 for addition of a member and long time relationship,
respectively.
06*, 08* or 12* houses are classified as Dush sthanas or bad
houses.
06* house signifies among many, separation from spouse,
diseases, ill-health, borrowing, loans, etc.
08* house stands for sudden accidents, deaths, impediments,
difficulties, etc., while 12* house is for loss, expenses, hospitals,
new environments, charity, spirituality, etc.
The connection of 07* lord or a planet signifying 07* house
with that of planets connected with 06 / 08 / 12 are not desirable
for smooth martial life.
In the chart no. 33 mentioned below, 07th, -lord is Mars, who
is posited in 1 2* house. Mars is in the star of Moon who signifies

Basics'i ofNakshatra Padhathi ( Marriage , Profession & Healt
Me: 2 Vi 20- GK v(u (R): 4Cp50-PK Ve: IDCnSO-PiK Sa (R): 0 Cp 32- DK
Mars is aspected by Jupiter, who is lord of 06* house. Hence
07* has got connection to 06 (aspect of Jupiter), 08, 12 houses.
This is quite detrimental for smooth martial affairs.

Venus Position and Ketu
Connection
Venus is the Chief Governor of marriage. Venus signifies
women, wife, pleasures, drinks, enjoyments, cushions, comforts,
creativity, beauty, etc.
Ketu is the mokshakaraka and stands for emancipation, nonmaterialiastic, spiritual thinking, etc.
When Venus and Ketu are conjoined or connected to 07* house,
it is felt that there is not much love and affection between a married
couple.
An example chart no. 34 is given below:

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
The chart, belonging to a male, has got Scorpio rising with
Venus being lord of 07* house. Venus is posited in Ketu star Makha
in Leo and thus will give result of Ketu. Ketu in turn, is posited
Venus Bharani star in Aries. Bharani is ruled by Venus.
The native is not able to adjust in marital life and complains of
lack of response and romance from spouse.

Longevity
What is foremost and important to be evaluated is the longevity
aspect in the chart of both boy and girl. Elders say Ayurarogya
sowkhyam, meaning good longevity and health.
If the chart does not promise longevity, Astrologer should forewarn the client about it, and should decline to match the chart for
marriage.
The longevity is seen from lagna (for self) and 8* house. 8*
from 8* house is 3rd house, which also is counted for longevity as
per bhavat bhavam.
According to Vedic point of view, 8* house of the girl is also
seen for the longevity of marital life. If the 8* house and 8* lord
are heavily afflicted, then the longevity of the husband will be in
trouble. If there is no longevity for either of the native, the matching
should not be done.
The significators of maraca or badhaka houses when connected
to houses of longevity, they shall always threaten the longevity of
a native.
Longevity is classified into 4 categories viz. Balarishta, Alpayu,
Madhya Ayu and Purna Ayu. Some Astrologers consider Aparimitha
ayu also, which means unlimited longevity.
Longevity of Balarishita cases are upto 08 years viz:.
a) Alpa Ayu is upto 33 years.
b) Madhya ayu will indicate upto 33 to 66 years.
c) Purna Ayu is upto 100 years.
d) Aparimitha ayu is beyond 100 years.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
a) When it comes to longevity, houses to be checked are dushsthana, maraca, badhaka, moksha, which negate longevity.
b) 06, 08, 1 2 houses are dush sthana.
c) 1 2* house stands for moksha also.
d) Punya houses are 01, 05, 09, while 1 0* house stands for karma,
which stand for good longevity.
e) Consider Saturn as Ayushkaraka and yogakaraka planet for
showering beneficial rays,
f) Planets posited in own star or own house or exalted become
stronger on given situations.
Badhaka
For all Chara (moveable) signs, 1 1 * house shall be the badhaka.
For all Sthira (fixed) signs, 09* house, and for all Dwiswabha (dual)
07* house shall be badhaka.
The badhaka table is given below:
02nd and 07* houses are maraca for all the lagans. The maraca
table is given below:

Chapter 17: Longevity
Aquarius, Cancer
Pisces, Leo
Saturn, Moon
Jupiter, Sun
What Astrologers required to consider in the issue of maraca
and badhka houses are:
a) Lord of these houses,
b) Planets posited in the star of lords
c) Occupants of these houses
d) Planets posited in the star of occupants, and finally
e) Nodes, viz. Rahu and Ketu connected with these houses.
Longevity Chart
The standard longevity chart is given below:
Up to 33 year
Up to 66 Year
Badhaka
& Maraka
Birth in DBA
of Maraka &
Badhaca

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Let us analyze a few charts. Chart no. 1, US President # 37
Gerald R. Ford, was born 14-Jul-1913 at 00:43 AM CST, +06:00,
096W01 41N17; OMAHA Nebraska, USA.).
Chart no.35— President Ford died on 26-Dec-2006 at the age
of 93 years and 165 days, making him the longest-lived U.S.
President.
Mars, Rahu or Ketu
Planet In the Star of
08* lord
Planet connected with
Mars, Rahu or Ketu
Badhka
Harmful
Planet for
longevity
Death
Significations
11 Sc23-DK Ma:
13Ta20-GK Sa:
Ven

Chapter 17: Longevity
The lagna lord and 08* lord is Mars, who signifies 01 , 08 and
occupying in 01 , besides signifies 03, 05 through Sun. Lagna star
lord is Venus, who signifies 02, 07, 08, 04. Planet posited in 08*
house is Moon, who signifies 04, 08 and is in Saturn star, who
signifies 02, 10, and 1 1 . Moon is under the aspect of Saturn and
Jupiter aspects lagna from own house.
But the lagna is connected to 05* house (through Sun), so
that the illness aspect is largely free from it.
Native ran Saturn dasha approximately
upto 8 years of age, Mercury dasha upto
25 years, Ketu upto 32 years, Venus
upto 52 years, Sun upto 58 years, Moon
upto 68 years, Mars upto 75 years and
Rahu upto 93 years.
The longevity aspects show maraca,
badhaka and punya houses. It signifies
medium longevity of 66 to 99 years.
But out of running dashas, Venus was
Gerald Rudolf Ford strongly connected to maraca and
badhaka houses, which ran upto 52
years only.
Thereafter, Sun ran upto 58 years. Sun
is lord of 05 and is in 3rd house. Moon
signifies 04, 08, 10, 1 1 and 02. Mars is
lord of 01 and 08, posited in Sun star
04) was also suitable. Mars is connected to lagna, longevity and
Punya houses. Whereas Jupiter singifies 09, 12, 02, 07 and aspects
lagna, could the final emancipation.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Moon's position in Ayushkaraka Saturn star in the house of
longevity, duly aspected by Saturn from Moon star is also a point
to be considered for longevity aspects.
President Ford died on 26-Dec-2006 during Jup-Jup-Mer period
at the age of 93 years. Antara lord Mercury is in 4* (end) and is
aspected by Badhaka Saturn. The planetary positions on the date
of death are given below:
Out of the above significations, Sun, Mercury and Saturn are
in Ketu star. Ketu is the mokshakaraka. Also star lord of Ketu is
Sun, who is aspected by Jupiter. Jupiter is the strong significator of
maraka and moksha.
Chart No. 36— given below— belongs to Sir Mokshagundam
Visveswaraya, the legendary Indian engineer and statesman was
born on 19-Sep-1861 at around 13-58 hours in Muddenahalli, near
Kanivenarayanapura, Chikballapur District of Karnataka State.

Chapter 17: Longevity
As:
Me:
Re:
Sun
S* Vi 22- PK Ju:
19 Le08-BK Va:
17Ge68 HL:
17Cp29-MK Ma. 24Le17-AK
3 Li 56- GK Sa: 22Le17-AmK
Rah 01, Ve, Ju,
Ket 07, Me, Ra,
Sir Visveswaraya died on 14 April 1962
during Venus dasha, Jupiter Bhukti and
Jupiter Antara after living for 101 years.
Mercury is exalted is in own star, besides
placed in Sun (09 and 10) star, Uthara.
There are three planets, viz. Mars,
Jupiter and Saturn posited in 09* House
(punya). Sun and Moon are in own
stars. Venus is in 1 1 * house.
Sir M Visveswarayya
Asc star lord is Venus, who signifies
09. Occupant is stronger. Hence Venus

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
will give result of 09 and 11 more
strongly.
Asc sign lord Jupiter signfiies houses
again 09 and 11 become stronger.
1 1 * house is an upachaya house (if it is not badhka) and
stands for progress.
08* bhava falls in Mercury star Aslesha in Cancer. Mercury is
exalted and is posited in 1 0* house in the star of Sun, who signifies
08* lord Moon is in 02nd house, but in own star, Sharavana.
03rd lord Saturn is in Venus star, signifying 02, 03, 09 Ve» 06 and
All these aspects put together has given the native long life of
101 years, which is Puma Aayu.
In the chart No. 36 shown below is of a male nativity born
on 02 Sep 1961 at 9-18 a.m. near Cochin, Kerala, with balance
VMD of Moon dasha upto April 1965.
Ma: 2 Vi 20- GK Ju(R): 4Cp50-PK Ve: IDCneo-PiK Sa(R): CCp32-DK

Chapter 1 7: Longevity
Jupiter is the lone planet signifies 06* house, besides aspect
of Saturn, Mars and Mercury. Sun, Moon, Mars, Venus, Rahu and
Ketu signifies 08* house. Rahu, Ketu, Mars and Mercury only signify
12* house. Mars, Rahu and Ketu only signifies 02, 07 (maraca)
houses. Badhka (1 1 *) house is signified by Sun, Mercury, Jupiter,
Saturn, Rahu and Ketu.
Either of 01 , 05, 09 or 10 houses is signified by Sun, Moon,
Mars, Venus, Saturn, Rahu or Ketu.
Moon is exalted and is occupant of 08* house but under aspect
of 06* lord Jupiter. Mercury is exalted is in own house, but aspected
by 06* lord Jupiter and also in moksha sthan. Lagna lord Venus is
in 1 0* house, but is aspected by 06* lord Jupiter. Illness will attack.
Under this scenario, one felt that native will have 66-99 range
of Madhya aayu or medium longevity.
Moon dasha will end at the age of 03 years and 07 months.
Thereafter, the native will run VMD periods of Mars (upto lOy,
07m), Rahu (upto 28y, 07m), Jupiter (upto 44y, 07m), Saturn (upto
63y, 07m) and Mercury (upto 80y, 07m).
The lagna falls in Mars star Chitra in Libra, Libra is ruled by
Venus, who is also lord of 08* house. 08* bhava will fall in Sun
star Krithika. Moon is occupant of 08* house. 03rd house is vacant,
its lord is Jupiter. Jupiter is in 04* house.
Out of above, Saturn isyogakaraka (04, 05, ll)for Moon sign
as well as for lagna. Hence Saturn dasha is ruled out for death,
which runs from 44 to 63 years of the native.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Next VIVID is that of Mercury. Mercury is lord of 09 (Punya),
but is posited in 1 2* (moksha) and is in the star of Sun (badhaka).
Mercury is conjoined with Mars, who is lord of 02 and 07 in 12
(maraca and moksha). Mercury gets aspect of Jupiter, who signifies
11 and 4 predominantly rather than lordship of 03 and 06 houses.
04* house is the end and 1 1 * is badhaka.
Under this combination, it is felt that native will not survive
Mercury dasha. In the Mercury dasha, native will run MercuryMercury, Mercury-Ketu, Mercury-Venus and so on. Ketu is of course
occupant of 05* house, but will signify 04 through Saturn and 02,
07, 12, 08, lOthrough Mars. Through Sun, Ketu will signify 01 and
08 also. Hence lagna (body), longevity (08), maraca, badhaka,
moksha house are connected. Nodes are stronger. Hence this period
shall be crucial for the native, which falls in 2027-2028 period, (at
the age of 67 years).
During this period transit Saturn shall be in Aries, which happens
to be 12* house (moksha) from Moon as well as the 3rd cycle of
Saade Saath. At that period, transit Jupiter shall be in Leo / Virgo.
In the chart No. 37 mentioned below, the native achieved
only short longevity, who died in Nov 2008 in her Jupiter dasha,
Satum Bhukti and Moon Antara. Of course, the native was suffering
from cancer.

Chapter 17: Longevity
Rah 06, Ke, Ma
Ket 12,Ve, Ma
Of the above, all planets are signifing either of the detrimental
houses for lonevity, such as 02, 07 (maraca), 09 (badhaka), or 12
(moskha) except Saturn, But Saturn is under the aspect of Jupiter,
who signifies 02 (maraca) and 09 (badhaka). Moon, both marakca
and badhaka, is aspecting lagna (body).
Lagna lord Mars is posited in 1 2* house and is in the star of
Rahu who signifies 06* house, thereby cabling a relationship with
lagna (self) and 06 (disease). 08* lord Mercury is posited in own
house, thus prompting one to say that the longevity is good. But
one should mark the Rapa Kartari yoga for Mercury for being placed
in between Moon (Maraca and badhka) and Jupiter (maraca and
badhaka). 08* lord Mercury is placed in badhaka (09) and maraka
(02) Jupiter star.
She was admitted in hospital with formation of water in the
brain in the dasha of Jupiter-Saturn-Moon. Mark the connection of
watery signs with Jup and Sat. Moon is a female planet, who is
naturally a watery planet. Jupiter's and Moon's aspect on lagna
(brain) has caused watery formation in brain. Jupiter's connection
with 08* house made it excessive and serious in nature. Jupiter
will itslef expand or make the body part to swell. Saturn aspects
Moon, while lagna lord Mars is connected to Rahu as well as 06*
house. Hence, Saturn, Moon, Mars and Rahu contributed for dreaded
disease like cancer.
Hence period became adverse and the native died in Jup-SatMoon period itself.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Caroline Kennedy and Father's Longevity
Date: November 27, 1957
Time Zone: 5:00:00 (West of GMT)
N Y, New York, USA
Lunar Yr-Mo: Hemalamba -
Margasira
Tithi: Sukla Shashthi (Ve)
Wednesday (Me)
Caroline Kennedy Nakshatra: Sravanam (Mo)
Yoga: Dhruva (Ke)
Karana: Taitula (Me)
Hora Lord: Moon (5 min sign: Li)
Sunrise: 7:01:24 am
Sunset: 4:25:47 pm
Janma Ghat: 3.0666
Sidereal Time: 12:43:43
Caroline Kennedy, (Chart No. 38) daughter of US President
John F Kennedy, was born on 27 Nov 1957 at 08-1 5 am, New-York
(NY), New York City, 74°00'W 40°45IN, USA

Chapter 1 7: Longevity
Caroline Kennedy is the only surviving child of late US President
John F Kennedy. President Kennedy was assassinated on 22 Nov
1963 at Dallas, Texas State, by alleged assassin Lee Harvey Oswald,
during Caroline's VMD of Mars-Ven-Rah period. Caroline was only
06 years old at that time and this indicates that the longevity of
the father was too short-lived.
If lagna and 08* house are connected to maraca, badhka,
moksha and dush-sthana houses, then the longevity of the native
is under severe threat.
For father 09* house is considered for evaluation. For Caroline,
Scorpio rising and 09* house falls in Cancer. In this case maraca
shall be Sun (lord of 02), Saturn (lord of 07) and badhaka is Venus
(lord of 11 - for chara rashi). Planets, who signify 02, 07 and 11
houses, shall also function as maraca or badhaka.
Cancer is unoccupied. No planet aspects it. Its lord is Moon,
who is posited in Shravana star in 07* house, which is maraca.
Ketu is in Venus star. Rahu is in Libra and is in own star. Hence
Rahu also signifies Venus. Hence both Rahu and Ketu offer result
of Badhaka. Planets posited in Rahu or Ketu stars also offer results
of Badhaka, since they are Nodes. Mars is in Rahu star. Hence
Mars will offer badhaka result. Mercury, being lord of 1 2* house
(Moksha) is in Moola star ruled by Ketu. Ketu is badhaka. Hence
Mercury offers result of badhaka through Ketu.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Hence planets who offer badhaka result are: Venus, Mars,
Mercury, Rahu and Ketu.
02nd lord Sun (maraca) is posited in Anuradha star ruled by
Saturn, who is lord of 07* house (maraca). Moon is posited in
maraca house (07* house).
Hence planets who offer maraca result are Sun, Moon and
Saturn.
Mars signifies badhaka and in whose star Jupiter is posited.
Besides, Jupiter aspects Moon from Mars star Chitra.
Hence almost all planets signifying either maraca or badhaka
or moksha from 09* house made the longevity of father to have
cut off so early at her very tender age of 06 years.
Meantime, a question was asked as to how shall be the
longevity of the father of this baby girl born on Dec 16, 2005 at
Hyderabad at around 1-30 pm. The chart no. 39 is drawn and
shown below:
If the lagna and / or 08* house is connected to badhaka /
maraca and dush sthanas, one's longevity shall be threatened.

Chapter 17: Longevity
Fa father take 09* house as lagna and this falls in Scorpio.
08* there-from shall be Gemini. Moon is occupant of 08* house
(Gemini). For sthira rashi (Scoprio), 09* shall be the badhaka.
Moon is the badhka lord and is posited in the house of longevity.
This combination is detrimental for longevity of father (in this case).
Moon is in the star of Rahu, who signifies 05 and Jupiter. Jupiter is
lord of 02 and is in 12 (maraca and moksha respectively).
Saturn is the lord of 3 (longevity) and is in badhaka house.
Saturn is in Aslesha star ruled by 08* lord Mercury. Hence Saturn
gives the result of 03, 08 and 09. When a planet who signifies
badhaka and longevity, the question of one's longevity shall be
under threat.
08* lord is Mercury, who is posited in lagna, which should be
treated as good for longevity. But Mercury is posited in the star of
Saturn, who signifies badhka.
Jupiter, who is posited in Rahu star in 1 2* house (Moksha),
being lord of 02 (Maraca), aspects badhka Moon who is posited in
house of longevity.
Both Moon and Jupiter are posited in Rahu star Arudra and
Swati respectively. Although Rahu is posited in 5* house (punya),
the depositor of Rahu viz., Jupiter is maraca. Rahu is in the star
Saturn, who signifies badhaka and longevity.

Papa Kartari Yoga
If 7* lord or 5* lord or 8* lord or these houses are placed in
between malefics or conjoined with malefics, there are enough
reasons to predict that the significations shall be disturbed or ruined.
in papa-kartari yoga, then there shall be
difficulties in having progeny.
If 7* house falls in papa-kartari yoga, then there shall be
difficulties honsarifall^fe or for spousal matters.
If 8* house falls in papa-kartari yoga, then there shall be
difficulties in longevity of the native.
Chart no. 40
As explained in the Chapter of "longevity" in this book, one
could see that the 08* lord Mercury is posited in Papa Kartari yoga
for being placed in between Moon (Maraca and badhka) and Jupiter
(maraca and badhaka).
This type of rules shall be applicable for other significations
too.

Divorce and Dual Marriage
When marriage matching is undertaken by Astrologers, they
are also required to watch carefully, if there exists separation or
divorce or dual marriage, etc., in the chart of either boy or girl.
The chart (No. 41) given below is of a native, who had
married, divorced and again married another woman. Native was
born on 1 7h December 1956 at around 9.15 a.m. Ahmedabad,
India.
1 st marriage took place in Sept 1980 during Rahu-Moon-Venus,
and was separated within 45 days. Divorce took place two years
thereafter through a court of law. 2nd marriage took place in 1984
and this marriage is sustained.
Marriage houses are 7 (marriage), 2 (addition of a member)
and 1 1 (long time relationship and fulfillment of desires). Marriage
will take place when dasha / bhukti / antara promises and transit
agree, if the chart promises. For separation, take 01 , 06, 10 and
1 2* houses.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Lord of 07th house is Mercury, who is posited in Lagna in
Purva Ashada Star ruled by Venus. Venus is lord of 06 and is posited
in 12th house. Hence 07th lord itself agrees for separation.
First marriage took place during Rahu dasha, Moon Bhukti
and Venus antara in Sept 1980. Rahu is conjoined with Venus (06,
1 1 , 2, 3) and Saturn (02, 03, 12). Saturn, being lord of 02, is in
own star in 12th house. Rahu, being Node, will give result of Saturn,
Venus, Moon and Mars.
Bhukti lord Moon is posited in 06th house in own star, being
lord of 08th house. But Moon is aspected by Venus and Saturn,
who has got connection with houses such as 02 and 1 1 . Hence
Moon, though posited in 06, was prevailed upon by Satum and
Venus to solemnize marriage
Antara lord Venus signifies (06, 1 1 , 02, and 03).
During that period, in transit, dasha lord Rahu was in Aslesha
star ruled by 07th lord Mercury. Antara lord Venus was posited in
Pushya star ruled by 2nd lord Saturn.
The native got separated from wife during Rah-Mon-Ven-Ketu
period. Ketu gives the tendency to eject. Separation is seen from
06, 01, 10 and 1 2* houses. However, readers could see that Dasha
/ Bhukti / Antara lords also signify negative houses such as 01, 06,
and 12. Ketu also signifies 01 and 06 through Jupiter and Moon.
However, legal separation did not take place immediately which
eventually happened at the onset of Jupiter dasha when JupiterJupiter was operating. For all legal aspects Jupiter has to be
connected to the pertinent houses. Jupiter is the lord of 1 and is
posited in 1 0* house, which promises separation.
Native married again in Jupiter dasha, Satum Bhukti. The girl's
(second wife) janma star was Anuradha, ruled by Saturn. Her lagna
was Scorpio, which was tenated by Saturn in her natal chart. In
the boy's chart also Saturn is in Scorpio.
For 2nd marriage, normally 09* house is taken and 07, 02 and
1 1 along with Mercury and dual signs. 09* becomes 03rd (younger
co-born) to 07* house, since 2nd wife becomes some sort of a
younger sister to first wife.

Chapter 19: Divorce and Dual Marriage
Jupiter is posited in Sun star and hence signifies 09* house,
while Saturn is lord of 02nd house. Hence Jupiter dasha gave divorce
and second marriage. 07* lord Mercury is posited in Sagittarius, a
dual sign, while Jupiter is lord of Sagittarius and Pisces and is
posited in Virgo; all are dual signs.
Let us see another example (Chart no. 42): Female, born on
married in Jan 1991 and was divorced in 2004.
07* lord is Sun, who is posited in Moon star Rohini. Moon is
posited in 07* house in Ketu star Makha. While Moon is lord of 06,
star lord of Moon, Ketu, is posited in Aslesha star ruled by Mercury,
in 06* house. Mars aspects Moon from 12* house.
Marriage took place in Venus dasha, Saturn bhukti and Mercury
antara. Dasha lord Venus is lord of 04 and 09 and is posited in 03rd
house in own star. Saturn is lord of 1 and 2 and is posited in Sun
star and hence signifies 07* house. Mercury is lord of 05 and 08
and is posited in Venus star. Dasha and Antara lords Venus and
Mercury respectively are under the aspect of Mars, who is in Moon
star Shravana, while Moon is occupant of 07th house. Hence period
favoured.
Divorce took place in 2004 most probably in Moon dasha, Moon
bhukti, Moon is having connection with 06* very strongly, as
discussed earlier.

Basics cfNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In yet another case (Chart no. 43) of divorce, the boy was
born on 30-Jun-1971 at 1-05 pm Vizag divorced his wife, who was
born on 09-Jun-1974 at 7-00 am Kakinada.
The chart of the boy is appended above. Lagna is in Virgo and
07* house falls in Pisces. There are no occupants in Pisces. Jupiter
is the lord of 07* house. Stars ruled by Jupiter are Punarvasu,
Visakha and Purva Bhadrapada. Mercury is in Punarvasu and signifies
1 and 10, besides 3, 4 and 07. Moon aspects 07* house, who
signifies 01 , 10, and 1 1 .
But Jupiter is posited in Saturn star Anuradha. Saturn is lord
of 5 and 06. Besides, Saturn aspects Jupiter from 09* house. Saturn
is in Sun star Kruthika, who signifies 10 and 12.
Since 07* lord Jupiter has become weak, the native sought
divorce in Jupiter-Jupiter period. Jupiter also will signify a judge
and the divorce was granted through a court of law.
The chart (No. 44) of the girl is given below. Gemini is rising
and 07* house is vacant. Lord of 07* house is Jupiter, who is in
own star, Purvabhadrapada. Lagna is occupied by Mercury and
Saturn, who aspects 7^ house. They are in Rahu star Arudra, while
Rahu is in Mercury star in Scorpio, which becomes 06* house.
Rahu will give result of Mars and Mercury along with 01 and 06.
Mars is posited in 02nd house in Saturn star (1 , and 06). The native
got divorced in Rahu-Mars period.

Chapter 19: Divorce and Dual Marriage
The nakshatra ponthanam achieved are 23, while minimum
required points are only 18.
But there is also a Kuja's placement mis-match in this case. In
the chart of girl, Mars is posited in 02nd house from lagna while
Mars is in 07* from Moon. In the boy's chart Mars is in 05* from
Lagna and Moon, while Mars is in 09* from Venus.
Lord Ram of Ramayana
The following horoscope chart no. 45 is supposed to be of
that of Shri Ram of Ramayana fame. In the epic Ramayana, sage
Valmiki narrates about the horoscope chart of Ram and his brothers,
Bharat, Laxman and Shatrughna.
Some Astro software specialists have calculated back the
possible combination of the planetary positions as explained by
Sage Valmiki and concluded that the year of birth should be BC
Many astro pundits opine that the horoscope of Lord Rama
including the position Mercury and Nodes are that the one illustrated
below;

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
The highlight of the horoscope is that 5 planets viz. Sun, Venus,
Mars, Jupiter and Saturn are posited in their respective exaltation
sign, which made many astrological researchers in the past to look
at it with lot of anxiety and respect.
It is said that the thithi is sukla paksha
navami and the Moon is posited in
Punarvasu star ruled by Jupiter.
Punarvasu star in Cancer is the last pada
which forms 3 deg. 20 min. only. Thus
Lord Ram would have got the VMD of
maximum of 4 years of Jupiter.
Sage Valmiki had neither mentioned
about the planetary longitudes nor the
star in which the planets posited, except
for Moon.
When Moon is posited in Jupiter star
and conjoined with Jupiter, they do
aspect 07* house and offer the result
of 06* house. When 07* is linked to
06* house, one could conclude that the
harmony in marital life shall be too
average.
On the other hand, 07* lord Saturn's position in 04tn house
shuns romance and the marital life should be just mechanical one.

Chapter 19: Divorce and Dual Marriage
05* lord Mars is posited in 07* should definitely bring in some
romance between the couple. Occupancy of Mars in 07* house is
perceived as Kuja dosha or Manglik. But for Cancer lagna, Mars is
yogakaraka and is lord of 05* house (romance) cannot be construed
as a factor for marital discord.
07* lord Saturn's aspect on 06th lord Jupiter and whose agent
Moon, should be a contributory factor for prolonging the marital
life.
Some mythological write ups proclaim that Sita mata was elder
than Lord Ram.
When Mars, Saturn and Sun become significator of 07* house,
one's first wife should be older than native, which is contrary to
the conventional practice of wife being younger than husband.
In this case 07* lord Saturn is aspected by Sun and 07* is
occupied by Mars. Thus the condition is satisfied.
Abduction is nothing but jail yoga. Sita Mata was abducted by
Ravana, the demon king of Lanka, by deceiving the Rama brothers.
When lagna is connected to 03, 08, 12, one could be in the
jail. For 07th house (Capricorn), Jupiter becomes lord of 03 and 12,
who aspects lagna of wife (Capricorn). Sun is the significator of
08* house, who aspects 07* lord Saturn. Hence Sun and Jupiter
(03, .08, 12), put together by their efforts, could abduct Sita mata.
Rahu’s position in 12* is definitely a contributory factor to the
incarceration of Sita Mata. In that case, Saturn should have been
placed in Rahu star Swati in Libra. 1 1 * lord Mars's position in lagna
(Capricorn) has definitely helped Sita Mata to attain freedom from
the clutches of Demon King Ravana.
Marital Disharmony and Prashna Theory
For marriage, take houses 02, 07 and 1 1 . For divorce, take
vyaya (negative) houses viz. 01 , 06, 10. 1 2* house stands for loss
in general. Houses 06 and 12 are detrimental for marital failures.
The following charts belong to a couple. The husband was
born on 17 Feb 1970 at 3-45 pm at Mumbai (chart No. 46):
Date: February 17, 1970

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)

In the chart of the husband shown above, lagna is in Gemini.
07* house falls in Sagittarius at 26 deg. 33 min. at Purva Ashada
star ruled by Venus. Venus is lord of 05* house, which promotes
romance.
07* lord Jupiter is also posited in 05* house, which again
promotes romance.
Then how did marital altercations have been reported?
Definitely negative houses such as 01, 06, 10, 12 should be
connected to 02, 07, 1 1 houses for creating flutter in marriage.
Mars is the lord of 06* house. There are no occupants of 06*
house. Mars is posited in 10* house, which is a negative house for
long time relationship. Mars is aspecting Jupiter (07* and 1 0* lord)
by its 08* aspect, thereby causing rupture in 07* significations.
Hence 06 and 10 are linked to 07* house.
Mars is lord of 11th house too. But by its position in 1 0* negates
long time relationship. Besides, Mars is the planet who promotes
quarrels and arguments. When Mars is in 1 0* house, one will behave
independently and also try to dominate the other.
Stars ruled by Mars are Mrigashira, Chitra and Dhanishta. Planet
posited and Mars star is only Sun. Hence Sun also will give the
result of 06, 11 and 10* houses.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Nodes connected with Mars are none. But Sun, an agent of
Mars, is conjoined with Rahu, while Sun aspects Ketu. Hence Nodes,
Rahu and Ketu, will give the result of Sun. Sun signifies negating
houses 06 and 10. Hence Nodes will also contribute to give results
Any planet posited in Nodes' stars viz, Ashwini, Makha, Moola
ruled by Ketu and Arudra, Swati and Satabhisha ruled by Rahu
shall offer the result of the respective Node.
Jupiter is posited in Swati star. Venus and Rahu are posited in
Satabisha. Hence Jupiter and Venus will offer result of Rahu. Rahu
will give result of 06 and 10. Hence Venus and Jupiter also will
provide result of 06 and 10 houses. Of course, Venus is lord of 12.
Ketu will offer result of 06 and 10 through Sun. Planet posited
in Ketu star (Ashwini) is only Saturn. So Saturn also gives result of
06, 10. Saturn aspects Jupiter. Hence Jupiter besides gives result
of 06 and 10, under aspect of Mars and Satum (both signifying 06
and 10), has become futile for offering 07* results.
These combinations all put together has made his marital life
miserable.
It will not be out of place to mention here that it shall be
unwise to blame any koota like nadi koota, yoni koota, gana koota,
etc. for any case of a marital discord.
As regard the current planetary operating period viz. Vimshottari
Maha dasha (VMD), the native is running Mercury dasha, Moon
Bhukti and Sun Antara upto 1 st week of August 2010.
Dasha lord Mercury is slightly perturbed in marital matters
being lord of 01 (negation to 2— addition of a member), lord of 04
(negation to romance— 5th house) and occupant of 08* house
(impediments and obstacles). Mercury is aspected by Saturn, who
signifies 06 and 1 0.
Satum always promotes enmity.

Chapter 19: Divorce and Dual Marriage
Bhukti lord Moon is lord of 02 and occupies 0 1 st house. Moon
is in the star of Jupiter (Punarvasu) lord of 07, 10 and occupant of
05* house. Moon hence in total signifies 01, 02, 05, 07, 10th houses.
In these except 10* house, all are favourable for marital matters.
How does then Moon create rupture in marital life? The star lord of
Moon is Jupiter, who signifies 06 and 1 0* houses.
Antara lord is Sun, who, as it is, signifies 06 and 10 through
Mars. Hence dasha, Bhukti and antara lords do promise for
separation.
The wife was born on 19-Aug-1974 at 4-30 a.m., Bangalore,

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
She is having Gemini rising in Arudra star ruled by Rahu at 11
deg. 18 minutes. 07* bhava in Sagittarius is falling in Ketu star
Moola. Ketu is in 12* house, the house of loss. Planets posited
in Ketu stars are Mercury and Sun. So they will give result of 07*
and 12* house.
07* lord is Jupiter, who is posited in 09* house and is in own
star. Hence Jupiter should be strong. Mars is the lord of 06* house,
which negates marriage. Mars is aspecting Jupiter. Hence the marital
discord has taken place.

Chapter 19: Divorce and Dual Marriage
The wife is going through VMD of Mars dasha, Sun Bhukti and
Jupiter Antara. Mars signifies 06* house. Bhukti lord Sun signifies
12 and not 06* house. But it is conjoined with Mars. Next bhukti
shall be of Moon. Moon signifies 02,03,12,05 houses through self
and Venus. With this Mars dasha will be completed.
Next dasha shall be of Rahu. Rahu is posited in 06* house
shall not be favouring for marital harmony.
Saturn brings in enmity. She is born in Purva star in Leo and
transit Saturn in the second house from Leo, which means the last
phase of Saade sath is being experienced by the native. Please
note Saturn's placement in Punarvasu star ruled by Jupiter, while
Jupiter is the lord of 07* house. Hence Saturn is connected to 07*
house and brought in marital disharmony during its cycle over
natal Moon.
In order to evaluate as to whether the couple will eventually
separate or not, astrologers are required to take a time chart and
study. Accordingly, a time chart is taken for the moment of
judgement and the same is appended here below:—
Time Chart (No.48)
Date: July 23, 2010
Time Zone: 5:30:00 (East of GMT)
Hyderabad, India
Vedic Weekday: Friday (Ve)
Nakshatra: Moola (Ke)
Hora Lord: Sun
Ayanamsa: 23-54-28.90
Sidereal Time: 8:13:42

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Here in the horary or parshna chart, Libra rising at 07 deg. 50
min. and the corresponding 07* bhava falls in Ketu star. Ketu is in
a dual sign and signifies Rahu and Mercury. Rahu in turn signifies
Venus and Jupiter. Hence Ketu signifies 06* house through RahuJupiter.

Chapter 1 9: Divorce and Dual Marriage
07* lord is Mars. Mars is posited in 12* house along with 04*
and 05* lord Saturn. Both Saturn and Mars are signifying 11*
house through Sun. But Sun is in 10* house. Besides, Mars and
Saturn are under the aspect of 06* lord Jupiter. Hence it is felt that
the couple will separate and will go in for legal separation due to
the connection of Jupiter.
What About Second Marriage?
The following chart no. 49 belongs to a female, who was
married, but unfortunately divorced.
For second marriage take 09* house along with 07* and 1 1 *
houses. 09* house is the bhatru (younger) of 07* house, signifying
second spouse. Mercury and dual houses signify duality of events.
If these houses are somehow linked, then one could boldly declare
that there will be second marriage for the native.
Date: September 8, 1970
Time Zone: 5:30:00 (East of GMT)
Mumbai, India
Lunar Yr-Mo:
Tithi:
Vedic Weekday:
Nakshatra:
Sunrise:
Sunset:
Janma Ghatis:
Ayanamsa:
Sidereal Time:
Sadharana - Bhadrapada
Sukla Sapthami (Sa)
Tuesday (Ma)
Anuraadha (Sa)

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)

Chapter 19: Divorce and Dual Marriage
The parents, as usual, are anxious and worried. Question was
raised as to whether this girl, who is now 40 years old, could marry
again.
For second marriage, take 09* house. If there is link between
07, 09 and 1 1 , second marriage could be predicted.
07* bhava falls in Rohini star ruled by Moon, while the 09*
bhava falls in Pushya star ruled by Saturn. Both Saturn and Moon
are linked since Moon is in Anurada star ruled by Saturn. But Saturn
is occupant of 06* house and is in the star of Sun, who occupies
and holding lordship of 10* house. Hence Moon will give result of
06* house.
09* lord Moon aspects 07* house, but is not linked to 07*
lord Venus. Mere aspect should take care of 2nd marriage.
Unfortunately, Moon is signifying 06* house and aspects 07* house
from lagna.
Mars is the lord of 06* house and is posited in a barren sign in
Ketu star Makha in 1 0* house. Mars aspects 09* lord Venus.
All these combinations do not augment for a second marriage
for the native.
Hence it was concluded and declared that there shall not be
second marriage for this native.
Moon, the index of the mind of one, signifies 06 and 01 in this
case, the houses negate marriage. Hence native also shall say no
to a second marriage.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Dual Marriage
Since wife of the native, whose chart no. 50 is given below,
passed away, he preferred to marry for a second time. The native
was born on 16 Aug 1965 at 8-10 a.m. near Calicut, Kerala.
Lagna falls in Leo at 26 deg 44 min. 07* Bhava therefrom
shall be in Aquarius in Purva Bhadrapada star, ruled by Jupiter. If
Jupiter or the 07* lord defines 07, 09, 1 1 then second marriage
could be predicted. Take 02, dual signs, Mercury and Mercury's
stars for addition of a member and duality.

Chapter 19: Divorce and Dual Marriage
Jupiter is lord of 05, 08 and is posited in 1 1 * house, in the star
of Mars, who signifies 03, 04, 09. Hence Jupiter will give result of
05, 08, 11, 03, 04, and 09. Saturn is posited in Jupiter star Purva
Bhadra, being lord of 07* house. Saturn is aspecting 09* house.
Hence Saturn, Mars and Jupiter are linked. Hence 2nd marriage is
promised. Native shall marry again in Venus-Saturn-Ketu period.
Venus signifies 2nd house and a dual house. Venus is the chief
Governor of marriage. Saturn signifies 07* house and is under
aspect of Jupiter. Ketu is aspected by Saturn and is in Mercury star
Jyeshta (duality). Ketu also will signify Mars (09* lord).

Unconventional Marriages
Second Hand Spouse
The title looks little sarcastic by saying second hand spouse.
There are some occasions when a person is married to an already
married person. In such cases one could address that person as a
second hand spouse (either husband or wife).
The astrological combinations found for marrying an already
married person is that Saturn, Mars and Mercury, who are connected
to 7* house. Saturn is the planet who signifies old, second hand
item, etc.
When Rahu is involved in that connection the person shall be
from other caste.
Let us see few examples and visualize if these combinations
are really working well in these charts: Chart No. 51
The Chart below is of a very popular person, born on October
16, 1948 at 12-05 am near Chennai.

Chapter 20: Unconventional Marriages 105
For marriages, consider houses 2, 7 and 1 1 . In the chart,
Satum is lord of 07 is posited in Ketu star, Makha, in Leo. Ketu
conjoined with Venus in Libra, will give result of Mercury first. Ketu
is aspected by Saturn and hence Ketu will give result of 07* along
with Mercury. Mars is posited in Saturn star, Anurada, in Scorpio.
Hence Saturn, Mercury and Mars become significators of 02, 7*,
1 1 * houses for the native to have the God's blessing to marry an
already married person, whereas the native was not married at
that time.
The marriage was solemnized on 02-May-1980 during MerJup-Mer-Mer period.
Aspect of 07* lord Saturn on dasha lord Mercury has promted
Mercury to conduct marriage in its period. Bhukti lord Jupiter is in
Ketu star, who will give Mercury and Saturn results.
05* lord Mars is in Satum star and hence signify 07* house,
making it a love marriage. Rahu signifies Mars and hence Rahu is
connected to 7* house. The married parties i.e., girl and the boy
were from different castes.
The planetary positions on the date of marriage at 1 2-20 pm
were as follow:

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
When reckoned from lagna, i.e., Cancer (of fhe native), all the
planets from Sun to Ketu are signifying either 2 or 7 or 1 1 . Chart
The native is born on 16-3an-1958 at around 4-30 am at
75E 34, 11 N 50, and was married to an already married person
during November 1984. But it was the first marriage for the native.
As: 27 Sc 55 Su: 2 Cp 08- DK Mo: 14 Sc 44- PiK Ma: 23 Sc 29- AmK
Me: 8 Sg 18- PK Ju: 7 Li 03- GK Ve: 21 Cp 51- BK Sa: 27 Sc 54- AK

Chapter 20: Unconventional Marriages
In the chart above, Asc is posited in Mercury star in Scorpio
and is tenated by Moon, Mars and Saturn. All of them are aspecting
7th house. Moon is in Saturn star, while Mars and Saturn are in
Jyeshta ruled by Mercury. Lord of 7th house, Venus, is in Moon star
Shravana, while Moon is in Saturn star. Hence the combination of
Mars, Mercury and Saturn has come into the picture and into the
07th house.
Chart No. 53: Warren Gamaliel Harding, born on November
Ohio, was the 29* US President from March 4, 1921 until his death
on August 2, 1923. The natal chart is given below:

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession tS Health )
Navamsa
President Harding
November 2, 1S65
e Gk
MO
Body
Lagna
Sun - MK
Moon - PK
Mars - AmK
Mercury - AK
Jupiter - GK
Venus - BK
Saturn - PiK
Rahu - DK
Ketu
Longitude
Significations
09, Ve, Ma, Me
03, Ve, Me, Ju
On July 8, 1891, Harding married
Florence Kling DeWolfe. Florence was
a divorcee, five years Harding's senior,
and the mother of a young son, Marshall
Eugene DeWolfe. She had pursued
Harding persistently until he reluctantly
proposed.
In the chart of President Harding
Capricorn rising, and the lord of 7th
house being Moon, is aspected by
Warren Harding
Saturn, Mars and Mercury are conjoined
with Sun made h s wife older than him.

Chapter 20: Uncon ventionai Marriages
It was a love marriage. One could see
Venus, being lord of 5, giving romance,
is posited in Moon star Hasta and
thereby signifying 7th house.
The dasha ran at the time of marriage on July was of
Sun-Mer-Rah. ^ 1891
Sun is posited in Rahu star Swati. Rahu will give result of 7th
house through Venus. Mercury and Sun are aspected by 7th lord
Moon. Hence planetary combination and dasha operated at the
time of marriage signaled for love marriage.
In the chart of Felipe De Borbon is the crown Prince of Spanish
monarchy (Chart No. 54). Tbe prince was born on 30 Jan 1 968
at 12-45 pm Madrid, Spain, 40 N 24, 03 W 41 is married to Letizia
Ortiz, a Television journalist, a commoner and a divorcee.
In the chart of crown Prince Felipe, Aries is rising as per the
chart appended below:

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Crown Prince Felipe
07th lord Venus is in Ketu star Moola in
Sagittarius, a dual sign. Hence Venus
will give the result of Ketu.
Ketu is posited in Virgo, another dual
sign, in Chitra star ruled by Mars. Since
Ketu is in Virgo in Chitra star, it wil signify
Mercury and Mars. Besides, Ketu is
aspected by Saturn and Mars. Star lord
of Venus is Ketu, who is getting
connected to a dual sign (Virgo),
Mercury, Mars and Saturn indicates that
the spouse was already married.
There are cases reported when the Wife older is than him or
the husband is quite older than the average age difference the
society practiced in a particular era while solemnizing maniage
between a couple.
These types of alignments could be called unconventional
marriages where the age of wife is more than that of her husband
or the wife is too younger than the husband.
Age Difference Between Couple
Prince Charles of UK
Crown Prince Charles, Prince of Wales, born Charles Philip
Arthur George, on 14 Nov 1948 at 9-14 pm, London, UK, 51
N 30, 00 W 10, is the eldest child of Queen Elizabeth II and
Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh (chart No. 55).

Ae: 12Cn22 Su 29LZ3AK Mo: 7/V23-GK Ma: Z7Sc55-AmK
M»: I3LI&PK Ju: 6SJ51-DK Ve: 23W21-BK Sa: (2L«WPK

112 Basics of Nakshatra Padhalhi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Prince Charles first married Lady Diana Spencer on 29 Jul 1981
(Mon-Jup-Ven). She was born on 01st July 1961.
After the separation from 1 st wife and her eventual death in a
car accident in Paris in 1997, in 2005 Prince Charles married- his
long time friend Camilla Parker Bowles.

Chapter 20: Uncon ventional Marriages
Princess of Wales Dutchess of Cornwall
Lady Diana Spencer Camilla Parker Bowles
First Wife Too Younger
It is said that when Moon, Venus and Mercury signifies one's
07th house, his first wife shall be too younger.
Lady Diana Spencer was 12 years and 07 months younger
than Prince Charles.
07th house, which signify first wife, falls in Capricorn in Moon
Shravana. Moon signifies Ketu and is in Aries. Ketu in turn signifies
Venus and Mercury.
Second Wife Older Than Him
When the pertinent house i.e., (for 1 st wife take 07th house
and for second wife, take 09th house) is connected to Sun, Saturn
and Mars, the wife shall be older than him.
Dutchess Camilla, the second wife of Prince Charles, was born
on 17 July 1947 and thus becomes 08 months elder than Prince
Charles.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In this chart Ketu, being a Node, will give the result of Mercury,
Sun, Moon, Saturn, Rahu and Venus. When Saturn, Sun and Mars
signify 09th house, second wife shall be older than him.
09th bhava star lord is Saturn. 09th lord is Jupiter and in whose
star Sun is posited. Venus, who is posited in Mars star Chitra,
aspects 09th house. Hence 2nd wife of Prince Charles was older
than him.
Already Married Person as Wife
09th bhava star lord Saturn is posited in Ketu star. Ketu signifies
Mercury. Venus is posited in a dual sign in Mars star Chitra. Hence
09th bhava is connected to Saturn, Mercury and Mars which gave
Prince Charles his second wife, who was already married at the
time of his marriage to her.
23rd US President - Benjamin Harrison
Benjamin Harrison (August 20, 1833 - March 13, 1901)
was the 23rd President of the United States, serving one term
President Harrison had married twice in his life. The second
marriage was afterthe death of the first wife. The horoscope chart

Chapter 20: Uncon ventional Marriages
US President #23 Benjamin Harrison (AUG 20, 1833, 03:18
AM LMT, 084W45', 39N09’, North Bend, Ohio, USA)
SAG
SCO
LIB
III 11-05 Mo
VIR

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Planetary Longitudes and Significtions
Wives
President Harrison's 1 st wife was Caroline Scott and second
wife was Mary Dimmick.
Mary Dimmick (April 30, 1858 - January 5, 1948) was the
second wife of President Harrison. She was 25 years younger than
Harrison, and was the niece of his first wife.
On October 22, 1881, Mary had married Walter Dimmick, a
son of the attorney-general of Pennsylvania. But Walter died three
months after their marriage, leaving her a widow at age 23.
A niece of Caroline, she, in 1889 moved into the White House
to serve as assistant to the First Lady. Sometime after Mrs. Harrison's
death in 1892, the former president and Mrs. Dimmick fell in love
and late in 1895 announced their engagement
09th bhava falls in Saturn star Uthara Bhadra in Pisces and
Saturn is the lord of 07* house. Saturn is posited in a dual sign,
Virgo. Hence Saturn is connected to 07 (marriage) and 09 (second
marriage). 07th lord Saturn aspects 09th house. Hence the second
marriage took place for President Harrison.
The age difference between President Harrison and his second
wife Mary Dimmick was 25 years, which is considered extra-ordinary
age difference and unconventional.

Chapter 20: Unconventional Marriages
09th lord is Jupiter, who is placed in Venus star Bharani and
signifies Venus. Jupiter is aspected by Moon. Mercury is posited in
Ketu star Makha, while Ketu signifies Venus. Moon is in Rahu star
and signify Rahu, who in turn signifies both Jupiter and Venus.
Hence, Venus, Moon and Mercury, through Ketu drove Harrison to
marry a too younger woman,
29th US President Warren Harding
US President #29, Warren Gamaliel Harding, was born on Nov.
GROVE, OH). President Harding married Flowrence Kling DeWolfe
on July 8, 1891. Florence was a divorcee, five years Harding's senior.
In this chart no. 57 of President Harding, Capricorn is rising.
For spouse, take 07th house, which falls in Cancer. Lord of Cancer
is Moon. Moon is posited in Aries. Planets posited in Libra will
aspect Moon. Sun, Mars, Mercury and Saturn are posited in Libra
and aspects 07th lord Moon. When Mars, Saturn and Sun is linked
to 07th house, the wife shall be elder than him.
Sachin Tendulkar - Indian Cricketing Icon
Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar, (chart no. 58) born on 24 Apr
1973 at 7-30 pm Mumbai, is a cricketing icon in India for the last
20 years. He has achieved phenomenal success in this field.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Sachin Tendulkar
Sachm Tendulkar
Ma: ■ aCpffl-ta*
CL: SCpDl ’
Ms: ■ J (7RI4-W T -At
Ra ITSj5l.'CK Ks
MAifi-PK
10 At 51- OK AffMo:
iscpept; J.vfe
175*5) Sf’IS-HL;

Chapter 20: Unconventional Marriages 119
Tendulkar's wife is said to be elder than him. Lagna is falling in
Libra and automatically 07th house shall be Aries.
Mars is the lord of 07th house and in whose star (mrigashira)
Saturn is posited. Hence Saturn signifies 07th house. Sun is an
occupant of 07th house. Hence Mars, Saturn and Sun become
significators 07th house, paving way for wife to be older than him.

Love Marriage
Love marriage is not common now-a-days in India. Love or
romance is seen from 05th house, while marriage is from 07th house.
When 05m and 07th are linked, one could get married after a love
affair, if the dasha / bhukti / antara are promising.
In the chart No. 59 mentioned below, a female bom on 21
Sep 1949 at 8-00 a.m. near New Delhi, fell in love with someone
and got married. The chart is shown below:
In the chart above, 05th lord is Saturn, while 07th lord is Jupiter.
7th lord Jupiter does not signify 05th house, except aspecting 05*
lord. It shall be more accurately pronounced in the following manner:

07th bhava falls in Mercury star Revati at 28 deg. 19 min. in
Pisces. 05th bhava falls in Mars star Dhanishta. Mercury is posited
in lagna at 26 deg. 04 min., which shall be Chitra star ruled by
Mars. Hence Mercury has got connected to 05 and 07 bhava, giving
way for romance and marriage.
In the chart No. 60 of Ms. Geethika, born on 19-Mar-1984 at
12-15 pm 79 E 24, 09 IM 46 Place: Vaikom, Kerala.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In the chart, Jupiter is lord of 07th house and is posited in the
star of Purva Ashada ruled by Venus. Venus is lord of 05th house.
Hence Jupiter signifies both 05th and 07th houses. Hence the native
got married to a boy whom she loved before marriage.
The marriage took place in Jupiter VMD, Saturn Bhukti and
Venus Antara. Jupiter is lord of 07th house. Saturn is in 05m house
(1 1 to spouse) and is posited in Jupiter star Visakha. Antara lord
Venus is lord of 05* house.
The following horoscope chart no. 61 is of Mrs. Sonia Gandhi,
wife of Late Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi. She is currently a member
of Indian Parliament, President of the ruling Congress party and
the Chairperson of ruling UPA.
The chart assumes significance with reference to her love
marriage with Rajiv Gandhi, son of the Indian Prime Minister when
Mrs. Gandhi was from Italy.
Date: December 9, 1946
Time Zone: 1:00:00 (E of GMT)
Lusiana, Italy
Lunar Yr-Mo: Vyaya - Margasira
Tithi: Krishna Dwitiya
Vedic Weekday: Monday (Mo)
Nakshatra: Aardra (Ra)
Yoga: Subha (Su)
Karana: Taitula (Me)
Sonia Gandhi Hora |_orcL Mercury
Mahakala Hora: Saturn
Kaala Lord: Jupiter
Sunrise: 7:48:06 am
Sunset: 4:23:35 pm
Janma Ghatis: 33.6206
Ayanamsa: 23-01-09.79
Sidereal Time: 2:13:07

Chapter 21: Love Marriage
Sonia Gandhi met Rajiv Gandhi, who was enrolled in Trinity
College at the University of Cambridge, in 1965 at a Greek
restaurant.
05th house is considered for romance, while 07m for marriage.
Other supporting houses for marriage are 02 and 1 1 . When there
is a link between 05 and 07th houses, love marriage shall take
place, if the dasha and transit support. Rahu signifies other castes,
while Saturn signifies lower caste.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In this chart, Cancer is rising and 07th lord shall be Saturn.
Mercury is posited in Saturn star Anurada in 05th house. Hence
Mercury shall offer the result of 05 (romance) and 07 (marriage).
Rahu is posited in Taurus and is aspected by Mercury. Hence Rahu
will offer result of Mercury i.e., wherever Mercury gives result. Since
Mercury offers result of 05 and 07, Rahu also offers the same.
Indeed Rahu signifies other caste, foreign, etc. for one to marry
from outside community.
The couple was married in 28th Feb, 1968 in Jup-Ket-Sat-Ven
period at New Delhi. Dasha lord Jupiter is the vivaha karaka. Bhukti
lord Ketu is in 05th house and is conjoined with Mercury. Mercury
signifies 05 (romance) and 07 (marriage). Hence Ketu also gives
the same result. Antara lord Saturn is lord of 07th house (marriage).
Sookshma lord Venus is lord of 1 1 th house (long time relationship).
Hence the chart and the period ran did favour for romance
and marriage from outside community.
Love Marriage for Parents
The native is a boy (chart no. 62) born on March 06, 2002 at
4-30 pm, 1ST, Hyderabad, India, to parents who belong to difference
castes and married after a love affair.
Does the boy's chart indicate the above? The chart of the boy
appended below. Mother is seen from 04^ house, while father is
seen from 09m house. Hence chart taken out for mother and father,
as derived from the boy's chart, using 04th and 09th house as lagna
for mother and father respectively.
Date:
Time:
Time Zone:
Place:
5:30:00 (East of GMT)
Lunar Yr-Mo:
Tithi:
Vedic Weekday:
Nakshatra:
Hyderabad, India
Vrisha - Magha
Krishna Ashtami (Ra)
Wednesday (Me)
Jyeshtha (Me)

Chapter 21: Love Marriage
Yoga:
Karana:
Janma Ghatis:
Ayanamsa:
Sidereal Time:
Vajra (Mo)
Kaulava (Ma)
Me:
Ra.
Body
Lagna
Sun-BK
Moon - AmK
Mars-PK
Mercury - AK
Jupiter - PK
Venus - GK
Saturn - MK
Rahu-DK
Ketu
11 Ga53-PiK Ve:
Longitude
4 Pi 13-GK Sa:
Star/ p
Asre
PBha
Jye
Aswi
Dhan
Ardr
UBha
Rohi
Mrig
Jye
05th house is considered for romance, while 07th for marriage.
Other supporting houses for marriage are 02 and 1 1 . When there
is a link between 05 and 07th houses, love marriage shall take
place, if the dasha and transit support.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In order to consider whether there was love marriage between
parents, we need to rotate the chart to the respective houses and
reckon link between 05 and 07 houses. Rahu signifies other castes,
while Saturn signifies lower caste.
For the boy, Cancer is rising. Hence 04th house shall be Libra.
Take this as lagna for mother.
07th house for mother shall be Aries. Its lord is Mars. Planet
posited in Mars star, Mrigashira, is Rahu. Rahu is conjoined with
Saturn, who is lord of 05‘n house. Hence Rahu will give the result
of 05 (romance) and 07 (marriage), besides other caste. Hence
the mother had love marriage with other caste boy.
Since the boy is born in Cancer lagna, take 09th house, which
is Pisces, as lagna for father.

Chapter 21: Love Marriage
07th house for father shall be Virgo. Mercury is the lord of 07th
house. Planet posited in Mercury star, Jyeshta, is Moon. Moon is
the lord of 05* house (romance). Hence there is love marriage for
father awarded by Mercury and Moon. Rahu is in Taurus and is
aspected by Moon. Hence Rahu will give result of Moon. Hence
Rahu signifies 051h house (romance). So, Mercury, Moon and Rahu,
put together gave love marriage for father with other caste girl.
Note: In this dasha, Bhukti, antara cannot be
considered, since we are using son's chart as basis.

Multiple Marriages
Sir Ahmed Salman Rushdie, KBE, is a British-lndian novelist
and essayist. He achieved notability with his second novel, Midnight's
Children (1 981 ), which won the Booker Prize in 1 981 .
His fourth novel, The Satanic Verses was the centre of a
controversy, drawing protests from Muslims in several countries.
Some of the protests were violent, in which death threats were
issued to Rushdie, including a "fatwa" against him by Ayatollah
Khomeini, Leader of Iran, in 1989.
He was appointed a knight Bachelor by Queen Elizabeth II for
"services to literature" in June 2007. He holds the rank Commandeur
in the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres of France. In May 2008 he was
elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters.
Sir Rushdie was married four times, according to reports
circulated. The horoscope (chart no. 63) as per the available

Chapter 22: Multiple Marriages
Sunrise:
Sunset:
Janma Ghatis:
Ayanamsa:
Sidereal Time:
Details of the marriages of Sir Rushdie are as per details given
below:—
Padma Lakhsmi 17 Apr 2004 - 02 Jul 2007 (divorced)
Elizabeth West 28 Aug 1997 — 2004) (Divorced) 1 child
Marianne Wiggins 28 Jan 1988 — 02 Mar 1993 (Divorced)
Clarissa Luard 1976 - 1987 (Divorced) 1 child
Take 02, 07 and 1 1 houses for marriage. 05th will contribute
romance. 04m will negate romance. Houses, 01 , 06, 10 along with

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
12 will see separation from marital relation. Take Jupiter and Venus
for marriage.
For 1 st marriage, take 07th house and for subsequent marriages,
take 03rd house there from i.e., houses, 07, 09, 11, 01 , 03 and so
on.
Jupiter is lord of 09 and occupant of 07th house, whereas
Mercury being lord of 06th house is posited in Punarvasu star ruled
by Jupiter. Hence Mercury gives result of 06m and 07m house.
Mercury signifies multiplication. Jupiter is the vivaha karaka. Saturn
is lord of 10 and 11 signifying long time relationship (11) and 10
(negation to it). Lagna lord Mars, who signifies 05m house (romance)
aspects Jupiter.
07th lord Venus is in Rohini ruled by Moon, whereas Moon is in
a dual sign along with Mercury. Venus is conjoined with Rahu.
Rahu signifies other castes, religion, etc.
First Marriage
1 st marriage took place in 1976 in Jupiter dasha, Venus bhukti
period. Both Jupiter and Venus signify 07m house. Hence period
favoured for marriage.
Second Marriage
2nd marriage took place on 28 Jan 1988 in Saturn-MercuryRahu period. Saturn signifies 04, 10, 11 houses. Saturn is aspected
by Mars, who signifies 01 , 08, 05, 03 houses. Mars aspects 07m
house, and is aspected by Jupiter from 07m house. Rahu and
Mercury signifies 07m house (marriage) through Venus and Jupiter
respectively. Jupiter is lord of 09th house.
Third Marriage
3rd marriage took place on 28 Aug 1997 in Saturn-Rahu-Saturn.
Saturn signifies 1 1 m house (3rd spouse), and is aspected by Mars.
Significations of Mars are already discussed. Bhukti lord Rahu
signifies 02, and 07m houses through Venus.

Chapter 22: Multiple Marriages
Fourth Marriage
4th marriage took place on 17 Apr 2004 in Mercury-MercurySaturn. Mercury signifies 07th house through Jupiter. Significations
of Saturn is already discussed.
First Divorce
1st marriage was divorced in 1987 during Saturn-Mercury
period. Saturn signifies 04, 10, and 11th house. 10th stands for
vyaya to 1 1 m house (long time relationship. 04th house is vyaya to
05th house (romance). Bhukti lord Mercury signifies 06th (negation
to marriage), 12 (separation— through Jupiter), and is aspected by
Judge Jupiter. Hence period favoured for divorce due to bitter
relationship between the couple.
Second Divorce
2nd marriage was divorced on 02 Mar 1993 during SaturnVenus-Mercury. Signification of Saturn and Mercury are discussed
in the previous paragraph. Bhukti lord Venus signifies 02, 07, 03,
04 houses. 4th negates romance.
Third Divorce
3rd marriage was divorced in 2004 during Mercury-Mercury
period. The significations of Mercury were already discussed.
Fourth Divorce
4th marriage was ended on 02 Jul 2007 Mercury-Venus-Saturn.
The significations of Mercury, Saturn and Venus are discussed in
the previous paragraphs.
Hence the combinations formed in the chart of Sir Rushdie
arranged and derailed marriages in his life.
Elizabeth Taylor
Dame Elizabeth Rosemond Taylor, DBE (born 27 February
1932), also known as Liz Taylor, is an Anglo-American actress. She
is known for her acting talent and beauty, as well as her Hollywood
lifestyle, including many marriages. Taylor is considered one of the
great actresses of Hollywood's golden age. (Chart no. 64)

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Date: February 27, 1932
Time Zone: 0:00:00 (East of GMT)
London, UK
Lunar Yr-Mo: Prajapati - Magha
Tithi: Krishna Shashthi (Ve)
Vedic Weekday: Friday (Ve)
Nakshatra: Visakha (Ju)
Yoga: Dhruva (Ke)
Karana: Vanija (Ve)
Sunrise: 7:00:22 am
Elizabeth Taylor Sunset: 5:27:47 pm
Janma Ghatis: 48.1095
Ayanamsa: 22-54-34.20
Sidereal Time: 12:37:2

Chapter 22: Multiple Marriages
In the case of Liz Taylor, who has been married eight times to
seven husbands, Aquarius is rising in Mercury star Jyeshta, with
Janma star has been Visakha in Libra sign.
07th house falls in Taurus, whose lord is Venus. There are no
occupants in Taurus, nor any planet in Venus stars. But Rahu and
Ketu will signify Venus.
Venus is posited in Pisces, 05th house, which shall be house of
romance. Jupiter is occupant of 09th house and Saturn aspects it.
Moon is the only planet who is in Jupiter star. Rahu in Pisces will
give result of Venus, Jupiter and Saturn. So wherever Venus, Jupiter
and Saturn give result, Rahu, as a catalyst, will just follow. So,
Rahu will give 07, 09, 11, 03, 05, 07, 09 houses, which shall be
marriage nos. 01, 02, 03, 05, 06, 07, 08. For the 04th marriage,
Mars shall be responsible, who is also in Rahu star.
06th lord Mars is posited in Rahu star, Sathabisha, in Aquarius,
while Rahu signifies 07th house through Venus. Hence, through
Rahu, Mars will give result of 01 , 07, and 06 houses, paving way
for separation in marital life.
The marriage details of Ms. Taylor are detailed below:
First Marriage
First marriage took place on 06-May-1950 and was divorced
on 29-Jan-1951 during Sat-Mer-Sat period of VMD. Dasha lord
Saturn is lord of 03 and 04 and signifies 04 and 10. But Saturn is

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
aspected by Jupiter who signifies 05, 02 and 1 1 . Bhukti lord Mercury
is lord of 1 1 and signifies 05 and 07 through Rahu. Thus period is
coincided with houses which offer marital ceremony.
Divorce of 1 st marriage took place on 29-Jan-1951 during SatKetu-Rahu period. Saturn signifies 10th house since posited in Sun
star. Ketu will give result of Mercury, Venus, Sun and Mars. Mars
signify 01 , 04, 05 and 06 while Venus signifies 07 and 05. Antara
lord Rahu is in Saturn star. Period cited favour for divorce.
Second Marriage
Second marriage took place on 21 Feb 1952 in Sat-Ven-Ven
period.
Vivaha karaka Jupiter, who signifies 02, 04, 05, 08, 09 and 1 1
houses, is aspecting dasha lord Saturn. Saturn signifies 03, 04, 10
houses. Bhukti and Antara lord Venus signifies 05, 12, 07, 04, 08,
1 1 houses. The period favoured for romance and marriage.
Divorce from 2nd marriage took place on 26 Jan 1957 during
Sat-Mon-Ven period. Saturn signifies 03, 04, 10 houses. Bhukti
lord Moon signifies 09, 12, 02, 05 houses. Antara lord Venus signifies
figure, but 10 and 12 which negates marriage along with 04 and
08 prevailed. 04 negates romance while 08th house gives
impediments.
Third Marriage
Third marriage took place on 02 Feb 1957 during Sat-MonVen period, but her husband died on 22 Mar 1958 during Sat-MarVen period.
Vivaha karaka Jupiter, who signifies 02, 04, 05, 08, 09 and 1 1
houses, is aspecting dasha lord Saturn.
Antara lord Venus signifies 05, 12, 07, 04, 08, 1 1 houses.

Chapter 22: Multiple Marriages
Fourth Marriage
Fourth marriage took place on 12 May 1959 during Sat-RahSat period, and was divorced on 06 Mar 1964 during Mer-Mer-Ket
period.
Vivaha karaka Jupiter, who signifies 02, 04, 05, 08, 09 and 1 1
houses, is aspecting dasha lord Saturn.
Fifth Marriage
Fifth marriage took place on 15 Mar 1964 during Mer-Mer-Ket
period, but was divorced on 26 Jun 1974 during Mer-Rah-Mer period.
Sixth Marriage
Sixth marriage took place on 10 Oct 1975 during Mer-RahMar period, but was divorced on 29 Jul 1976 during Mer-Jup-Mer
period.
Seventh Marriage
Seventh marriage took place on 04 Dec 1976 during Mer-JupKet period, but was divorced on 07 Nov 1982 during Ket-MoonRah period.
Eighth Marriage
Eighth marriage took place on 06 Oct 1991 during Ven-SunSat period, but was divorced on 31 Oct 1996 during Ven-Rah-Ket
period.
World Heavy Weight Boxing Champion—
Muhammed Aii
Muhammad Ali (born Cassius Marcellus Clay Jr.) is a retired
American boxer and three-time World Heavyweight Champion, who
is widely considered one of the greatest heavyweight championship
boxers of all time. As an amateur, he won a gold medal in the light
heavyweight division at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome. After
turning professional, he went on to become the first boxer to win
the lineal heavyweight championship three times. (Chart no. 65)

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Mb: 20 Cp 25- BK Ju(R): IS Ta 65- MK Ve(R): 27Cp38-AmK Sa(R): 23 Ar 37- AK

Chapter 22: Multiple Marriages 137
Muhammad Ali has been married four times and has seven
daughters and two sons.
First Marriage
Ali met his first wife, cocktail waitress Sonji Roi, approximately
one month before they married on August 14, 1964. Rote objections
to certain Muslim customs in regard to dress for women contributed
to the breakup of their marriage. They divorced on January 1 0,
Second Marriage
On August 17, 1967, Ali (aged 25) married 17-year old Belinda
Boyd. After the wedding, she converted to Islam and changed her
name to Khalilah Ali, though she was still called Belinda by old
friends and family. They had four children: Maryum (b. 1968),
Jamillah and Liban (b. 1970), and Muhammad Ali Jr. (b. 1972).
Third Marriage
In 1975, Ali began an affair with Veronica Porsche, an actress
and model. By the summer of 1 977, Ali's second marriage was
over and he had married Veronica. At the time of their marriage,
they had a baby girl, Hana, and Veronica was pregnant with their
second child. Their second daughter, Laila, was born in December
1977. By 1986, Ali and Veronica were divorced.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Fourth Marriage
On November 19, 1986, Ali married Yolanda Ali. They had
been friends since 1964 in Louisville.
Ali has two other daughters, Miya and Khaliah, from extramarital
relationships
Cancer is rising in the eastern horizon and 07th house falls in
Capricorn. Jupiter, planet of religion, discipline and administration,
is the lord of 06th house (negates marriage) and is aspecting 07th
house and the planets posited therein viz., Sun, Moon, Mercury
and Venus. Besides, Jupiter signifies 07th house through Moon.
Venus posited in 07th house being in Mars star Dhanishta,
thereby signifying 05 and conjoined with the duplicate master
Mercury will prompt the native to land into more and more love
affairs and they result into wedlock.
Jupiter is lord of 06 (negation to marriage), 09th house (second
wife) aspects 07th house (marriage) and is posited in 1 1 th house
(third wife). Jupiter's aspect on 01 st lord Moon (4th wife) is also to
be taken into consideration along with Mercury's placement in 07*
house.
Richard Burten
Richard Walter Jenkins Jr. popularly known as Richard Burton
born on 20 Nov 1925 at 3-00 pm Pontrhydyfen, Wales, 52nl7,
Richard Burton, CBE (10 November 1925 — 5 August 1984)
was a Welsh actor. He was nominated seven times for an Academy
Award (without success) and was at one time the highest-paid
actor in Hollywood. He remains closely associated in the public
consciousness with his second wife, actress Elizabeth Taylor; the
couple's turbulent relationship was rarely out of the news.

Chapter 22: Multiple Marriages
Richard Burten

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Burton was married five times, first to Sybil Williams from
1949 to 1963, with whom he had two children, actress Kate Burton
and Jessica Burton. He was married twice, consecutively, to Elizabeth
July 1976). The first marriage took place in Montreal. Their second
marriage occurred sixteen months after their divorce, in the Chobe
National Park, Botswana.
First Marriage
Saturn is placed in 07th house and is in the star of Jupiter, who
signifies 09th house, enabling duality of marriages. But, Mars is
posited in 07th house and is in the star of Rahu, who is in 4th house.

Chapter 22: Multiple Marriages
4th house being vyaya to 5th (romance), there may not be much
bve in marital life for the native.
Second Marriage
07th lord Venus is posited along with Jupiter in 09th house in
Sagittarius, a dual sign. 11th lord Saturn is posited in 07th house. 1 st
lord Mars is posited in 07th house.
Third Marriage
1 1 th lord Saturn is posited in 07th house paving way for 3rd
marriage.
Fourth Marriage
Lagna lord Mars is in 07* house, giving way for 4th marriage.
Fifth Marriage
Third Lord Mercury is not connected to 07th house, but Venus,
being lord of 07th house, aspects 3rd house.
Negation To Marriage
But 06th lord Mercury is in own star and is not linked to Saturn,
Mars, or Venus for negating the marriage.
But Saturn (lord of 10th house) and Mars (lord of 01st house)
are signifying 07th house. 06th bhava falls in Sun star in Virgo. Sun
signifies 07th house through Saturn. Hence Sun signifies 06th and
07* houses and thereby causing rift and separation in marital life.
These combinations made Sir Burton to go through a situation
of 'marry-divorce-marry'
Dr M Karunandhi
Dr. Muthuvel Karunandhi, Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, born
on June 03, 1924 at 12-03 pm, 1ST, Tiruvarur, Tanjore Dist., Tamil
Nadu, India, 79 E 39, 10 N 46. The media reports reckon that Dr
Karunanidhi married three times viz. Padmavathi, Dayalu and
Rajathi. (Chart no. 67)

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Dr M Karunandhi
Me 25 At 37- MK Ju (R): 22 Sc 35- PK V*: 23Gs>56-PlK S* (R): 3U21-DK

Chapter 22: Multiple Marriages
1 st spouse shall be seen from 07th house and bhatru bhava
(03) there-from shall be 09th house for the second spouse and 3rd
spouse shall be reckoned from 1 1th house.
Mercury always signifies duality along with dual signs.
The lagna rising is Leo in Purva star ruled by Venus at 16 deg.
30 min. and the corresponding 07th bhava falls in Aquarius in Rahu
star Satabhisha. Saturn is the lord of 07th house, who is posited in
09* lord Mars star, Chitra in Libra. Mercury is posited in 09th house
(second spouse) and aspects 07th lord Saturn. Mercury is also the
lord of 1 1 th house (third spouse).
Hence Mercury who signifies 09 and 1 1 and its aspect on
Saturn, who is in 09th lord Mars star paved way for multiple marriage.
Mars is posited in 06th house. Although Saturn is lord of 06 and
07th house, by virtue of Saturn's placement in Mars star with Mars
in 06th house has definitely caused separation in marital alliance.
In that sequence, 1 st lord should be the 4th spouse. The lord of
1st house is Sun, who is posited in Moon star (12th lord) in 10th
house (negation to 11), should have definitely not created a way
for yet another marital alliance.

Extra Marital Affairs
Some persons do indulge in extra marital affairs, thanks to
the planetary combinations. Mercury or signs viz. Gemini, Virgo,
Sagittarius and Pisces notify duality. Planets posited in the stars of
Mercury, such as Aslesha, Jyeshta and Revati shall also signify
Mercury and hence duality. Nodes posited in Gemini or Virgo will
also signify Mercury.
07m house signifies marriage and spouse. 03rd will signify
younger co-borns. Hence 09th shall be younger co-bom for 07*
house or a second spouse.
Being a mystical house, 08m house when connected to 07m,
shall indicate secret pursuits with reference to spousal affairs. 12m
house shall be the secret affairs, loose sex life, including bed
pleasures. Jupiter is putra-karaka and Venus signifies love affairs
along with 05m house. Saturn flouts rule or does not care about
the rule.
Conjunction or mutual aspect or exchange of houses or stars
between Venus and Moon who together signify womenfolk have to
be taken into consideration.
Frank Gifford born on 16 August 1930 at 02:10 AM Santa
Monica, CA, USA, 34N01, 118W.
Handsome and personable, Gifford, had an extra-marital affair
in 1997 with TWA flight attendant Suzen Johnson, which put his
name in the media machine as a philandering husband which
threatened the stability of his marriage. He suffered the public
embarrassment of having his picture all over the scandal rags.
In the chart mentioned below no. 68 Gemini is rising with
07* lord Jupiter is posited in lagna, a dual sign.

Chapter 23: Extra Marital Affairs
\ /ju X / HI
IS u Vy sp SW Mo
As Ma
Ve
GL X
AL
Ke
SL
(Sa)
Jupiter is aspected by Saturn from 07* house, being lord of 08
and 09. Saturn gives the result of 05* also through Ketu. Mars,
posited in 1 2* house aspects Saturn through 08* aspect.
Venus and Moon have exchanged their stars, i.e., Venus is in
Hasta star ruled by Moon, while Moon is in Bharani star ruled by
Venus.
Chart no. 69 of Tiger Woods, the world famous celebrity golf
player, born 30 Dec 1975 at 22-50 hours, Long beach CA, USA,
was admitted to have extra marital relationships.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)

Chapter 23: Extra Marital Affairs
Jupiter is lord of 07, who is posited in
Mercury star Revati in a dual sign,
Pisces. 09th lord is Venus, who is
aspected by Jupiter. Hence there is a
relationship established between Jupiter
and Venus.
09* lord Venus gets aspect of 08* lord
Mars. Venus and Moon are conjoined.
Jupiter signifies 04, 07, Me» 05, 01, and
10. Hence Jupiter also contributes to
romance.
Sun is lord of 12, posited in Purva
Ashada star ruled by Venus. Hence Sun
signifies 09* house.
Chart (no. 70) of John F Kennedy born on 29 May 1917 at 309 pm Brookline, MA, USA was reported to have extra marital
relationships.
Naturally, there was constant gossip concerning the handsome
young President's extramarital adventures. The most persistent
rumors centered on movie stars Marilyn Monroe and Angie
Dickinson— Ms. Dickinson was a friend of the Kennedy family.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In this chart, 07* lord is Jupiter, who signifies 04, 07, 09, Su»
09 and 12. Jupiter is a strong significant of 09* house and is
conjoined with Venus, lord of 09. Venus is posited in 08* lord Mars
star, whereas Mars is posited in star of Venus. Moon is posited in
Venus star, Purva. Jupiter is lord of two dual houses (Sagittarius
and Pisces). Hence houses, 07,09,08 and 12 are involved along
with Jupiter. Saturn, being lord of 05* house (romance) aspects
Mars, who signifies 09* house.
Chart No. 71 of HG Wells was born on 21 Sept 1866 at 4-30
p.m. at Bromley, England, 51 N 24, 00 E 02.

Chapter 23: Extra Marital Affairs
Herbert George Wells (21 September
celebrated English author, best known
for his work in the science fiction genre.
He was also a prolific writer in many
genres, including contemporary novels,
history, politics and social commentary.
Together with Jules Verne, Wells has
been referred to as "The Father of
Science Fiction".
Wells was reported to have physical
Herbert George Wells affairs with Various Women.
In this chart, 07* lord Mercury is posited in 09* house and is
in the star of Sun, who is posited in a dual sign (Virgo). 07th house
is posited by Mars, who is lord of 05 and 12.
Moon is lord of 08* house, and is posited in Mars star Dhanishta
and hence signifies 02, 08, 05, 1 2, 07 houses.
In yet another case, Raj Kumar Patharphod (chart no. 72) is
apparently a gentleman with Commerce Degree and is employed
in a medium sized Indian Manufacturing Company. He is married
and is father of a baby girl of 4 years old.
But he is now understood have separated from his wife and is
living separately with his female friend. Does the chart indicate
any such bad relationship? Will he join his wife or continue to live
with his friend?
Date: Sept 16, 1980
Time Zone: 5:30:(E of GMT)
Jaipur, India
Lunar Yr-Mo: Raudra - Bhadrpda
Tithi: Sukla Sapthami
Vedic Weekday: Tuesday (Ma)
Nakshatra: Jyeshtha (Me)
Yoga: Priti (Me)

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Karana: Garija (Ju)
Ayanamsa: 23-29-27.86
Sidereal Time: 15:56:04
It appears that he got into love affair with his friend in Venus
dasha, Moon Bhukti. This also is the period he got separated from
his wife.
How does the natal chart fare with reference to marriage?
07* lord is Moon, who is posited in 1 1th house indicates very good
marital harmony. But Moon is in star of Mercury. Mercury signifies
06 (negation to marriage) and 09 (second wife). Mercury is in turn

Chapter 23: Extra Marital Affairs
in the star of Moon. Rahu and Venus are occupants of 07th house.
Venus is lord of 05 (romance) and 10 (negation to 1 1 * house).
Rahu signifies Venus, Mercury and Moon. Since 05* is appearing
often, native shall be more of a romantic person.
Saturn, who flouts rules, signifies 09* house (second wife)
also signifies 08* house through Sun. Jupiter is the lord of 12*
house, is posited in 08* house and is in the star of Sun, who is in
09* house. Hence combinations are well formed for the native to
ignore his first wife and go in for a second set up of marital life.
Let us take th^e horary chart for the time of judgement.
Now time is 3-53 pm at Hyderabad on 1 st July 2010 (Thursday)
and the horary chart is appended below:
Rahu star. Day is ruled by Jupiter. Hence ruling planets are Mars,
Saturn, Rahu and Jupiter. Since Node, who is in Venus star, take
Venus also.
In the prashna chart, lagna is rising in Anuradha star in Scorpio.
07* lord is Venus, who is posited in 09th house in Cancer in Aslesha
star ruled by Mercury. 09* house when connected to 07 indicates
second wife. Mercury signifies duality.
Mars is lord of 01 , 06, is posited in 10* house in the star of
Venus, who signifies 07, 12, 09. Hence the horary chart does not

It appears that he got into love affair with his friend in Venus
dasha, Moon Bhukti. This also is the period he got separated from
his wife.
How does the natal chart fare with reference to marriage?
07* lord is Moon, who is posited in 1 1 * house indicates very good
marital harmony. But Moon is in star of Mercury. Mercury signifies
06 (negation to marriage) and 09 (second wife). Mercury is in turn

Chapter 23: Extra Marital Affairs
in the star of Moon. Rahu and Venus are occupants of 07* house.
Venus is lord of 05 (romance) and 10 (negation to 1 1 * house).
Rahu signifies Venus, Mercury and Moon. Since 05* is appearing
often, native shall be more of a romantic person.
Saturn, who flouts rules, signifies 09* house (second wife)
also signifies 08* house through Sun. Jupiter is the lord of 12*
house, is posited in 08* house and is in the star of Sun, who is in
09* house. Hence combinations are well formed for the native to
ignore his first wife and go in for a second set up of marital life.
Let us take tl\e horary chart for the time of judgement.
Now time is 3-53 pm at Hyderabad on 1 st July 2010 (Thursday)
and the horary chart is appended below:
Rahu star. Day is ruled by Jupiter. Hence ruling planets are Mars,
Saturn, Rahu and Jupiter. Since Node, who is in Venus star, take
Venus also.
In the prashna chart, lagna is rising in Anuradha star in Scorpio.
07* lord is Venus, who is posited in 09* house in Cancer in Aslesha
star ruled by Mercury. 09* house when connected to 07 indicates
second wife. Mercury signifies duality.
Mars is lord of 01 , 06, is posited in 10* house in the star of
Venus, who signifies 07, 12, 09. Hence the horary chart does not

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
promise of a compromise with the wife. Instead, the native may
divorce his wife in Venus dasha, Mars Bhukti running up-to October
It is not men alone who go in search of a second relationship.
Women get maximum bad name in this line. Wine and Women
have been hand in hand from time immortal. Mostly women who
make this kind of relationship as profession, is called prostitution.

Denial of Marriage
Most people do get married in their life time, however some
do not. Astrology should be a perfect tool to diagnose as to why a
person is not fortunate enough to marry.
For marriage, take 07* house as the real house of marriage
with 02 and 11 as supporting house. 05* is celebration while 08*
becomes 02nd to 07* house. Some Astrologers consider 05 and
08* house too. Jupiter and Venus are the planets who signify
marriage.
When 02, 07, 11 houses are connected to its negating houses
viz. 01 , 06 and 10 along with 1 2* house (loss) and barren signs,
marriage could be denied. Take barren signs for fixing the final nail
on this aspect. Gemini, Leo and Virgo are considered barren signs.
Take Saturn as delay master. Conjunction or aspect of between
Saturn and Moon could cause delays, cancellation of proposals
and even engagements.
Rajesh (chart no. 73) is a bachelor as of 2010. He was born
Mysore, South India.
Ma: 8Ta27-GK Ju: 0Cn3S-DK Ve: 22PM1-PK S« <R): 24Li52-AmK

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Leo rising and 07* lord Saturn is posited in 3rd house and is in
Visakha star ruled by Jupiter. Jupiter is lord of 06* house and is
posited in 1 2* house in own star and hence marriage is denied.
Jupiter being lord of 06 and 09, is posited in 1 2* house in own star
caused the problem. Had Jupiter been in the star of Saturn (Pushya),
the chances of marriage should have been brighter in this case.
The conjunction of Saturn with Moon, causing punarphoo
dosha, has also contributed to denial of marriage in this case.
The person was born in Jupiter dasha with balance of 06 years
and 06 months. Thus, he will run Saturn VMD upto 25 years and
06 months. Thereafter, Mercury dasha shall run upto 42 years and
06 months. The significations of Jupiter and Saturn are discussed
here-above. Mercury is lord of 02, 11 and is posited in 10* house.
Out of these houses, Mercury will give more result of 1 0* house,
which is negating 1 1 * house.
07* bhava falls at 26 deg. 20 min. in Aquarius, which
corresponds with Purva Bhadra star ruled by Jupiter, Jupiter is in
own star in 12* house and is aspected by delay master Saturn.
Another native was bom on ll-EMov-1958 at 23-59 hours 1ST,
New Delhi, India, is yet to be married. (Chart no. 74).

Chapter 24: Denial of Marriage
In this case lagna falls at 27 deg. 17 min. in Pisces. 07* house
shall be in Virgo, a barren sign. Lord of Virgo is Mercury, who is
posited in Saturn star Anuradha in Scorpio. Saturn is the delay
master. Saturn aspects 07* house. Mercury is aspected by Mars
from Sun Star Kruthika. Mars will give result of 06* house. Sun is
lord of 06* house, which negates marriage.
Rahu is occupant of 07* house and is in the star of Mars (06*
house).

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi ( Marriage , Profession & Health)
07th bhava falls at 27 deg. 17 min in Virgo, which is
corresponding to Chitra star ruled by Mars. Mars signify 06* house
through Sun, since posited in Krithika star.
VMD Dasha ran for the native are: Jupiter upto 06 years and
11 months, Saturn upto 25 years and 11 months, Mercury upto 42
years and 1 1 months, Ketu upto 49 years and 1 1 months.
As per the social and traditional custom followed now-a-days,
marriageable age could be during Saturn dasha (in this case). Saturn
is posited in 10* house and aspects 07* house. Saturn gets the
aspect of Mars (06* house significator). Next dasha is that of
Mercury, who is again getting the aspect of Mars. All these
combinations led the native not to marry in her life.
The chart illustrated below is that of a native who was born on
1 9 Feb 1 959 at 05-45 hrs. in Bonn-Lengsdorf, Germany, who is yet
to get married. (chart no. 75):

Chapter 24 : Denial of Marriage
Lagna is at 21 deg. 38 min. in Sagittarius, and the corresponding
07* bhava falls in Gemini at the same longitude in Jupiter star
Punarvasu. Gemini is a barren sign. Jupiter is in 12* house in
Saturn star Anuradha. Saturn, the delay master, aspects 07* house
as well as Moon.
Venus is the lord of 06* house, which normally deny marriage,
is posited in Jupiter star Purva Bhadra. Hence Venus denies
marriage. Jupiter gets the aspect of Mars from 06* house. Hence
07* bhava star lord Jupiter becomes weak to offer marriage.
07* lord is Mercury, who is in 3rd house in Rahu star, Satabhisha.
Rahu is in 1 0* house in Moon star Hastha in Virgo and signifies
07* house through Moon and Mercury. Hence Mercury and Rahu
should be favouring for marriage.
But Moon is occupant of 07* house, being lord of 08* house.
Mars is posited in Rohini star in 06* house. Hence Mars signifies 06
and 07 to deny marriage.
Upto the 41st year of the native, the VMD ran were that of
Rahu, Jupiter and Saturn. Marriageble age should have been in
Jupiter and Saturn periods, but they did not favour for a marital
alliance. Of course, marriage could take place in Mercury period
also which ran from 41 st year to 58 years, since Mercury being lord
of 07* house. Mercury is aspected by Saturn, and is conjoined
with Sun. Sun signifies 06* house through Mars.
Unfortunately, all these combinations created no marital bliss
for the native.
A male nativity, born on 28 July 1946 at 04.36 a.m. Chennai,
India, 80 E 17, 13 N 04, is yet to be married. (Chart no. 76):

158 Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In this case, lagna falls in Jupiter star, Punarvasu, in Gemini.
07* lord is Jupiter. There are no occupants of 07* house. There
are no planets posited in the stars of Jupiter. Hence Jupiter alone
becomes significator of 07* house. Jupiter is posited in Virgo in
the star of Mars. Mars is lord of 06* house. Saturn, the delay
master, is aspecting 07* lord Jupiter. Moon is conjoined with Saturn
in Cancer.
07* bhava falls in Venus star Purva Ashada. Venus is in own
star, belong lord of 05, 12 and posited in 03rd house. Venus is

Chapter 24: Denial of Marriage
conjoined with Mars, who is lord of 06* house, besides aspecting
06* house.
Both Jupiter and Venus are posited in barren signs, viz. Virgo
and Leo respectively.
Native was bom in Saturn VMD with balance of approx. 18
years. Then on, upto 35 years, the native will have Mercury dasha.
Thereafter, Ketu dasha ran for next 07 years and Venus for next 20
years, i.e., upto 62 years. Mercury is lord of 01 and 04 and is
posited in 2nd house in own star. Mercury is the lord of 06* bhava
in Scorpio, being at 22 deg. 57 min. in Jyeshta star. Ketu signifies
06* house, Mercury and Mars. The significations of Venus are
already discussed. Hence the combinations illustrated above, did
not favour for a marital life.
Native, a girl, born on July 19, 1973 at 08-20 a.m. 1ST at 79 E
39, 10 N 46, nearTanjore, Tamil Nadu, India, is yet to get married.
(Chart no. 77)

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In this case, Leo is rising in the eastern horizon at 05 deg. 40
min. in Makha star ruled by Ketu. Saturn is lord of 07* house, who
is posited in 1 1 * house, but in a barren sign.
Moon is occupant of 07* house and in whose star, Sharvana,
Jupiter is posited in 06* house. Hence Jupiter will give result of 06
and 07, besides lord of 05 and 08. Jupiter gets aspect of Sun,
Mercury and Venus from 1 2* house. Occupant Moon is lord of 1 2*
house, and is posited in the star of Rahu. Rahu is in 5* house and
gets aspect of Saturn, being lord of 07* house. This combination
should be favourable, but in this chart, the bliss of marital life was
spoiled by Jupiter, who was aspected by Sun and Mercury from
Saturn star, who is the delay master.
The native was born with balance VMD of Rahu 08 years and
05 months. Subsequent VMD shall be of Jupiter upto 24 years,
Saturn upto 43 years and Mercury upto 60 years.
Dasha lord Saturn signifies 07* house. But Saturn is in a barren
sign and is aspected by Mars, who is signifies 04, 08, 09, 11, 12,
03 houses through self and Mercury, Besides, Saturn is lord of 06*
house.
All these combinations did not permit native to have the marital
bliss.
Rachel Carson, was an American marine biologist and author
of 'The Sea Around Us," 1951 , and "Silent Spring," 1962, as well as
two other popular books about ocean life.
In addition, Carson, through her writing, made science
accessible, beautiful and exciting to the common person.
Carson warned the public about the dangers to waterfowl of
DDT, and that introducing DDT into the North American ecosystem
could "upset the whole delicate balance of nature." Carson's
prophecies about the dangers of pesticides had come true. She
was a spinster.

Chapter 24: Denial of Marriage
Carson was born on 27 May 1907 at 2-00 a.m. Sprindale, PA,
USA. (Chart no. 78):
Time Zone: 5:00:00 (W of GMT)
Springdale, PA, USA
Tithi: Poumimasya (Sa)
Vedic Weekday Sunday (Su)
Nakshatra: Anuraadha (Sa)
Yoga: Siva (Me)
Karana: Bava (Su)
Hora Lord: Sun
Rachel Carson Mahakala Hora: Jupiter
Kaala Lord: Jupiter
Sunrise: 4:59:22 am
Sunset: 7:32:50 pm
Janma Ghatis: 52.5261
Ayanamsa: 22-28-01.99
Sidereal Time: 17:55:36

162 Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Lagna falls in Pisces at 05 deg. 38 min. in Saturn star Uthara
Bhadra. Corresponding 07' bhava falls in Virgo in Sun star. Sun is
lord of 06* house. Saturn is in own star and aspects both 07*
house as well as its lord Mercury from 1 st house. Moon is posited in
Saturn star and aspects 07* lord Mercury.
The native ran 12 years and 03 months of Saturn dasha and
Mercury dasha upto 29 years, Ketu upto 36 years, and Venus upto
56 years.
Mercury is lord of 07* house, but is aspected by Saturn and
Moon, besides conjoined with 06* lord Sun. Ketu is in 1 1 * house,
but signifies Sun and Saturn. Venus signifies 03, 08, 02 and is in
the star of Ketu who signifies 1 1 * house.
Hence Sun, Saturn and Moon put together brought about the
denial aspect in marital life for the native.
Female born on 24 Apr 1944 at 15-53 hours, 1ST, Shimoga,
South India, 13 N 55, 75 E 34 (Chart no. 79):

Chapter 24: Denial of Marriage
In this chart of native born in 1944, lagna falls in Sun star
Uthara in Virgo. Corresponding 07* bhava falls in Pisces in Jupiter
star. Jupiter is in 1 1 * house and aspects 07* should automatically
give the native a marital life.
Jupiter is conjoined with Rahu, who is in Saturn star. Hence
Rahu will give the result of both Saturn and Jupiter viz. 06 and 07
houses. The star lord of Rahu is Saturn, who is in a barren sign.
Besides, 06* lord Saturn aspects 07* house through its 10* aspect.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Saturn is posited in Mars star Mrigashira star ruled by Mars.
06* bhava falls in 01 deg. 05 min. in Aquarius, which shall
correspond with Dhanishta star ruled by Mars. Mars is posited in a
barren sign in Jupiter star, who is lord of 07* house. Hence Mans
gives the result of 06* bhava and 07* house.
All these combinations led the native to not getting married.
Native was born in Sun dasha and marriageable age shall be
during Mars / Rahu main periods or even than of Jupiter. Jupiter
should be strong to give marriage, but Mars and Rahu are not
favourable. It could be concluded that although Jupiter was strong
to give marriage, because of Rahu's significations and Saturn's
aspect on 07* house, the marriage did not materialize.

Children or Progeny
The main concept of marriage and marital life is for "vamsha
vardhana" or for continuance and prosperity of one's generation.
Hence it is essential and most important that Astrologer should
check the aspect of progeny.
Children bom to a couple could be either male alone or female
alone or both genders. In some cases twin children could also be
born. Delay and denial of children are the main aspect for Astrologer
to verify.
If the progeny is not promising, the marriage matching should
not be done with that chart, and the native may be asked to adopt
a child. In some cases people do go in for the sperm-donor system.
If 5* lord or house is heavily afflicted, then there will be
problems in having progeny.
For child birth, one could take 02, 05 and 1 1 * houses. 02
house stands for addition of a member, while 05* is child birth.
1 1 * house stands for fulfillment of desires, besides it is 5th house
of spouse.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Let us see if chart Mo. 80, which is appended below, promises
child birth or not:
The female nativity, is born on Oct 27, 1980 at 10-42 pm at
Hyderabad, India, was blessed with a female child on 1 6 Dec 2005
at around 1-30 pm.
Child birth took place in Jupiter-Mercury-Mars period. 5* house
is well fortified although lord of 5*, Venus, is posited in 04* house.
Planets posited in 5* house are Mercury and Sun. Venus and Jupiter
are posited in Sun star, while Rahu and Mars are posited in Mercury
star. Hence Jupiter dasha, Mercury bhukti and Mars antara, child
birth took place.
The baby was bom on 16 Dec 2005 at 1-30 pm with Asc.
rising in dasha lord Jupiter sign (Pisces) in Revati star ruled by
Mercury. Moon was in Gemini ruled by Bhukti lord Mercury (with
Moon) in Arudra star ruled by Rahu. In the chart of the mother of
the child, Rahu is posited in Bhukti lord Mercury star, Aslesha.
Transit Jupiter was in Swati star in Libra, which corresponds to
mother's 5* house.
In the chart No. 81 mentioned for a male nativity born on 02
Sep 1961 at 9-18 am near Cochin, Kerala, the child birth took place
on 26 May 1990 at 13-30 pm. during his Jup-JuppJup VMD period.
The child was born with lagna rising in Sun star in Leo and Moon in
Arudra star ruled by Rahu in Gemini.

Chapter 25: Children or Progeny 167
Dasha lord Jupiter, who is also putra karaka is posited in 04*
house, but is in Utharasada star ruled by Sun. Sun is lord and
occupant of 1 1 and is strongly disposed for 1 1 * house matters.
Sun is aspecting 05* house. Hence child birth is promised. But 05*
lord being Saturn, the child was born on a Saturday with Saturn as
significator of lagna (in Leo) of the child.
Twins
If you ask God Almighty for one child, God blesses you with
two children at a time, which is called twins.
Kalyan Verma's Saravalli vide Chapter 8 stanzas cited below
states that:—
Stanza - 16:Twin Birth. If the Sun and Jupiter be in Gemini,
or Sagittarius in aspect to Mercury, birth of two male children be
predicted. Two female children will be born, if Venus, Mars and the
Moon be in Pisces, or Virgo in aspect (of) Mercury.
Stanza — 21 -22: One Male Child and one female child to be
born, should Lagna and Moon be in even Raceis and be aspected
by a strong planet, then there are twins in the womb (one male
child and one female child). Similar results follow, if the Moon and
Venus are in even Raceis, or common Signs and be strong.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
This particular rule mentioned under stanza 1 6 for female twins,
the same is tested and found to be correct. If Asc lord, Mars and
3rd lord are conjoined and connected with a twin (dual) sign, twin
birth could be predicted.
Case no. 82: Please see the horoscope chart of mother of
the very above twins.
As per Kalyana Verma's Saravalli Chapter 8, stanza 1 6 if Venus,
Mars, Moon in aspect of Mercury and when they are placed in
Pisces (a female sign) twin girls will be borne.
Here in this case, Moon is not conjoined with other planets,
but is placed in Mercury's house, a dual house and is in the star of
Jupiter, dual house ruler. 5* lord is Venus (lord of progeny) and
hence twin girls were borne to the native. Hence mother's chart
indicates twin girl daughters, while daughters' chart should definitely
indicate twin birth.
There are many rules and planetary combinations, which could
cause twin births. Some of them have not been dealt here.

Chapter 25: Children or Progeny
One combination is that the As c lord (being Mars - significator
for co-borns) is placed in any of Mercury stars such as Aslesha,
Jyesta or Revathi, with the 3rd lord signifies a double-bodied house
and connected to Mercury will cause dual birth.
Chart no. 83: Kusuma (elder of the twin girls) born June 09,
2004 at 05-37 pm at Hyderabad, India, while the younger (of the
twin girls) was born at 540 pm.
Here you will see that the Asc lord Mars (self and younger coboms) and 3rd lord Saturn (younger co-borns) are placed in Gemini,
a twin sign. Besides, there are no planets in any of the stars owned
by Mercury, in order to signify duality. But both Saturn and Mans
are Mercury sign. The question of duality connected with Asc and
3rd lord are satisfied, and this indicates that natives are born as
twins.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Chart no. 84: Twin females 25* November 1967 at 10-20
pm and 10-23 pm at Hyderabad.
Me: 21 Li 59- BK Ju: 11 Le 25- PK Ve: 23Vi37-AmK Sa (R): 12P)30-PiK
Ra: 2 Ar36-AK Ke: 2U36 HL: 3 Pi SO GL: 26Aq26
The Asc lord Moon is placed in Venus star Purva Phalguni and
hence signifies Venus. Venus is posited in Mars (co-borns) star
Chitra in a dual sign, Virgo. 3rd lord Mercury is placed in Jupiter
(lord of two double-bodied houses) star Visakha. Ketu who is
conjoined Mercury is again placed in Mars star Chitta. Asc lord
Moon is placed with Jupiter (lord of twin houses). Lagna falls in
Saturn star Pushya, whereas Saturn is posited in Pisces, a dual
sign and is in mutual aspects with.
These combinations ensured that the native is born as twin.

Chapter 25: Children or Progeny
Chart no. 85: Twin females 22nd June 1970 at 10-45 pm and
10-48 pm respectively at 77 E 36, 12 N 58.
Asc lord Saturn is in 3rd house (house ot co-borns). Mars is
lord of 3rd house (co-borns) and also is the natural significating
planet for younger co-borns. Mars is placed in a dual bodied sign,
i.e., Gemini, in the star of Punarvasu ruled by Jupiter. Asc lord
Saturn and 3rd lord Mars are getting the aspect of Jupiter, lord of
two double-bodied sign, who is also placed in Mars star Chitra.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Chart no. 86: Miss Barbara Bush born 25* November 1981
at 09-50 a.m. Midland, Texas, USA and twin sister Miss Jenna Bush
born at 10-05 a.m. (twin daughters of 43rd US President George W.
Bush.)
Planetary positions at 10-05 a.m. on 25* Nov 1981 at Midland,
Texas, USA, West of GMT 6.00 hours 102 W 04, 31 N 59
Here in this case just see that Sagittarius is rising and the lord
Jupiter is placed in Chitra star owned by Mars, who is the natural

Chapter 25: Children or Progeny
karaca for co-borns. The third lord (signifying co-borns) Saturn is
placed in a dual sign Virgo, owned by Mercury. Besides, Saturn is
also placed in Chitra Star. Mercury, a planet of duality is placed in
Jupiter star Visakha, signifying duplication for Asc (self).
3rd lord Saturn is in a dual bodied house and is in Mars star
Chitra. Mars is the natural karaka for younger co-borns, whereas
Jupiter being lord of lagna signifies self, is also is in Mars star
Chitra.
These combinations are sufficient enough to reckon that the
native is bom as twins.
Now let us see the chart no. 87 of the father, President George
W Bush, to verify for anv indication for twin children.
5* house should signify the first child and 7* house (being 3rd
from 5*) should signify the 2nd child. Mars is the natural karaca for
co-borns.
The 5* lord Mars is placed in Venus star Purva, whereas Venus
is conjoined with Mercury, a planet of duality. Mercury is also
conjoined 7* lord Saturn in Asc. Ketu who is placed in 5* house
should signify 5* lord Mars. Ketu is placed in Mercury star Jyeshta
again signifying duality. Hence twins were born.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
The readers could infer from the examples and analysis
explained above for twin births, the rules prescribed in Saravalli do
hold good, but other combinations will also have to be looked into.

Delay in Birth of Children
There are many combinations for delay in child birth.
Saturn or Saturn with Ketu connection and when they are
connected to putra sthana i.e., 5* house or 5* lord along with
barren signs cause delay in birth of children could be predicted.
Please see the chart no. 88 above, born on 2nd May 1979 at
00-30 hours, Hyderabad.
The native has lost toetus while in the 5’ month of pregnancy.
Eventually the native was blessed with twin females on 09* June
2004. The VMD period of birth of children is Sat-Sun-Mon period.
Take houses 5 (progeny), 02 (addition of a member) and 1 1
(fulfillment of desire as well as 05* from spouse) for child birth.
Dasha lord Saturn and Bhukti lord Sun are posited in Venus
star who is lord of 5* house (progeny). Antara lord Moon is
significant of 07* house and is posited in putra karaka Jupiter star.
Moon also gets aspect of 1 1 * lord Mars from a fruitful sign. 07*
house becomes the 2nd issue for a native.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
The reasons for loss of progeny while in the womb are because
of the connection of Mars, a maraca and lord of 4* with 5* lord
Venus. 4* lord should negate 5* lord by conjunction. Putrakaraka
Jupiter is aspecting both Venus and Mars. This ensures progeny. If
so, why the baby was dead in mother's womb itself? Jupiter is
placed in Saturn star Pushya and hence Jupiter there becomes an
agent of Saturn only. Hence Saturn is connected to Putra or progeny
indirectly. Both Saturn and Sun are posited in 5* lord Venus star
Pubba and Bharani respectively. No other planet is posited in Venus
star. Moon is placed on Jupiter Star and signifies Putrakaraka Jupiter.
Hence birth of child took place during Sat-Sun-Mon period.
Once we look at the transit chart at the time of child birth, we
may find that Venus, being lord of 5* was placed in 5* house,
while Jupiter was in Venus star Pubba (Purva). Saturn was aspecting
transit Jupiter and natal Venus. Rahu was transiting in Venus star
pubba and in natal chart, Rahu was conjoined Saturn. In the natal
chart Moon was in Jupiter star Punarvasu and while in transit chart,
Moon was in Purva Bhadra, another Jupiter star.
Let us analyse how child birth took place in the following chart
no. 89, who was born on 02 Sept 1961 at 9-18 am Cochin, India,
with balance Moon dasha upto Sept 1965.
For progeny, take 02 (addition of a membel^'tfe (child birth)
and 1 1 (fulfillment of desires and 05* house to spouse). 01 , 04
and 10 are the negating houses to 02, 05 and 11. 12* house
stands for loss in general.

Chapter 26: Delay in Birth of Children
Lord of 05* is Saturn, who is in 04* house, which negates
child birth. But Saturn is conjoined with Putrakaraka Jupiter. Venus
in Saturn star and is in Cancer, a fruitful sign. Venus signifies 01 ,
08, 10, 04 and 05. Although Venus signifies 01 and 04* houses,
05* house is good. Sun aspects 05* house while Ketu is posited in
05* house in Mars star, Dhanishta. Ketu is the natural aborter.
Rahu-Moon-Sat period in May 1988 saw an abortion by wife.
But eventually, the native was blessed with a son during Jup-JupJup.
Rahu is posited in Makha star ruled by Ketu, who is an aborter.
During the period of abortion transit Saturn was posited in Ketu
star Moola.
When the child birth took place, transit Jupiter was in Rahu
star in Gemini and was aspecting the natal 05* house of native
(Aquarius). Saturn had made the first return to Capricorn, in the
native's life.

Absence of Progeny
Couples do get married. Marriages are said to have been
decided in heaven. But some people are denied progeny. Using
Astrology as a tool, one could really forsee if progeny is promised.
Barren sign is a sign of the Zodiac that, according to ancient
astrological tradition, is not likely to possess strong powers of
procreation, i.e. they are "barren." The signs most associated with
infertility are Gemini, Leo, and Virgo, who are called barren signs.
In addition, Aries, Sagittarius, and Aquarius are also believed to
quite often have problems in matters of reproduction and are
therefore considered semi-barren.
While 2, 5 and 1 1 which are the houses who contributes for
progeny, the negating houses such as 1,4,10 will negate the issue
of progeny. 12* house may be taken as house of loss in general.
Barren signs and Eunuchs will play their role. Saturn, Mercury,
Rahu and Ketu are Eunuchs. 8* house is treated as house of delays
and impediments.
Let us examine few examples where the natives were not
blessed with children: —
In the chart no. 90 mentioned below of male nativity, born
on 22 July 1970 at 7-00 am at Hyderabad, the native is 39 years
old as of 2009 and is not blessed with children. The native is born
with Jupiter VMD upto Aug-1985.

Chapter 27: Absence of Progeny
5* house, which falls in Scorpio, is vacant. There is no Ketu
(aborter) connection with 5* house. 5* lord Mars is in Saturn star
while Saturn is in Aries. Saturn is in Sun star and Sun is again in
Saturn star (Pushya). Jupiter is Putrakaraka is in Mars star in 4*
house (negation to 5th). The signification of Mars is already
discussed. Here Sun, Mars along with Saturn do not contribute
towards progeny.
From Moon sign (Aquarius), Gemini becomes 5* house, (a
barren sign) and its lord Mercury is conjoined with Mars and Sun
who are in Saturn star, besides Mercury is placed in own star.
Dasha ran from 1 5* year to 34 year was of Saturn, who is lord
of 07 and 08 and is posited in 1 0* house in the star of Sun who
signifies 1 and 2. Saturn gets aspect of Jupiter from 4* house, who
is in Mars star Chitra, which is negating 5* house (progeny).
Now, let us examine the following charts belonging to a couple:

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Female (Chart No. 91 ) born at 9:30 pm, on 28 Sep 1962 in
Chennai, India, with balance Moon dasha upto Aug-1972. Her
husband was born at 11 :10 pm, 26 Feb 1965 in Mumbai.
Mon 03, 05 Mon
Let us take the horoscope of the wife first. Taurus is rising
with balance Moon VMD runs upto Aug 1972. Moon, Sun and
Mercury are in 5* house. Sun is lord of 4 and all these planets are
posited in barren sign, Virgo. Mercury being lord of 5* is exalted,
but is in the star of Mars. Mars is also posited in a barren sign,
Gemini.
From the age of 1 7 to 35 the native ran the period of Fiahu
and thereafter upto 51 years Jupiter. The period of real youth was
in Fiahu Mahadasha.

Chapter 27: Absence of Progeny
VMD lord Rahu signifies 05* house through Moon and Saturn,
but Saturn is in Moon star and Rahu is in Moon house. Hence
Moon who holds the trump card is in own star in a barren sign,
Virgo, denied children in Rahu VMD.
Next VMD is of Jupiter, who signifies 08, 10 and 1 1 , who is
again posited in Rahu star.
Hence as discussed above about Rahu significations, native
was not blessed with progeny.
Readers may now check the husbanc 's chart no. 92.
5* lord is in 5* house, who is conjoined with Sun, Mercury
and Venus. Saturn, Sun and Mercury are in Rahu star, Satabisha.
They will give result of Rahu. Venus is in Mars star Dhanishta.
Rahu is in Mars star in 8* house. Mars is Sun star in a barren sign
and aspects all planets posited in 5* house. Putrakaraka Jupiter is
in a semi-barren house. These combinations do not contribute for
child birth.
’ The native was bom in Venus dasha upto March 1971 i.e.,
upto 6 years. Thereafter Sun dasha for 6 years and Moon for 10
years, Mars for 7 years and Rahu for 18 years. Hence during youth,
Mars and Rahu are operated. Both Rahu and Mars do not promote
child birth as per the chart.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In another example (chart no. 93) of male bom on 17 Mar
1958 at 17-08 hours Hyderabad, India.
The analysis should go in the following way:—
a) 5* house is occupied by Saturn who is placed in Ketu star
Moola in Sagittarius in a semi barren sign. Ketu is a naturally
an abortive planet while Ketu is in a semi barren house in own
star.
b) 5* lord is Jupiter, who is placed in Rahu star and is conjoined
with Rahu, who is in own star. Hence Rahu along with Jupiter
will give mostly the result of Venus, since being in Libra.
c) Venus is lord of 3 and 10 (negation to 11) and is posited in 6* _
house. Venus will give result of 6 more than 3 and 10. 6* is
negation to 7* house (2nd child). Venus is in Moon star in 7*
house. But Moon is in Mars star and Mars signifies 6* house.
Again Moon is negating 2nd issue through Mars.
d) T lord Saturn, who could contribute 2nd child is already in
Ketu star. Ketu is in Aries, a semi-barren sign.
In the circumstances, eventually the native was not blessed
with any children.
The chart no. 94 illustrated below is that of a female born on
02nd May 1979 at 00-30 hours in Hyderabad, South India, with

Chapter 27: Absence of Progeny
Capricorn rising in star Sharvana star ruled by Moon with nakshatra
of Punarvasu in Gemini.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In this chart, the husband was declared as impotent with a
very low sperm count, which prompted the couple to seek assistance
from a sperm bank for birth of children.
What could be the reason for husband not to have sperm
count to have his own children?
05* house stands for child birth. In order to evaluate the
progeny issue of spouse, the chart should be rotated to 07th house
and take it as lagna.
Cancer shall be the 07* house, and counting there-from Scorpio
becomes the 05* house for spouse. 05* bhava falls at 10 deg. 24
min. which corresponds to Anuradha star ruled by Saturn. From
07* house, Saturn becomes lord of 07 and 08, posited in 02nd
house in the star of Venus, who signifies 04, 11 and 09. Saturn, a
eunuch, is posited in a barren sign, Leo. Saturn also signifies 04*
house which negates 05* house. Venus is posited in Mercury star,
who is also a eunuch. These factors contributed for no child birth
or very low sperm count for the husband.

Death of Spouse
While matching is done, the Astrologer is required to check if
the widowhood or widower-hood is present in the chart.
Chart No. 95— Maria, born February 21, 1972 at 9-30 pm
Hyderabad.
The death of the husband of this native took place during
Saade Saath after three years of marital life and couples were
blessed with two children. Husband died due to heart attack while
driving.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
(Planets shown in the brackets are the star lords)
planets during their periods. Her husband died on 20th Dec 2001
during Rahu-Venus-Sun-Mars period.
Spouse should be seen from 7* house. 7* Cusp falls in Mars
sign in Aries. Bhadhaka for Aries is Saturn and sign is Aquarius.
Maraka for Aries is 2nd and 7* lords, which in this case is Venus.
Mars is in Venus star and will give result of Venus. Sun is in Rahu
star and will signify Rahu. Besides Sun and Mercury are in Badhaka
house. Hence the period of Rahu-Venus-Sun-Mars really tantamount
for the significations connected for death of husband.
The chart indicates longevity of husband as middle longevity
or Madhya aayu. Asc lord when signifies Bhadaka, Maraka and
6,8,12, longevity upto 33 years only. Jupiter is 12* Bhava lord.
From 7* house, 6* is Virgo, 8* in Scorpio and 12* is Pisces being
Bhava Lords Mercury, Mars and Jupiter respectively. Jupiter is in
Ketu star and signifies Ketu. Ketu is in Saturn star. Saturn, besides
badhaka lord, is occupant of 2nd house (maraca).

Chapter 28: Death of Spouse
6* Lord Mercury is in 1 1 * house (Badhaka) and in Rahu star.
Rahu signifies Saturn. Saturn is Bhadaka. Hence connection is
established between Mercury (6*, 11*) and Saturn (badaka). 8*
Bhava Lord is Mars, who is occupant of 1st house (i.e., 7* for
husband). Saturn being Bhadaka is also occupant of 2nd house.
Henoe all the houses i.e., maraca, badhaka, Moksha, 6,8,12 are
connected to each other.
Besides the above 7* lord Mars signifying Asc lord for husband
is placed in between Venus on one side and Saturn & Moon in
other side. This is Papakartari yoga. Though Venus is generally
treated as a benefic planet, it is placed in Revati star ruled by
Mercury, who is a strong significator of 1 1 * house (Badhaka).
Besides, Venus is maraca (02, 07) lord. Saturn and Moon are
occupant of 2nd house (maraca) and they are in Sun star Kruthika.
Sun is occupant of badhaka house (Aquarius).
Papa means malefic in nature and kartari means scissors, which
effects malefic influence. Planetary position on ethe date of death
of the husband is given below:

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
The chart No. 96 — shown below is that of Jacqueline Bouver
Kennedy, former first Lady and wife of 35* US President, John F.
Kennedy (born on 28 Jul 1929 at 14-30 hours, New York.
President Kennedy was shot dead on 22 Nov 1963 allegedly
by Lee Harvey Oswald. The widowhood has happened in her 34*
year.
Libra rising and the 07th house falls in Taurus. Take Taurus as
Lagna for her husband. Planets posited in Taurus are Jupiter and
Venus. When lagna, 08* are weak and connected to Mars and 06*
house, one could die in a battle or by weapon. Mars is posited in
Venus star Purva in Leo and hence becomes significator of lagna
and 06* house (body and injury). Venus is posited in Mars star
Mrigashira. Hence Venus becomes significator of 04 (Vehicle), 12
(moskha), and 07 (maraca) houses. 08* lord is Jupiter and occupant
of 08* house is Saturn. Saturn is in Ketu star, whereas Ketu is
occupant of 06* house (injury). Saturn is the badhaka. Jupiter is in
Moon star, while Moon is occupant of 1 2* house (moksha, loss in
general, etc.). Jupiter is conjoined with Venus and aspects 07*
house (maraca).

Chapter 28: Death of Spouse
Hence it is felt that lagna, and 08* are connected to Mars,
06th house, marakca, moksha and badhka houses, which is
detrimental for longevity and could contribute to violent death.
The death of President Kennedy took place during Jacqueline's
VMD period of Moon-Jup-Saturn. Dasha lord Moon (04, 06, 12)
signifies vehicle, injury and moksha. Bhukti Jupiter (01, 08, 11,04,
12) signifies self, longevity, vehicle, moksha, etc. Antara lord Saturn
(10, 11, 08, 06) signifies badhaka, longevity, injury, duty, etc.
Kennedy was killed in Dealey Plaza at Elm's Street, Dallas City
in Texas State on 23 Nov 1963 by assassin's bullet while traveling
in Presidential Ltmiousine,

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In the next chart no. 97 illustrated below, the wife of the
native (born on 16 Aug 1965 at 8-10 a.m. near Calicut, Kerala, 75
E 46, 11 N 15) died in Nov 2008 due to dreaded disease, cancer.
Body Longitude Star/ p
Lagna 26 Le 44' 59 UPha 1
Moon - PiK 11 Pi 43' 06 UBha 3
Mercury (R) - AmK 29 Cn 10’ 52 Asre 4
Jupiter - DK 01 Ge 55' 57 Mrig 3
Venus - GK 02 Vi 37’ 15 UPha 2
Rahu-MK 16 Ta 40' 21 Rohi 3
Leo is rising in the chart. For spouse, the chart may be rotated
to 07* house which fails in Aquarius. For Aquarius lagna lord Saturn
is posited in lagna itself and is in the star of Jupiter, who is in 05*
house. This should contribute to some good longevity. But the
chart should be analysed deeply. 06* house falls in Cancer, whose
lord is Moon. Moon is posited in Saturn star, Utharabhadra. This
indicates that 06th lord Moon becomes a strong significator of 1 st

Chapter 28: Death of Spouse
house (body). Hence there is a link established between 1 st house
(body) and 06* house (roga). Saturn, Moon and Rahu shall
contribute to cancer. Rahu is posited in Rohini star ruled by Moon.
Being a Node, Rahu will give result of Venus, Moon and Mars (in
this chart) wherever they are offering results.
The spouse died in November 2008 during the native's VMD
period of Venus-Jupiter-Moon. Venus is badhka for Aquarius and is
posited in 08* house — longevity. 08* house also makes the illness
serious in nature. Venus also signifies 06* house through Sundisease. Bhukti lord Jupiter is in 05* house, which should negate
the illness. But Jupiter is lord of 02 (marakca) and is posited in
Mars star Mrigashira (Mars is in Badhaka house). Jupiter will make
illness to swell. Antara lord Moon signifies self, 02 (marakca) and
06* (illness). Hence the period did not favour further recovery
from illness and the spouse died.

Sanyasa Yogam or Ascetic
Marriage is for a life together till end of this life, sharing and
caring each other. But if you find that the boy who married your
daughter has lost interest in marital life on one fine morning, and
he declares that he will take up sanyasin; what will you do?
This sort of situation brings about disappointments in marital
life of couple and also for the persons connected with the family.
Hence it is extremely important to see in advance (when the
marriage matching is done) to ensure that the chart is free from
Ascetic yoga.
Astrologically, one combination is that if the lord of the
Ascendant is deposited in the star of the planet, which is strongly
connected with 3, 10, 12 houses and connected with Saturn /
Kethu", then one will be an ascetic.
Chart No. 98 below given is that of Aurobino Ghose (August
15, 1872 - December 5, 1950) an Indian nationalist and freedom
fighter, poet, philosopher and yogi.
Me: 23 Le 37-AK Ju: 21 Cn 42- BK Ve: 8Le39-PiK Sa: 23Sg36-AmK

Chapter 29: Sanyasa Yogam or Ascetic
Aurobindo had been engaged in yogic discipline for years, but
disturbances to his progress following the events surrounding the
Congress had put him in the need of consulting a yogi. After
attending the Surat session of the Indian National Congress in
1907, Aurobindo met Vishnu Bhaskar Lele, a yogi, in Baroda. This
meeting led him to retire for three days in seclusion where, following
Lele's instruction, Aurobindo had his first major experience, called
nirvana - a state of complete mental silence free of any thought or
mental activity.
10* house is connected to 05, 08, 12,
09, Jupiter, Saturn and Ketu, one should
be inclined into religion and spirituality.
06* house signifies daily attendance,
service, etc. Moon is the significator of
mind along with Lagna and 04* house.
03rd house signifies mental inclination.
Under these combinations, Saturn's
connection with Moon is important.
If the lord of the Asc is posited in the
Aurobino Ghose star of a planet, which is strongly
connected with 3, 10, 12 houses along
with Saturn/Kethu", then one will be an
ascetic.
Asc is falling in spiritual, Ketu star Makha in Leo. 1 0* lord is
Venus, who is in Ketu star in Leo, Ketu is in 4* house, the house of
mind. 03rd house, signifies mental inclination, is ruled by Venus,
who is in Ketu star.
Rahu, the materialistic shadowy planet, is posited in 1 0* house,
Taurus. Rahu signifies both Moon and Venus. Both Moon are Venus
are in Ketu star. Jupiter and 9* house signifies religion. 12* house
stands for spirituality and meditation.
Saturn and Moon are in 5* house (worship). Saturn is in Purva
Ashada ruled by Venus. While Venus is in Ketu star, Moon is in
Moola ruled by Ketu. 05* lord Jupiter is in 1 2* house - spirituality
and meditation).
Lord of 09* is Mars who is conjoined with Jupiter (08Mysticism) and both are posited in 1 2* house. 07* lord signifies

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
marriage. Saturn is posited in 5* house, but is in Venus star Purva
Ashada. Venus signifies Ketu, 01, 10, 03, and 04. Saturn is conjoined
with 1 2* lord Moon, who is in Ketu star Moola.
Asc is posited in Ketu star Makha and is occupied by Venus,
who signifies 01, 03, 10. Saturn is posited in Venus star Purva
Ashada, and is conjoined with Moon, who is lord of 12. Rahu,
posited in 10* house signifies Moon (12* house). Rahu also will
function as Venus.
The initiation into spiritualism took place in Moon dasha-Saturn
Bukuti.
Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa— Chart no.99— (Feb 18,
1836 — Aug 16, 1886), born Gadadhar Chattopadhyay, was a
famous mystic of 19th-century India.
He became a priest of the Dakshineswar Kali Temple, dedicated
to the goddess Kali, which had the influence of the main strands of
Bengali bhakti tradition. His first spiritual teacher was an ascetic
woman skilled in tantra and Vaishnava bhakti. Later an Advaita
Vedantin ascetic taught him non-dual meditation, and according to
Ramakrishna, he experienced nirvikalpa samadhi under his
guidance. Though conventionally uneducated, he attracted the
attention of the middle class and numerous Bengali intellectuals.
v. Sri Ramakrishna Paramhans, born on 18-Feb-1836, at 06.44
AM, Kamarpakur, Hooghly Dist, Bengal, Undivded India (22N54,

Chapter 29: Sanyasa Yogam or Ascetic
Hora Lord: Jupiter
Mahakala Hora:Mars
Kaala Lord: Jupiter
Janma Ghatis: 1.2341
Ayanamsa: 21-34-07.63
Sidereal Time: 16:52:48
In this case, the lord of Asc. is Saturn. Whereas, planets posited
in lagna are Sun, Moon and Mercury. Sun signifies 01 , 07, and 04.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Moon (in Purva Bhadra star) signifies 06, 01, and 11, 02, 05through
Jupiter. Mercury is lord of 05 and 08 and posited in lagna in the
star of Rahu, who signifies 04* house. Saturn is posited in Rahu
star in 09* house and is exalted. These planets do not strongly get
connected to 3, 10 and 12* house along with Saturn and Ketu.
But Mars is lord of 10 and 03 is posited in 12* house. Ketu is
posited in Scorpio will follow Mars to give result of houses viz. 03,
10 and 12. Mars is in Shravana star ruled by Moon, who is occupant
of lagna. Hence Mars gives result of 01 , 06, 03, 10, 12 along with
Ketu. Saturn is lord of lagna.
10* lord Mars is in 12* house while 10* is occupied by Ketu,
who is in Jupiter star. Jupiter more strongly signifies 05* house.
Moon, being lord of 06* is posited in 01st house and signifies 05*
through Jupiter. These combinations do not entail very much for
one to take a job and earn a livelihood.
Paramhans was married at the age of 32 years, most probably,
at the threshold of Mercury dasha. Mercury is lord of 05 and 08
and aspects 07* house. However, Mercury is in Rahu star and
Rahu, is an occupant of 04* house. Moon is in lagna (being lord of
06) and aspects 07* house, makes the marriage not very much
smooth and viable.
Gurumayi Chidvilasananda, born Malti Shetty, on June 24, 1955
at 11.00 a.m. Mangalore, South India, was a Siddha yoga disciple
of Swami Mukthananda. Initially she used to be the English translator
for Swami Mukthananda (chart no. 1011— given below).
Me (R): 27Ta32-AK Ju: 9Cn07-PK Vo: 20 Ta 04- PiK Se <R): 21 Li 51- MK
Ra. 3Sg03-AmK Ke: 3Ge03 HL: 3 Sc 43 GL: 11Ge22

Chapter 29: Sanyasa Yogam or Ascetic
Gurumayi
Chidvilasananda
The Asc is rising in Leo in the star Purva
ruled by Venus. Venus signifies 03, 10
and (12 through Moon).
Asc is tenated by Moon who is in Ketu
star shows selflessness and sacrifice.
Venus and Mercury are occupants of
1 0* house. Mercury is in Mars star, who
is lord of 09 (religion). Venus is posited
in Moon star (12, 01), whereas Moon is
posited in Ketu star. Lord of 08 signifying
mysticism, is Jupiter (religion) is posited
in spiritual Saturn star Pushya in 12*
house, the house of meditation and
sacrifice.
Rahu indeed is a materialistic shadowy planet, who is in 5*
house, but is in Ketu star and are aspected by Mars (from Jupiter
(05, 08, 12) star. Sun also aspects Rahu but in Rahu star. Venus is
lord of 03 and 10, posited in Moon star, who signifies 12* house.
Moon is in Ketu star. Saturn is occupant of 3rd house.
On May 3, 1982, Malti Shetty was initiated as a sannyasin into
the Saraswati order, taking vows of poverty, celibacy and obedience,
during Sun dasha, Rahu Bhukti and Moon antara. Sun is posited in
Rahu star Arudra. Rahu is in Moola and Moon is in Makha; both are
ruled by Ketu. Rahu in 5* house is under the aspect of spiritual
Saturn, which indicates worship. Sun signifies Rahu. Moon is lord
of 12 and is in Ketu star. Saturn is posited in 8* lord and religious
Jupiter star, Visakha. Lord of 07 (marriage) Saturn is in 3rd house
in Jupiter star, while Jupiter is in 1 2 * house (loss), being lord of 06,
which is a strong combination for negating marriage.

Wealth or Dhana Yoga
There are various dhana yogas which are attributed by our
ancients. Conjoining of lords of quadrants and trines should make
the native wealthy during its dasha / antara / bhukti. Some sensitive
points such as Indu lagna, house of fortuna, etc. are being discussed
by the ancients.
If House of fortuna falls in trines such as 01, 05, 09 or quadrants
such as 01 , 04, 07, 10, they are good. Another view is if House of
Fortuna falls in a particular house, the significance of that house
gets boosted up.
Other than trine-quadrant, foruna or Indu lagna, the following
aspects may also be considered for wealth factors.
a) 02nd lord is connected to 02, 06, 10 and 1 1 .
b) 1 0* lord is connected to 02, 06, 1 0 and 1 1 .
c) Well fortified 02nd house which is connected to 02nd or 1 0* or
11* house.
d) Dhanakaraka Jupiter's connection to 2nd house.
e) When lagna lord and 5th lord are in trine, it appears that
native will have high position.
f) 02nd or 1 1 * house should not get connected to 08 or 1 2*
houses.
Let us examine some natal charts: The chart given below
(chart No. 1 01 ) is that of a person born in average circumstances.

Chapter 30: Wealth orDhana Yoga
The native is bom in Cancer Asc. with Moon in Purva star
ruled by Venus in Leo. He had education upto high school level
only. He had struggled a lot in Industrial area and mastered a
technical job.
He started to do business by setting up a small industrial unit
in Rahu dasha, Saturn bhukti. After initial problems, the unit started
functioning well. One could observe that dasha lord Rahu signifies
Moon (02), Mercury (business, 10). Bhukti lord Saturn signifies 02,
07 houses.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Now the native is well posited financially as well as business
wise. For business take 07* house. If 10* house is connected to
07 and Mercury, then one will do business. If 02, 06, 10 and 1 1 are
linked one will earn well during the dasha / bhukti / antara of
significators of these houses.
In this case, planets who signify 02nd house are Sun, Moon,
Rahu, Ketu, Jupiter and Saturn. This is a great advantage for wealth
prospects.
As of 2010, he is running Jupiter dasha, Mercury Bhukti. Next
dasha shall be of Saturn. Both dashas promise more wealth factors.
The other important thing to be noted is the position of Moon in
Venus star, who is lord of 1 1 . Hence Moon signifies both 02 and 1 1
houses and neither Moon nor Venus are linked to 08* or 1 2* houses.
In the (chart No. 102) of Asaf Jah VII born Usman Ali Khan
Bahadur (April 6, 1886 - February 24, 1967), who was the last
Nizam (or ruler) of the Princely State of Hyderabad and of Berar.
He ruled Hyderabad between 1911 and 1948, until it was merged
into India.
As: 2 Li 41 Su: 24Pi30-AmK Mo: 17Ar39-BK Ma: 14Le24-MK
Me: 28 Pi 59- AK Jut 6V155-DK Ve: 10Aq57-PiK Se: 10Ge21-PK

Chapter 30: Wealth or Dhana Yoga
Usman Ali Khan
Bahadur
(last Nizam of
Hyderabad)
Lagna lord and 05* lord are Venus and
Saturn. They are posited in trine. 02nd
lord Mars is in 11th house, but
dhanakaraka Jupiter is posited 12th
house. There are no occupants of 2nd
house. No planet aspects 2nd house.
Stars ruled by 2nd lord Mars are
Mrigashira, Chitra and Dhanishta. There
are no planets in these stars. Nodes
connected to Mars are Rahu and Ketu.
Hence Mars along with Nodes, Rahu and
Ketu become significator of 2nd house.
From Moon sign (Aries), 2nd lord is
Venus, who is imbibed in 1 1 * house.
There are no occupants in 2nd house
(Taurus).
Stars ruled by Venus are Bharani, Purva and Purva Ashada.
Moon is in Bharani. Mars is in Purva. No planet in Purva Ashada.
Nodes are conjoined with Venus and Mars. Hence from Moon sign,
significators of 2nd house are Moon, Venus, Mars, Rahu and Ketu.
Jupiter aspects 2nd house. In a nutshell, 2nd lord from both lagna
and Moon are posited in 1 1 * house.
Let us see another example (chart no. 103). Micheal
Bloomberg, (born on Feb 14, 1942 at 15-40 hours, Boston,
MA, USA) is an American businessman, billionaire and politician,
elected as the 108th Mayor of New York City on November 6, 2001,
succeeding Rudy Giuliani. After spending up to $70 million of his
own money on his campaign, he was sworn in by his predecessor.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In the worlds of finance and financial
journalism, Michael Bloomberg is a
phenomenon. The 25th richest
American with an estimated net worth
of $11.5 billion (Forbes September
2007), he runs a vast communications
empire that takes in $4.7 billion a year
in revenue and employs more than
10,000 people in more than 125 offices
worldwide. As his business empire
solidified, he became more interested
in philanthropy and civic involvement.
Michael Bloomberg A Proven salesman, legendary motivator
and disciplined manager, he built a
global conglomerate basically from
scratch.
Ma(R): 22CP16-MK Ju: 18 Ta 35- PiK Ve (R): HCpOI-PK Sa: 29Ar09-AK
Cancer is rising and 2nd house becomes Leo. The earnings are
through business. For business, take 07* house along with 10*
house. Mercury is the businessman. Saturn is lord of 07* house, is
posited in 1 0* house in the star of Sun, who is lord of 2nd house.
Mercury is in 7* house. Lord of 2nd house, Sun, is posited in Mars
star (in 8* house), while Mars is lord and occupant of 10* house.
Hence, business, wealth, etc. are very good. Jupiter (from 1 1 *
house, being lord of 06) is aspecting Mercury (business) and Venus
(lord of 11).

Chapter 30: Wealth or Dhana Yoga
From Moon sign, Saturn is lord of 2 and is posited in Sun star
Kruthika, while Sun is an occupant of 2nd house. Nodes are occupant
of 2nd house either from Lagna or Moon.
These combinations make the native rich and a successful
businessman.
Nelson Rockfeller (Chart no. 1 04) was
an American politician and from a noted
family, the son and heir of John D.
Rockefeller Jr., billionaire Governor of
New York.
Nelson Rockfeller
He was the 41st Vice President of the
United States under President Gerald
Ford, and the 49th Governor of New
York, as well as serving the Roosevelt,
Truman, Eisenhower and Nixon
administrations in a variety of positions.
He was also a noted businessman, art
collector, and philanthropist.
Rockefeller ran for the presidency in
1960 and 1968, unsuccessfully.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Lagna falls in Virgo and lord of 2nd house is Venus, who is
posited in 10* house. Stars ruled by Venus are Bharani, Purva and
Purva Ashada. There are no planets in its star. Rahu is conjoined
with Venus and will give result of Venus. Planets posited in Rahu
star are Mercury, Venus and Moon. Hence planets who will give
result of 2nd house are Moon, Venus, Rahu and Mercury. Jupiter is
posited in 1 1 * house, besides Moon is occupant of 02nd house,
being lord of 1 1 * house.
From Moon sign (Libra), Mars is the lord of 2nd house, posited
in 10* house. Mrigashira, Chitra and Dhanishta are the stars ruled
by Mars. But there are no planets in its stars. Jupiter aspects 2nd
house. Sun is the lone planet posited in Dhanakaraka Jupiter star.
Hence 2nd house becomes very strong both from Lagna and
Moon.
In the chart (No. 105) of an Indian Multi billionaire, Libra is
rising. There are Sun, Venus, Mercury and Ketu are posited in 7*
house (house of business).
Ffeh 01, Ju, Ven, Me, Su
Ket 07, Ma, Me, Su, Ve

Chapter 30: Wealth or Dhana Yoga
2nd lord Mara has gone to 08* house, but is in own star. Mara
aspects 2nd house. There are no planets in Mars stars. Venus and
Jupiter are in trine. Dhanakaraka Jupiter is in 1 1 * house in Sun
star, who is lord of 1 1 * house. Saturn is posited in 2nd house in
Mercury (7 and business) star, Jyeshta. Dhana karaka Jupiter gets
aspect of 2nd lord Mars, while Jupiter aspects Sun, Venus, Mercury,
Moon and Ketu from 1 1 * house. Yogakaraka Saturn signifies, 02,
04, 05, 07, 09, 12 houses, is favourably placed. Ketu also signifies,
07 (business), Mercury, Sun, Venus and Mars.
Further, Ketu signifies Mars, since posited in Aries. Mars is lord
of 02nd house (dhana bhava). Hence all planets posited in Ketu
stars will give result of 2nd house viz. Sun, Venus and Moon, in this
case. Thus, the significators of 2nd house shall be Mars, Saturn,
Sun, Venus, Moon and Ketu. Ketu is posited in Sun star, Krithika.
Sun is lord of 1 1 * house. Hence Jupiter, Sun, Venus, Moon and
Ketu also signifies 1 1 * house and Mars aspects 1 1 * house.
All these combinations made the native to be very rich right
from the birth.
Henry Ford - (Chart No. 106) (July
American founder of the Ford Motor
Company and father of modern
assembly lines used in mass production;
one of the richest person in the world.
He was a prolific inventor and was
awarded 1 61 U.S. patents. As owner of
the Ford Motor Company, he became
one of the richest and best-known
peopie in the world. He is credited with
Heny Fad "Fordism", that is, the mass production
of large numbers of inexpensive
automobiles using the assembly line,
coupled with high wages for his
workers. Ford had a global vision, with
consumerism as the key to peace.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
The chart of Henry Ford is shown below:
The following combinations in the chart may be examined:
1) Atmakaraka Jupiter and Putrakaraka Saturn are in trine which
confers high status.
2) Venus and Jupiter are in trine.
3) Saturn and Venus are in trine.
4) Moon is in own star and is in trine to Jupiter.
5) 10* house is posited by a strong Mars (in Leo) who is in Ketu
star, while Ketu is in 7* house (business).

Chapter 30: Wealth or Dhana Yoga
6) Jupiter alone signifies 02, 06, 10, and 1 1 houses from lagna.
7) From Moon sign, 06* and 08* lords are conjoined in 07* house,
which contributes a partial Chandra Aadhi yoga, conferring
high status.
8) Mars is a significator of 01 , 06 &. 10 houses and is posited in
Ketu star while Ketu is an occupant of 07* house, making the
native to launch into business. From Moon sign, Mercury, the
planet of business is posited in 07* house (business).
9) From Moon sign, 02nd lord is Saturn, who is posited in 09*
house and is conjoined with 02, and 11 lords Jupiter. Planets
posited in Saturn stars are Sun, Mercury and Rahu, who will
signify 02nd house from Moon.
These combinations are enough to suggest that one was a
successful, intelligent and opulent businessman.
Bill Gates
In the chart of Bill Gates (Chart No.107) of Microsoft fame,
born on 28 Oct 1955 at 22:00 hours Seattle, Washington, USA, 47

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Sun signifies 02,04, Ra»05
Mon signifies 01 ,09,Sa»04,07,08
Mar signifies 05,10,03,Mo»01 ,09
Mer signifies 03,12,Ma»03,05,10
Jup signifies 02,06,09, Ke» II
Ven. signifies 11,04, Ju»02,06,09
Sal signifies 06,07,04,Ju»02,06,09
Rah signifies 05, MaMe
Kel signifies 1 1 Ve,Ma
Vimsotlari Maha Dasas:
Lef us assume the lagna is Cancer only, because there are
aileast 2 charts in circulation as far as Mr. Gates is concerned.
Ketu is occupant of 1 1th in Mars star Mrigashira. —1 1
Ketu is in the star of Mars, who is Lord of 10 — 10
Jupiter is in 2nd house in star of Ketu. — 02, 06
Jupiter aspects 10th house. — 10
7th lord Sat is in Jup star — 07

Chapter 30: Wealth or Dhana Yoga
From Microsoft's founding in 1975 until 2006, Gates had primary
responsibility for the company's product strategy. He aggressively
broadened the company's range of products. Ketu dasha started in
1975 and Venus dasha started in 1982.
The following may also be looked into:
1) Under above combination, Jupiter and Venus are connected
to 2nd house.
2) Trine of planets such as Atmakraka and Putrakaraka (Saturn
and Sun in this case).
3) Lagna and 10th house getting boosted up, etc.
4) Venus and Saturn are in trine in 1 1 * house.
Bill Gates became rich during Ketu &
Venus Maha dasa. Ketu is posited in 1 1 *
house (gains), which is Venus House,
while Jupiter is posited in 2nd house in
Leo in Makha star ruled by Ketu.
Bill Gates
So Ketu does not spoil everything as
believed generally by many students.
Being Node, Ketu, gives good result,
unlike many astrologers claim. So Ketu
gave richness in fact through Jupiter
and Venus.
Fa high positions, one could take Aadhi
Yoga, which constitutes when benefics
in 6*, 7* & 8* from Moon are present
in a chart. In this chart, Moon is in
Pisces.
Counting therefrom, 06, 07 and 08* are posited by major
planets conferring Chandra Aadhyi yoga for the native to reach
high level.
For profession, take 10. For business take 7 and Mercury. If 7
and Mercury is connected to 10 and Mercury, one should do
business.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
For Bill Gates, 1 0th lord is Mars. Mars is conjoined with Mercury.
Mercury is in Mars star, Chitra. So Mercury is linked to 1 0* house.
Maha Rajah Nalvadi Krishnaraja Wodeyar of
Mysore
The chart (no. 108) appended below is that of Late Mysore
Maharajah Nalvadi Krishnaraj Wodeyar (1884-1940).
Of course, India is definitely a rich country with immense wealth
in kind of immoveable property, cash, gold, etc. held in possession
by many from centuries. Naturally, one would say what is there to
see in a King's chart if he was wealthier or not!

Chapter 30: Wealth or Dhana Yoga
But as far as an astrologer is concerned, he or she has to
prove it that one shall be wealthier based on the facts presented
by a horoscope chart.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Dhana sthana or house of wealth is deciphered from 2nd house
in a chart. Astrologers normally take 02, 06, 10 and 1 1 houses for
wealth factors. Jupiter is the planet who signifies dhana or wealth.
In this case, lord of 2nd house is Sun, who rules Krithika, Uthara
and Utharashada stars. Mercury is posited in Krithika.
Occupant of 02nd house is Mars, who rules Mrigashira, Chitra
and Dhanishta stars. Moon and Rahu are posited in Chitra star in
Libra and Virgo respectively. Ketu is posited in Mercury star Revati.
Hence the planets, who signify 02nd house are: Sun, Mercury,
Mars, Moon, Rahu and Ketu.
From Moon sign, Mars becomes lord of 02nd house. Rahu and
Moon are in Mars star. Ketu is aspected by Mars by its 08’ aspect.
Hence Moon, Mars, Rahu and Ketu do signify 02nd house from
Moon sign viz. Libra. Jupiter aspects 02nd house from Moon sign.
It will be interesting to see that out of the above planets, who
signify 02nd house, Sun and Mercury are posited in 1 1 * house from
lagna. From Moon sign, 2nd lord Mars is posited in 1 1 * house.
1 1 * lord Venus signifies 06* house, since being in Jupiter star.
Saturn is posited in 1 1 * house. 10* lord Mars is posited in 02nd
house.
More importantly, the conjunction of Jupiter and Venus for
Cancer Asc in lagna is considered a special high level status.
These combinations made Maharajah Krishanraja Wodeyar to
be extremely rich.

Charity or Spendthrift
One of the pillars of marital life is financial stability. Normally
astrologers check the financial stability, but what about charity?
When one partner spends most of the money on charity and
sell away the wealth, what the other will do? This case becomes
very grave and chronic in nature, when you are blessed with your
descendants.
Who are the real owners of your property? In my opinion,
your legal heirs who own it practically and not you. So, preserve
your wealth for them.
When the 1 1 * house which stands for gains is somehow
connected to 1 2* house (expenses), native is found to be having
no control over spending. But if Jupiter and Moon are in trine (1 ,5,9)
to each other, the over-spending is found to be curtailed.
Let us study some of the charts having planetary combination
for over spending or charity:—
Standard nativity (female), bom on 23 Dec 1966 at 7.00 am
near Cochin. (Chart no. 109).

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In the chart drawn above, readers may mark the aspect of
1 2* lord Mars on 1 1 * lord Venus in Ascendant (Sagittarius) and 2nd
lord Saturn, 1 1 * lord is for gains while 1 2* lord is for expenses. 2nd
house stands for finance.
While assuming the situation from Moon sign, 1 1 * lord Saturn
gets the aspect of 1 2* lord Jupiter. Besides, Saturn is imbibed in
12* in Jupiter star. 2nd lord Venus is aspected by Saturn from 12*
house. Although the person is not much into charity, the spending
pattern is enormous, which could cause opposition from the spouse.
2nd house signifies wealth, while 1 2* house stands for expenses.
From lagna, 02nd house is Capricorn, which is vacant. Its lord Saturn
is in Jupiter star, while Jupiter is posited in 08* house. Saturn is
also aspected by Mars, who is lord of 05 and 12. Mars is posited in
Moon star, who signifies 08 and 05. 5 stands for gain of opposite
party (07) while 08 stands for wealth of opposite party (2nd from
07* house).
In the chart (No. 110) drawn below belongs to Late M.S.
Subbulakshmi, Bharat Ratna. The native was born on Sept 16,
1916 at9-30 a.m. in Madurai, South India. Moon star lord is Bharani,
ruled by Venus. Lagna falls in Rahu star Swati in Libra.
Me: 25Vi58-AmK Ju(R): 12 ArOI-PK Ve: 14Cn25-MK Sa: SCnll-GK

Chapter 31: Charity or Spendthrift
Rah 04, Su, Sa, Ve, Ma
Ket 10, Ve, Sa, Mo
MS was bestowed with enormous prize money and awards,
which she donated to charity. She has given more than 200 charity
concerts, and raised well over Crores of Rupees, to be given away
in charity.
09* house signifies charity and if it has got connection to 02,
11 and 12, one could give away money in charty.
1 1 * lord is Sun, who is posited in own star, but in 1 2* house.
There are no occupants in 1 1 * house. Rahu is only in Sun star.
M.S. Subbulakshmi
Lord of 02 is Mars. There are no occupants in 02nd house.
Mars is posited in Rahu star, while Rahu is in Sun star. Sun is in 12*
house.
Mercury is the only planet posited in Mars star (Chitra).
Mercury is in 12* house, being lord of 09 and 12*. Hence
Mercury signifies 02, 09 and 12. Sun (1 1 * lord) and Mercury are
conjoined in 1 2* house.
In any case when 1 1 * lord is 12* house, one could give away
money to others,
These combinations made the native to give away money
earned in charity.
it is not sure whether this kind of act of charity has caused
any rift in her life, but in normal circumstances, the bond of family
could hamper its smoothness, since the money is required for one's
upiiftmentin life.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Following chart is of a native born on 25* Dec. 1966 at 8-30
p.m. 1ST, near Cochin, Kerala, India. (Chart no. Ill):
The Lagna falls in Cancer and Moon is Rohini star in Taurus.
In this chart, 12* house is vacant. Its lord is Mercury, who is
posited in own star in 05* house. Moon is posited in 1 1 * house
and is aspected by Mercury, who is lord of 1 2* house. Hence there
is a link established between 1 1 * and 1 2* houses. Here Mercury's
placement in own star is important, since it is very strong.

Chapter 31: Charity or Spendthrift
The person is found to be not at all careful about spending
matters and is alleged to have wasted money, which has caused a
lot of rift in marital life.
Astrologers are required to check these kinds of combinations
in natal chart at the time of evaluating marital match, so that peace
and tranquility is maintained in domestic life.

Profession
Professional matters are very important now-a-days. In olden
times agriculture and trading were the main sources of income for
some communities while some were very rich not worrying too
much into professional matters.
Now-a-days necessity of job and higher income is increasing
and people are looking for alliance for their children with better
professional positions.
6* house signifies service while 1 0* house signifies profession.
Jupiter is dhana-karaka. 2nd is the house of wealth. Jupiter and
Mars connection will give high level job along with 10* house.
A well placed Jupiter and 2nd lord will give very good wealth
when connected to 02, 06, 10, and 1 1 * houses. Well placed 6*
house and 10* house should make the person climb the stairs of
the career-ladder. Placement of Jupiter in 6* or 1 0* house should
also make person higher job. One will command power, if Mars is
connected to 1 0* house.
Chart no. 112, native is an engineer born on 09 July 1970 at
07-50 pm near Mumbai.

Chapter 32: Profession
The person completed his engineering degree and started his
career as an Engineer in a Telecom Company. He has climbed the
stairs of his career, and now is designated as General Manager.
Jupiter is in 1 0* house from lagna and is in Mars star, while
Jupiter also gets aspect of Mars from 07* house. Jupiter stands for
expansion while Mars stands for power. Other combination is to be
seen is that lagna lord Saturn and 5* lord Venus are in trine. The
native is bound to shine at professional matters. Native was born
in Sun VMD, and around 40 years of age, he will have
commencement of Jupiter VMD.
Jupiter is lord of 03 and 12 houses, and is posited in 10*
house in Chitra star ruled by Mars. Mars is lord of 04 and 1 1 and is
posited in 07* house. Jupiter aspects 2nd house also. Hence Jupiter
signifies 03, 12, 04, 11, 07, and 10 (and aspects 02 and 06). Hence
during VMD of Jupiter, native will prosper financially and get high
positions in Professional front, but will have change of jobs, etc.
There are powerful planets like Sun, Mercury, Mars and Venus
in 06, 07, 08 from lagna, conferring the native with lagna Aadhi
yoga This will also contribute the native to reach high level in life.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Chart No. 113. The Chart below is of a very popular and top
level film actress of yester-years, born on October 16, 1948 at 12OS a.m. near Madurai:
The chart could be evaluated for profession. Cancer rising,
and yogakaraka Mars who is lord of 5* and 1 0* is placed in own
house and hence is well placed. From the Asc, 6* lord Jupiter is in
own house and is well placed. From the Moon sign, 1 0* lord Jupiter
is placed in own house. Venus and Saturn are in trine in the house
of wealth, duly apsected by dhana karaka Jupiter. These
combinations are really good for a high level professional career
and extremely rich wealth factors.
In the chart no. 114 exampled below, native joined a Public
Sector undertaking as a junior level Assistant, but climbed the ladder
of his career gradually, and rose to the level of a very senior position.

Chapter 32: Profession
The career is seen from 1 0* house, which in this case, falls in
Virgo. Its lord is Mercury. No planet is in Mercury star. Jupiter is the
occupant of 1 0* house. No planet is in Jupiter stars. Occupant is
stronger. Planets who are aspecting 10* house is only Mars from
04* house. Hence Mercury, Jupiter and Mars are significators of
10* house without being connected to 08* or 12* houses. (Of
course, Mars is lord of 1 2* house).
In the periods of Jupiter-Jupiter and Jupiter-Saturn, the native
completed his graduation. He got regular promotions since Jupiter
VMD. In Saturn VMD, he rose to senior level authority. Saturn is
lord of 02 and 03 houses, but is posited in own star in 1 2* house.
More than this, Saturn becomes yogakaraka for Taurus sign as
well as lord of 10* house from Moon sign, has helped the native.
Since Mars is posited in Saturn star, Uthara Bhadra and Saturn
is lord of 03rd house (subordinate), the joining of native at
subordinate level was caused. The career growth was gradual due
to Mars imbibing in Saturn's star, Uthara Bhadra. Saturn is slow,
signals lower levels, struggles and hardwork.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Mars gave gradual power, authority and one's ability to
command, while Jupiter gave sound judgement, administrative skills,
wise decision taking capacity and expansion.
Other combination to be noted is the conjunction of Saturn
and Venus. In the period of yogakaraka Saturn, the efficacy of this
combination took its full form.
In the chart no. 1 1 5 mentioned below, the native got elevated
in professional front to the level of a Manager in a famous multi
national Company.
Me: 19 Le 57- MK Ju: 5 Ta 26- DK Ve: 11le26-GK Sa: UCn 53-PK
From lagna, 1 0* house is posited by Mars, Mercury and Venus.
1 0* lord is Sun, in whose star, Jupiter is posited. From Moon sign,
1 0* house falls in Scorpio. There are no occupants of Scorpio, but
Jupiter aspects. Mars is the lord, as well as aspecting. These are
good combinations for elevation in career. But 1 0* house is posited

Chapter 32: Profession
by 1 2* lord Venus and 08* lord Mercury. These combinations make
situation difficult for him, and the native undergoes uneasy
relationship from superiors as well as subordinates. During MercuryDasha, Ketu Bbukti (Ketu is aspected by Saturn), the native had to
face some difficult times at office, and eventually had to put in his
papers.
Venus signifies I.T. sector. Mercury and Mars are conjoined in
10* house signals a job related to analysis. Jupiter will signify
finance. Native was employed in Finance Section in an I.T. Company
and was involved in financial analytical work.
Unemployment
News of a promising career for the prospective son-in-law shall
glitter the eyes of his father-in-law, there are cases when there is
no job or career for the son-in-law, which could be disappointing
news.
At the time of matching the horoscope of the girl and boy, do
astrologers check as to whether the career of the boy is promising?
Pragmatically, many do not check this point.
It is indeed quite necessary to evaluate as to whether one will
have a good career or not for any astrologer at the time of marriage
matching.
When 10* house is connected to 03, 08, 12, 05, 09 and Ketu,
one may find very difficult to obtain a job for a livelihood. 03rd
house stands for change of place and sub-ordinate position. 08*
stands for disappointments, difficulties, humiliation, etc. 12* house
is generally considered as loss in general. 05* house stands for
negation to service (06). 09* is for negation to 10* (profession).
Ketu is the aborting Node.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Unemployed Man
Following chart no.116 is of a native, who was initially
employed in a shop in the Middle East, but has been jobless for the
past many years.
In this chart, Sagittarius is rising at 13 deg. 37 min. in Moola
star ruled by Ketu. 1 0* house falls in Virgo ruled by Mercury. Planets
posited in Mercury stars (Aslesha, Jyeshta, Revati) are none. Mercury
is posited in 08* house. Nodes connected to Mercury are Rahu and
Ketu. Ketu is an aborting or exiting node. Rahu is posited in 2nd
house in Moon star, who is lord of 08* house.

Chapter 32: Profession
Saturn is posited in 1 0* house in Chitra star ruled by Mars.
Planets posited in Saturn star (Pushya, Anurada, Uthara Bhadra)
are Mercury and Ketu. Since Mercury is aspecting Rahu, it will give
result of 10* house. Saturn's star lord Mars signifies 07, 05, 12
houses. Besides, Mars aspects 1 0* house. Mars is posited in Rahu
star, while Rahu signifies Moon (08).
Although Mars's position on 07* house and aspecting 1 0* house
is normally treated as good combination, because of the
significations of Mars (05, 12, 08), it did not auger well. Ketu's
connection with 10* house has to be viewed seriously, since it
could hamper the continuance of one's career.
From Moon sign (Libra), 10* house falls in Cancer, which is
inhabited by Mercury (09,12) and the exiting Node Ketu. Moon
herself is the lord of 10* house. Moon is in Jupiter star Visakha,
while Jupiter signifies 03, 06, 08.
In effect, these combinations did not go well with him for a
career.
The person finally attempted to do some business in Mercury
dasha, Saturn bhukti, but did not meet with success. Mercury
(business) and Saturn are signifcators of 07 and 10 indicating
business and profession.
By the onset of Ketu dasha (07 years) from 2000 to 2007 and
further in the Venus dasha (occupant of 05), he did not do any
specific job.
Will I Get a Working Woman as My Wife?
In ancient times, women normally do not come out their house
to seek out a livelihood. They manage their home and take care of
the household chores. Now-a-days many women are well educated
and they do seek an employment at the first instance.
Many boys prefer working woman as their life partner. An
educated and employed woman brings increased standard of living
in the society and controls the population.
But some women are still staying at home.

226 Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
The chart shown hereunder belongs to a decently educated
woman born and brought up in a major city in India. Unfortunately,
she is a house-wife, although wishes to take up a job. She was
born on Jan 29, 1960 at 00-30 hours, Hyderabad, India. (Chart
Moon is posited in Capricorn. Counting there-from, 10* house
shall be Libra. There are no occupants of 1 0* house. Venus is the
lord of it, is posited in 12* house. Venus is posited in the star of
Ketu, who makes one exit from its signification allocated.

Chapter 32: Profession
Dasha running during the time of the native attaining the age
of job shall be of Rahu. Rahu is posited in 1 2* house and signifies
lord of 04 and 05 in 3rd house, in the star of Venus, who signifies
01, 03, 08. Hence detrimental houses have come into picture during
Rahu dasha.
Next dasha of Jupiter ran upto 2002. Jupiter is definitely lord
of 06 (service), but is posited Moola star ruled by Ketu star. Hence
Jupiter will give the result of Ketu, who is an exiting-type Node.
Next dasha is of Saturn. The significations of Saturn have
been discussed. Although, Saturn is the yogakaraka for Libra, it
cannot offer a good employment because of its significations viz,
03, 04, 05 Ve» 03, 08, 01 . Hence the native remained jobless and
contented her life as house-wife.
In yet another chart no. 118 appended below of a married
woman, but she is jobless for the last 23 years. In other words,
she is a house-wife.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
PIS
III 12-01 Ra
AQU
CAP
ARI
Nirayana equal house
division bhava chakra
VII 12-01 Ra
GEM
VII1 12-01 Sa
CAN
LEO
Sun - GK
Moon - MK
Mars - BK
Longitude
Venus - AmK
Saturn - DK
Rahu - PK
Ketu
Lagna falls in Sagittarius. 10* house shall be in Virgo. Mars is
occupant of 1 0* house, being lord of 05 (negation to 06— service)
and 1 2* (loss) houses. Mars is in the star of Moon, who is lord of
08* (disappointment and difficulties) is posited in 05* house

Chapter 32: Profession
{negation to 06). Occupant Mars gets the aspect of Saturn, who
signifies detrimental houses like 03 and 08.
10* lord is Mercury, who is posited in 12* (loss) house and is
in own star.
Moon sign is in Aries. Counting from Aries, 1 0* house falls in
Capricorn. Its lord is Saturn, who is posited in 1 1 * bhava and in
12* house in the star of Jupiter, who is lord of 08 and 12. Jupiter is
posited in 03rd bhava in 04* house in Saturn star. Jupiter aspects
Saturn. Mars is aspecting Saturn, being lord of 01 and 08 in 06*
bhava.
Hence both from lagna and Moon sign, the 1 0* house has got
negative connection like 05, 09, besides detrimental houses like
03, 08, 12 for one not to get a job.
The marriage took place in Sun-Sun period. Sun is lord of 09,
occupant of 1 st house (12* bhava) and is in the star of Ketu, who
signifies 1 1 * house. Sun ran upto 27* year.
Next dasha shall be of Moon, which runs from 27* to 37*
year. Moon is occupant of 05* house, being lord of 08* house.
Moon is in the star (Ashwini) of aborting or exiting node Ketu.
Next dasha shall be of Mars which runs from 37* year to 44*
year. Mars is of course occupant of 1 0* bhava. But Mars signifies
05, 12, 08 and 12 and is under aspect of Saturn.
Next dasha shall be of Rahu for next 18 years, who is occupant
of 05 (negation to 6^— service),
Since the significations of planets connected to 10* house
and the dasha ran do not favour for a job, the native stayed at
home as housewife.
Following chart no. 1 1 9 is of a woman with average education,
but somehow found a Government job.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
From lagna, which falls in Taurus, 10* lord is Saturn, who is
posited in 06* house. But Saturn is in the star of Rahu, who signifies
08, 1 1 and 03. 03rd lord Moon is occupant of 1 0* house and is in
the star of Jupiter, who signifies 03, 08, 11. Moon gets the aspect
of Sun who signifies 06* house through Venus.

Chapter 32: Profession
Since 03 and 08 are connected, the job shall be at a lower
level. 10* house is comparatively stronger due to connection of
Saturn, Moon, Sun and 1 1 * house.
From Moon sign, Mars becomes lord of 10* house, who is
posited in Venus star, who is in Rahu star. Of course, 09* house is
connected through Venus. Rahu is occupant of 1 1 * house along
with Mars. Hence 10* is connected to 1 1 * and not connected to
Ketu. This has helped to get a job.
However, husband of this woman has no job for a long time.
Counting from 07* house, which falls in Scorpio, 1 0* house shall
be in Leo. Profession is seen from 1 0* house. It is occupied by its
lord Sun. This should warrant a job for her husband. But it is not
so. A little deeper study of the chart should reveal more stunning
results viz:
a) Sun, being 10* lord is in the star of Venus, who is lord and
occupant of 12* house. Hence 10* house is linked to 12*
house.
b) Sun is aspected by Moon, who is lord of 09* house, which
negates profession.
c) Moon is posited in the star of Jupiter, who is lord of 05 (negation
to service - 6* house) and Jupiter is posited in own star in
09* house. 09* house negation job (10* house).
d) Lord of 06* house is Mars (Service). Mars aspects Ketu. Hence
Ketu will give result of 08 (occupancy) and 06* (service). Ketu
will be forcing one to exit from its significations.
e) Mars, lord of 06* house - service, is further aspected by Saturn
from 1 2* house. Saturn is lord of 03rd house.
All these combinations made her husband not to have a
continuous job and she has been made to support the family.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
The chart no. 1 20 mentioned below, is of a housewife, bom
on 05 Nov 1954 at 4-00 a.m. 1ST, Tiruvalla, near Kottayam, Kerala,
In this chart, Virgo lagna rising and 10* house falls in Gemini
ruled by Mercury. There are no planets posited in Mercury stars.
Only Ketu signifies Mercury and 1 0* house. Occupant is stronger.
Ketu is having the tendency for "show-nothing" since it is an exiting
type Node. 10* lord Mercury is in 2nd house, which is normally
treated as a good combination, considering the wealth factors
generated by 2nd house. But Mercury is posited in the star Chitra

Chapter 32: Profession
ruled by Mars. Mats is lord of 03 and 08 and is posited in 05*
house.
Moon is in Aquarius. From Moon sign, 1 0* house is occupied
by Venus, who is in Anurada star ruled by Saturn, Who is lord of
12, posited in 09* house. 10* and 03rd lord Mars is posited in 1 2*
house and is in own star, being strong to negate job prospects.
These combinations rendered no job for the native, and she
remained as house-wife in her life of 56 years upto now.
The following chart no. 1 21 belongs to a housewife, born on
30 July 1971 at 00-50 hours 1ST, Near Kottayam, Kerala, India.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Aries rising and 1 0* lord shall be Saturn. Saturn is in 2nd house
and is under aspect of Jupiter from 08* house, who is lord of 09
and 1 2. Jupiter is in own star.
1 0* house is occupied by Mars and Rahu. Mars is lord of 01
and 08. Rahu will give the result of Mars (01 , 08), Venus (02, 07),
Rahu is somewhat favourable, but Saturn did not really get
the strength to offer a job for her. Since Mars aspects Ketu, Ketu
will give the result of 1 0* house. Hence Jupiter, Mars and Ketu
spoiled the 10* house by virtue ofthier significations.

Disease & Illness
There are several types of diseases, which are prevalent right
from ancient times.
But in the modern society the common diseases are diabetes,
heart disease and Cancer.
Illness or disease is prevalent only when lagna (body) and
06* house (disease) are connected. 08* house denotes gravity of
disease or suddenness, while 12* signifies hospitalization. Saturn,
Rahu and Jupiter are slow moving planets, who will inflict chronic
nature of disease.
Diabetes
Diabetes mellitus is often simply referred to as diabetes,
is a condition in which a person has a high blood sugar (glucose)
level as a result of the body either not producing enough insulin,
or because body cells do not properly respond to the insulin that is
produced. Insulin is a hormone produced in the pancreas, which
enables body cells to absorb glucose, to turn into energy. If the
body cells do not absorb the glucose, the glucose accumulates in
the blood (hyperglycemia), leading to various potential medical
complications.
The pancreas is a gland organ in the digestive and endocrine
system of vertebrates. It is both an endocrine gland producing
several important hormones, including insulin, glucagon, and
somatostatin, as well as an exocrine gland, secreting pancreatic
juice containing digestive enzymes that pass to the small intestine.
These enzymes help in the further breakdown of the carbohydrates,
protein, and fat in the chyme.

236 Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Moon, Venus and Jupiter when connected with 6* lord, Satum
or Rahu and in some cases Mars, and any of these planets are
connected to Asc. and a watery sign, then the native can be declared
as a diabetic patient. (Chart below No. 122)
Me: 19 Ge 36- AmK Ju (R): 16Cp30-BK Ve: 14Gs10-PK Sa: 0Ge17-DK
In this case, Asc. falls in the star of Moon in Rohini in Taurus,
whereas Moon is occupant of 06* house. Hence there is a relation
between Asc. and Moon. Lagna and 06* lord Venus is conjoined
with Saturn.
Mars is aspecting lagna and 06* lord Venus from a watery
sign, Pisces and Jupiter star Purva Bhadrapada. Mars signifies blood.
Mars is also aspecting Moon who is in 06* house. Jupiter aspects
lagna, who is a significator of 06* house through Moon, since
posited in Shravana star ruled by Moon. Jupiter is lord of 08* house.
Venus is signifying lagna and 06* house, who is conjoined
with Saturn. Saturn is connected to 1 2* house through Mars. Saturn
is normally treated as a malefic planet in nature and a significator
of defects. Diabetes is a defect of the pancreas glands, which
produces insulin.
In the chart mentioned below (Chart No. 42), the native, born
on 02 Sep 1961 at 9-18 a.m. Cochin, Kerala, with balance Moon
dasha upto April 1965. (Chart No. 123):

Chapter 33: Disease & Illness
Me: 2 Vi 20- GK Ju (R): 4Cp50-PK Ve: lOCn 60- PiK Se (R): 0Cp32-DK
Ra: 3le 11- AK Ke: SAqll HL: 15Sc30 GL: 29Pi36
He was diagnosed with diabetes in Jupiter-Venus period. Lagna
lord and 08* lord Venus (posted in Cancer) is aspected by Jupiter
and Saturn. Jupiter is lord of 06*, while Saturn aspects 06* house.
Moon is in 08* house while Mars is in 1 2* house in Moon star and
hence signifies 08* house. Mars is also aspecting 06* house.
Cancer
Cancer is a class of disease in which a group of cells display
uncontrolled growth (division beyond the normal limits), invasion
(intrusion on and destruction of adjacent tissues), and sometimes
metastasis (spread to other locations in the body via lymph or
blood). These three malignant properties of cancers differentiate
them from benign tumors, which are self-limited, and do not invade
or metastasize. Most cancers form a tumor but some, like leukemia,
do not. The branch of medicine concerned with the study, diagnosis,
treatment, and prevention of cancer is oncology.
Cancer affects people at all ages with the risk for most types
increasing with age. Cancer caused about 1 3% of all human deaths
in 2007 (7.6 million).
Cancers are caused by abnormalities in the genetic material of
the transformed cells. These abnormalities may be due to the effects
of carcinogens, such as tobacco smoke, radiation, chemicals, or
infectious agents. Other cancer-promoting genetic abnormalities
may randomly occur through errors in DNA replication, or are

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
inherited, and thus present in all cells from birth. The heritability of
cancers is usually affected by complex interactions between
carcinogens and the host's genome.
Illness take place only when lagna (body) and 06* house (roga
sthana) are linked. Saturn, Rahu and Moon are the main culprits to
cause the dreaded disease, cancer.
Brain cancer Brain tumour
The question of cancer disease comes when Saturn, Moon
and Rahu are connected to lagna. The chart below given Chart
No. 1 24, is that of a person who died of cancer in November

Chapter 33: Disease & Illness
The native was diagnosed with brain cancer during Jup-SatMoon period.
Jupiter aspects lagna. Saturn is the star lord of the lagna.
Moon aspects lagna. Lagna lord Mars is posited in Rahu star and
Rahu is occupant of 06* house. Dasha lord Jupiter and Bhukti lord
Saturn signifies 08 (serious nature). 08* lord Mercury signifies 2 =
maraca and 9 = badhaka. Dasha lord Jupiter signifies 02 and 09
(maraca and badhaka). Bhukti lord Saturn gets aspect of Jupiter.
Besides Saturn is in the star of Mercury who signifies 09 (badhaka).
Antara lord Moon signifies badhaka and maraca. Hence native
passed away during Jup-Sat-Mon period in November 2008 itself.
Initially it was reported of excessive water forming in the brain.
Dasha-Bhukti-Antara lords viz. Jup-Sat-Mon are all connected to
watery signs. The part afflicted is brain, which is signified by Mars
and Sun along with planets who signify either lagna or Aries. Antara
lord Moon is in Sun star. 06* house falls in Aries ruled by Mars,
who aspects Aries from Rahu star, while Rahu, the lead planet for
cancer is posited in Aries. Later doctors diagnosed the case as
brain cancer.
The chart No. 1 25 shown below is that of a Cancer patient
who was bom in Venus dasha running upto Dec 1963.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
06* lord Jupiter is aspecting lagna lord Venus, establishing a
link between Lagna (body) and 06* house (roga sthana).
Rahu is posited in Sagittarius, giving the result of 06* lord
Jupiter. Moon is posited in lagna lord Venus star and is under the
aspect of Saturn. So, Saturn, Moon, Jupiter, Rahu and Venus resulted
in Cancer affecting the person.
The person died of stomach cancer in Jupiter dasha, Saturn
bhukti.
In the Chart drawn below— No.126— of Hubert Humphrey,
born on 27 May 1911 at 04:43:00 a.m. at Wallace South Dakota
(45:05IM, 97:28:W), who served as Vice-President under 36* US
President Lyndon Johnson.
Rah 12, Sa, Me, Ju, Ma
Ket 06, Ju, Ve, Me, Sa, Ra

Chapter 33: Disease & Illness
Vice President Humphrey died on
January 13, 1978 of bladder cancer at
his home in Waverly, Minnesota, during
Sat-Mon^Jupiter VMD period.
Saturn and Rahu signify both lagna as
well as Roga. Moon is not directly
connected to Saturn, but Moon is in
lagna.
Hubert Humphrey Decaying is signified by Saturn. Moon
will give puss. Jupiter swells the illness
or part of the body afflicted. Jupiter is
in Rahu star Swati.
Bladder is situated at 06* house where Jupiter/ Venus signify.
Heart Disease
06* house signifies diseases. Disease will attack when 01st
(lagna) and 06* are connected or linked, and the native will suffer
from disease during the operating periods of significators of houses
06, 08, or 12. Significators of 05 and 1 1 will give recovery.
Sun, Moon, Cancer, Leo and 04* house signify heart. For
surgery, either Mars or Ketu have to come into the picture.
Heart attack has become a common disease now-a-days. The
Chart no. 127 given below is of a native, who had to undergo
heart surgery, bom on 23 June 1953 at 19-30 hours, near Kottayam,
Kerala, India, with Sagittarius rising and Moon in Libra in the star
of Visakha ruled by Jupiter.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Rah 02, Sa, Me, Ju, Mo, Ma
Ket 08, Me, Mo, Sa,
Lagna falls in Sagittarius in Venus star, while is in own star in
05* house, being lord of 06 and 11. Jupiter is lord of lagna (body)
is in 06* house and is in the star of Moon, who is lord of 08 and
signifies 06 and 1 1 .
Hence Venus and Jupiter do give health related problems.
Sun is conjoined with Mars. Moon is signifies 06* house.
Sagittarius is the 4* house which is ruled by Jupiter, who is in 6*
house. Jupiter signifies 08* house through Moon. Under the

Chapter 33: Disease & Illness
conditions, Saturn, who is placed in Mars star, aspects 04* house,
will necessitate surgery of the heart.
In Venus dasha, Venus Bhukti and Jupiter antara, the native
had undergone heart surgery. Since Venus signifies 05 and 1 1 and
also the fact that Venus is not connected to maraca or badahka
houses, the native survived the ordeal and recovered.
Son Suffering from Asthma Seen in Father's Chart
The following chart belongs to a friend, whose son is
unfortunately suffering from asthmatic problems.
Only if 1st house (body) and 06* house (roga sthan) are
connected, roga or illness will trouble the native.
08* house signifies seriousness of the illness including danger.
1 2* signifies hospitalization.
Mercury and 03rd house signifies lungs, Jupiter is the planet
who promotes sputum along with Venus. Watery signs will also
create phlegm. Airy signs signify breathing and dust.
Date: October 28, 1951
Time Zone:
Place:
Lunar Yr-Mo:
Tithi:
Ved'c Weekday:
Nakshatra:
Yoga:
Karana:
Ayanamsa:
Sidereal Time:
5:30:00 (East of GMT)
Mumbai, India.
Khara - Aswayuja
Krishna Trayodasi (Ju)
Sunday (Su)
Uttara Phalguni (Su)
Vaidhriti (Ju)
Garija (Ju)

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In this chart (no. 128), lagna rises in Libra. Progeny is seen
from 05* house. Hence take 05* house as lagna for his son. 05’
house falls in Aquarius.
Accordingly, chart of son drawn from father using 5* house as
lagna is drawn in nirayana equal house division is drawn below:

Chapter 33: Diseases, Illness
Now, there should a connection between Aquarius (lagna) and
Cancer (06 — roga). Readers may mark the position of Saturn in
Moon star Hasta in 08* house in Virgo (not bhava). Indeed, Saturn
is conjoined with Moon in Virgo. Hence Saturn alone will give the
result of lagna and roga sthan resulting in roga for his son.
Further, Asc star lord is Rahu, while 06* star lord is Mercury.
Indeed Mercury is posited in Rahu starand hence Mercury becomes
a significator of lagna and 06* house, thereby establishing once
again the aspect of roga for the native.
Saturn is further aspected by Jupiter from a watery signPisces, who passes on phlegm. 03rd house is signified by Mars
being lord of Aries. Mars aspects Rahu, who signifies lagna and
Saturn. Hence Rahu gives the result of 03rd house, Saturn, lagna
and 06* house. Rahu is a posited in an airy sign (Aquarius). Airy
signs contributes dust allergy.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Mercury is another planet, who signifies lungs, is in Rahu star
Swati and posited in an airy sign (Libra). Hence wherever Rahu
gives its results, Mercury also will give.
Saturn is the planet which creates difficulty while breathing
close to 08* bhava and being lord of 12* house signifies serious
nature of illness and hospitalization.
So, 01 (lagna), 06 (roga), 03rd house (lungs), 08* house
(serious nature), 12* house (hospitalization), Mercury (lungs) airy
sign (dust), Saturn (difficulty in breathing), Mars (CB^house), Rahu
(agent of Saturn and Mars) have come into picture for breathing
difficulties and phlegm formation in lungs for this boy.
Recovery is seen from 01, 05 and 11* houses only. Planet
signifying 05* house is only Mercury. Lagna is signified by Saturn,
Rahu, Mercury and Sun. Jupiter alone signifies 1 1 * house. But
unfortunately, these planets do also signify roga houses. Hence
the illness shall recur whenever dasha / bhukti antara signifies 01
and 06.
The chart of father is a telling example to seethe illness aspect
of his son.

Lunacy and Mental Illness
Mental illness, insanity, lunatic behaviour, etc. are to be analyzed
in advance at the time of checking the charts. One clearly knows
what will be the result of marital life, if the partner is mentally ill.
Mental Illness or Insanity is indicated as the lords of 06, 08,
12 houses and Moon (mind), Mercury (Intellect and Nerves), Ketu
(insanity) & Saturn (melancholy) are connected to 01 (lagna) and
04 (mind) houses.
The following charts are presented for insanity, mental illness
or lunatic behaviors.
Chart No.129 for the native born on 15-Jan-1959 at 05:25
a.m. New Delhi.

Basics oiNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Rah 1 0, Mo, Me, Sa, Ma
Ket 04, Ju, Me, Mo
Lagna falls in Ketu star Moda in Sagittarius. Taurus, Cancer
and Scorpio shall be 06, 08, 12 houses ruled by Venus, Moon and
Mars respectively. Out of these, only Jupiter is the occupant of 1 2*
house, who is the lagna lord.
04* lord is Jupiter, who is in 12* house. Ketu, who is posited
in 4* house also signifies 12* house through Jupiter.
Moon is posited in 04* house in Mercury star, and is aspected
by Jupiter from 1 2* house. Lord of 06* house is Venus, who is in
Moon star and Moon is lord of 08* house.
Ketu in the 4* house or connected to Moon makes one moody.
Lord of 06* is Venus, who signifies Moon (mind). Mercury is
conjoined with Saturn. Saturn signifies lagna and is in the star of
Ketu, Moola. The native was found to be insane.
Chart no.130: Mr. Manual Bubbitt, born Q3-May-1949 at 21 -
30 hours at Wa reham, MA, USA was a former Marine and Vietnam
veteran who had been executed for murdering a 78-year-old woman
in her home.

Chapter 34: Lunacy and Mental Illness
Babbitt came from a troubled family and had only a sixth grade
education. Suffering from mental illness since his youth, his
defenders said he cracked under the pressure of combat in 1968.
Lagna falls in the star of Saturn, who is lords of 3 (memory
and intelligence) and 4 (mind), but posited in 1 0* house in the star
of Ketu, who signifies 1 2* house. Hence lagna star lord and 3 rd
and 4* lord Saturn is a significant of 1 2* house.
Mercury, being lord of 08 and 11, is in 7* house (in the star of
Sun) and is under the aspect of Jupiter, who is also in Sun star,
whereas, Sun is the occupant of 06* house. Mecury gets aspect of
Saturn, while Saturn signifies 1 2* house through Ketu. Lagna lord
Mars is in Ketu star Ashwini in 06* house. Ketu is occupant of 1 2*
house.
Moon has gone into 08* house and is in the star of Jupiter,
who signifies 06* house through Sun.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Chart No. 131: Female nativity born on 07-Nov-1987 at 1614 hours at Vuyyuru, Near Vijayawada, India, Longitude: 80-35-0
East Latitude: 16-14-0 North
The lagna falls in Ketu star, Ashwini. Lagna lord Mars along
with lagna star lord Ketu are posited in 06* house, which contributes
illness. Moon is the significator of mind, is posited in 03rd house,
which negates 04* house. Moon is in the star of Rahu. Rahu signifies
06* house through Mars by aspect of Mars. Rahu is posited in 12*
house. Rahu is in the star of Saturn, who is occupant of 08* house.
So, the star lord of Moon is connected to 06 / 08 / 12 houses.
Mercury is lord of 3rd house as well as planet contributes to
memory and intelligence. Mercury is in 07* house in Libra, and in
the star of Mars. Mars is occupant of 06, lord of 01 and 08. Moon
is occupant of 03rd house, and is posited in Rahu star, who signifies
Sun signifies 05* house, is posited in 07* house, but in the
star of Visakha ruled by Jupiter, who is occupant of 12* house.
These combinations eventually resulted in mental disabilities
for the native.
Chart 132: George III (George William Frederick; 4 June
1738 - 29 January 1820) was King of Great Britain and King of
Ireland from 25 October 1760 until the union of these two countries
on 1 January 1801, after which he was King of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland until his death.

Chapter 34: Lunacy and Mental Illness
In the later part of his life, George III suffered from recurrent
and, eventually, permanent mental illness. Medical practitioners
were baffled by this at the time, although it has since been
suggested that he suffered from the blood disease porphyria.
King George III, was born on 04 June 1 738 at 7-46 LMT London,
The chart has got Cancer rising and lord
of 3 and Mercury is in 1 2* house in the
star of Mars who is also in Mercury star.
Moon is posited in 06th house and is
under the aspect of Saturn (08, 12) and
Jupiter (06).
04* lord Venus is in 12* house, who is
also under aspect of Mars (1 2* house).
Moon and 04* lord Mercury are found
to be afflicted.
Lagna lord gets aspect of 06* lord Jupiter ensuring illness for
the native. Mercury is in 12 along with Saturn makes some sort of
disturbance to nervous system.
Ma (R): 5Ge48-GK Ju:
King George 1 1 1

Chapter 34: Lunacy and Mental Illness
Venus posited in lagna in Moon star (mind) is aspected by 06*
lord Saturn, besides, Moon herself is posited in 6* house. Saturn
will slow down the functioning of brain.
Recovery
4* lord Jupiter is in 06* house, but in the star of Rahu, who
occupies 05* house. Moon also is lord of 1 1 * house, and in whose
star Venus is posited (in lagna).
These Combinations have really saved the Emperor from totally
getting the mind afflicted.

Blindness
Blindness is a serious nature of defect, which could crop up
even after marriage. There are cases when either of the marital
partner goes blind after marriage. A blind man could also be a
liability for a family in some cases, but there are exceptions to this.
For eyes, take Luminaires (Sun and Moon), Venus and Mars.
02nd house stands for right eye while 1 2* house can be considered
for left eye.
Mercury signifies the nerves, while Saturn stands for spoiling
it. Saturn and Mars mutual aspects / conjunction shall signal
destruction. Saturn signifies darkness.
When 02nd lord and 1 2* lord are connected to Sun, Moon,
Mars and Venus along with 06, 08, 12 and Saturn, one could loss
sight of eyes during the D / B / As connected to it.
The owner of the chart No. 1 34 mentioned below was said
to have become blind in Jupiter dasha, Mars bhukti in 1928 at the
age of 45 years. The native was born on March 24, 1883 at around
6-00 a.m. near Madras.

Chapter 35: Blindness
In the chart above, Sun, being lord of 06* house (a luminaire)
is tenated in lagna, signaling disease.
Saturn is posited in Krithika star ruled by Sun, while Sun is an
occupant of lagna. Hence Saturn becomes a significator of lagna
and 06* house.
Sun is in the star of Saturn, who is lord of 1 2. Moon is in own
star in 07* house and gets the aspect of 06* lord Sun.
Mars being lord of 02nd house (right eye), is in 12 and is
conjoined with Mercury. They are aspected by Saturn, who is lord
of 12. Mars and Saturn are in mutual aspects. Mars is posited in
the star of Rahu, who is occupant of 08* house. Hence Mars alone
is connected to 02 (lord), 06 (aspect of Saturn), 08 (in Rahu star)
and 12 (occupant). 08* lord Venus is in Mars star Dhanishta.
Saturn is lord of 1 2 (left eye) . Mars and Mercury are significators
of 1 2* house. They are connected to 06, 08, 12 as explained above.
The dasha at the time of loss of sight was Jupiter-Mars. Jupiter
is in Mars star. Mars signifies 1 2* (loss).
Let us check another chart No. 33.
Giuseppe Borgatti (Chart No. 135) was born on 17 Mar 1 871
at 2-10 pm Cento, Italy, 44 N 43, 11 E 17. He was an talian
tenor opera singer and teacher, noted for his renditions of Wagner.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In 191 3, in the middle of a performance
at La Scala, Borgatti suddenly went blind
at the age of 42nd year, and never
recovered his sight.
Caner rising. Lagna lord Moon is in
Capricorn and is aspected by Jupiter,
lord of 06. Hence the relationship
between 01 and 06 is established,
thereby making the native vulnerable
to suffer from illness or disease.
Giuseppe Borgatti Sun i£> one of the Luminaire besides
lord of 2nd house (right eye). Sun is
posited in Saturn star. Saturn is lord of
08* house and occupies 06* house.
Saturn signifies darkness.
Moon, another luminaire, is in Capricorn in Mars star and is
aspected by Jupiter, who is lord of 06* house.
Mars gets the aspect of Saturn from 06* house, besides being
lord of 08. 06* lord Jupiter also aspects Mars. Venus, who is in
Mercury star (12), also aspects Mars.
Mercury, who rules nerves system, is posited in 08* house,
and is aspected by Saturn from 06* house. Mercury is lord of 1 2*
house. Mercury is posited in Jupiter star, who signifies 06* house.
Hence, Luminaires, Mars and Mercury along with 02nd and
12* houses are afflicted by 06, 08, 12 and Saturn, thus making the
native vulnerable to loss of vision.
The dasha commensurate with the period of loss of sight was
Jupiter VMD, Rahu Bhukti in 1913. Jupiter is lord of 06* house and
Bhukti lord Rahu signifies Mercury. Hence the nerves system
connected to eyes are affected and thereby lost the sight.
In yet another case, birth (Chart No. 136) details of the
blind person are, born on 25-Aug-1973 at 15.10 hours,
Narasaraopet, Andhra Pradesh. The native lost his right eye vision
between 23-28 years. Unfortunately, he suddenly lost vision of left
eye also from October 2009, and is almost totally blind.

Chapter 35: Blindness
Me: 0 Le 12- DK Ju(R): 10Cp42-MK Ve: HVill-AmK Sa. 8Ge56-PiK
02nd house signifies right side eye. Saturn is lord of 02nd house,
who is in 06* bhava in Gemini in the star of Rahu. Jupiter is occupant
of 02nd house. Jupiter signifies Moon, being in Shravana star.
Although, Moon signifies 07* bhava, is in 08* house. Mars, though
is in 5* house, is lord of 12 (left eye), who is in Ketu star, aspects
Moon. Ketu, along with Saturn are in 06* bhava. Other Luminiary,
Sun, is also in Ketu star. Sun gets the aspect of Saturn. Venus is
lord of 06 and 1 1 , and is not connected to either Jupiter or Saturn.
There are no planets in Venus stars. Venus signifies Moon through
Hastha.
Neither Jupiter nor Saturn is connected to 1 1 * house. Native
lost right eye sight in Saturn VMD. The right eye sight was lost in
Mercury VMD. Mercury is in Ketu star and is aspected by Saturn,
the planet of darkness.
Unfortunately, these combinations resulted in making the native
a blind man.

Alcoholism by Spouse
Alcoholism is one type of enjoyment connected to addiction of
liquor. It spoils one's functioning of the brain, empties one's wallet,
spoils atmosphere at home, besides affects the mental growth of
self as well as family members.
• The aftermath of addiction is nothing but destruction for which
Mars and Saturn stand for. Venus is the planet who signifies food
and drinks, enjoyments coupled with intoxication, when connected
to Mars / Saturn. 02nd house signifies mouth, through which alcohol
intake happens. 05* house signifies enjoyments while 06* house
stands for habits and daily routines. Take a watery sign or watery
planet for watery intakes. 1 st house signifies lagna or body or onete
general outlook. Moon signifies one’s mind.
So when 5* house is connected 01 , 02, 03, 04, 05, 06, Mars,
Saturn, Venus and Moon or watery sign, one should be addicted to
alcohol.
Me: 19 Le 57- MK Ju: ^Ta26-OK Ve: 11U2S-GK $a: UCn53-PK

Chapter 36: Alcoholism by Spouse
In the chart above (Chart No. 1 37), Scorpio is rising. 5* lord
is Jupiter. There are no occupants of 05* house. Stars ruled by
Jupiter are Punarvasu, Visakha and Purva Bhadrapada. Only Moon
is posited in Purva Bhadrapada. Hence Moon signifies 05 and 02
through Jupiter. Moon is aspected by Venus and Mars and Mercury.
Mercury is in Venus star, while Mars is in Sun star.
Jupiter is posited in Sun star and Sun is conjoined with Saturn
(lord of 03 and 04) in Cancer, a watery sign. Mars is lord of 01 and
06 is aspected by Moon who signifies 02 and 05. The native is
found to be having severe intoxicating habits.
Robert Connors, father of US Astrologer Stephen Connors,
born on 25 Aug 1931 at 7-45 am, Chicago, Illinois, USA, 41 N 51 ,
87 W 39, died on 19 Mar 1971 due to alcoholism and liver failure.
The chart is given below;
As per the chart no.67 indicated below, Saturn is the lord of
05* house. Planets posited in Saturn stars are Rahu and Jupiter.
Moon is occupant of 05* house. Mars and Ketu are posited in
Moon star Hastha. Saturn also becomes significator of 06* house
along with Rahu and Jupiter.
2nd lord Venus is posited in Ketu star Makha. Ketu is significator
of 1 st house, besides, giving result of Mars and 03rd house. Saturn
is aspecting Ketu and lagna. Hence lagna is connected to Venus,
Saturn, 05* and 06* houses. Mars is occupant of lagna and is in
mutual aspect with Saturn. Jupiter (04) signifies a watery sign and
aspects Moon in 5* house. Chart no. 138

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Illness is indicated when 06* and lagna are connected. There
are no occupants of 06* house. Jupiter and Rahu are posited in
Saturn stars Pushya and Uthara Bhadra, respectively. Hence they
signify 06* house. Saturn is aspecting lagna. Besides, Mars aspects
Rahu and hence Rahu will give results of lagna and Saturn (06).
Hence illness is assured. Jupiter signifies Liver as well as stands for
enlargement. Hence disease connected to liver is expected.
The person died on 1 9 Mar 1 971 during Jup-Sat-Jup VMD period
due to liver failure and alcholosim.
In yet another alcoholic addiction case (chart No.139) of a
male nativity, born on 31 -Jan-1 974 at 00.20 hours,
Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, he had got the habit of addiction
in his teenage. He was married and blessed with two children.
Fortunately, he was de-addicted in May, 2009. It appears he has
done away with the habit of intoxication since then.
HL 5 Co 03 GL-. MVIM

Chapter 36: Alcoholism by Spouse
05’ house indicates one's enjoyment, etc., which falls in
Aquarius. Its lord is Saturn, who is in Mars star (02nd lord), Mrigashira
in Gemini. Occupant of 05* house is Mercury, who is also in Mars
star. Mars is in Venus star Bharani in Aries and is conjoined with
Moon. Jupiter is lord of 06* house, who is also in Mars star. Venus
is conjoined with 06* lord Jupiter. Moon is conjoined with Mans
and aspects lagna. Moon is in Ketu star and Ketu is in turn conjoined
with Saturn.

Misfortunes
There are numerous mishaps in life, like attack of chronic illness
like Cancer, or accidents, divorces, early death of spouse, etc.
Astrologer is required to check these aspects carefully. Let us
take few examples for these mishaps.
Accidents
Accidents, accidental deaths and misfortunes should be corelated with the longevity of the native at the time of marriage
matching. Sarvatha Chintamani by Venkatesh Sarma, vide Chapter
8 stanza 26 says that-
-if the Asc and 8* are devoid of strength, and are afflicted by
Mars and 6* lord, the native dies in a battle or by a weapon.
The Author has tested this particular rule in the horoscope of
around 40 nativities lived in this world right from the mythological
period to the modern era of 21 st century AD who died tragically.
The rule is found to be correct by 1 00%.
Whenever Mars is connected to Asc, (body), 06 (injury), 08
(Accident) there are chances that the native shall meet with
accidents, if the transits agree.

Chapter 37: Misfortunes
Case No.140— Swapna, Bom June 17, 1962 at 5.30 a.m. at
Mumbai, India, is of a female nativity, had met with a road accident
As: 23 Ta 48 Su: 2G«06-DK Mo: 18Sc41-MK Ma: 20ArS1-AK
Me(R): 14Ta48-BK Ju: 19AqOS-AmK Ve: 6Cn30-GK Sa (R): 17Cp38-PiK
The Asc lord Venus gets the aspect of planet of accident, Mars
(from 1 2* house). Mars also aspects 6* house (cuts and wounds)
owned by Venus. Sun, who is placed in Mars star Mrigashira, is
aspecting 8* house (house of suddenness, danger and accidents),
while the Asc has got some sort of Papa kartari yoga with Mars and
Sun on either side. A well-placed Jupiter's aspect (though 8* lord)
has saved the native, since Jupiter (lord of 11*) is aspecting the
6* house (house of cuts and wounds) as well as Sun, who signifies
Mars. 5* lord Mercury's position in lagna is also important for life
saving in this case.
The accident took place on Sept 14, 1986during Venus-VenusMercury period. It was also during Sade-sath period. On the day of
accident, Mars was in 8* house, while Venus was in 6* house and
Jupiter was aspecting Venus.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Case No. 141 Ronald Wilson Reagan, 40* US President, bom
February 6, 1911 at 4:16:00 am Time Zone: 6:00:00 (West of
GMT) Place: 89W47'12", 41N3838", Tampico, Illinois, USA.
President Reagan was shot at on March 30, 1981. A longnosed .22 caliber bullet, fired from a pistol, ricocheted off the
Presidential limousine and entered Reagan's chest, under his left
arm. The bullet was of exploding type, but it did not explode. The
main threat to Reagan's life was from blood loss and a collapsed
lung, but the President survived.
President Reagan completed his term
in office and eventually died on 5-Jun2004 due to Alzheimer's disease and
pneumonia at the age of 93 in Los
Angeles, California.
Asc lord Jupiter is in llmhouse. 5* lord
Mars is posited in lagna. 8* lord Moon
is in 5* with Saturn and Rahu, but
President Reagan unaspected by Mars, whereas Mars
aspects 8* house. 06* lord Venus is in
Rahu star, whereas Rahu in Aries will
signify Mars, the planet of injury. Moon
(08) is in Venus star (06) and aspects
lagna lord Jupiter.

Chapter 37: Misfortunes
8* lord Moon is in 5* house and is aspected by Asc lord Jupiter.
Since 8* lord got beneficial Jupiter aspect, and Asc lord Jupiter
was neither aspected by Mars or 6* lord Venus, President Reagan
survived the attempt on this life.
Since 06* lord Venus is in 3rd house (shoulders, lungs), the
bullet fired hit the part under left arm and lung was injured.
The period of injury was commensurate with Sat-Mer-VenMer. Saturn is lord of 3 (shoulders, lungs, etc.), Mercury is in Asc
(self)/ Venus is in 3rd house, being lord of 06 (injury). Mercury is
conjoined with Mars. Rahu signifies Mars. Mars aspects 4* house -
vehicle. Rahu signifies 06* through Venus, has caused injury during
the above period while traveling in Presidential limousine.
The native, whose birth data are given below (Chart 142),
had met with two vehicular accidents:
Birth data is: 9th of July 1969 Luanda, Angola, Time of birth
Me: 9Ga35-PiK Ju; 5Vi54-GK Va: 9Ta39-MK Sa: 14 Ai 06- BK

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession <S Health)
Rah 03, Ju,
Ket 09, Su, Ju
Accident 1 : 1st of Dec. 2008 near Tralee, Ireland at 08.00 AM,
Accident 2: 4th of March 2010 near Ballyduff, Ireland at 19.15
(approx.)
First of all, does the chart speak of accidents or not?
For accidents, take 01, 06, 08 and Mars. For vehicular accident,
take 04* and Venus. If 12* is connected, one will be in hospital.
Accidents are always caused by Mars. For recovery, take 01, 05
01 or Asc stands for self. 06 is the house of injury, while Mars
signifies injury. 08* house is for accidents. 12* house stands for
hospitalization. Accident will take place during the conjoined period
of planets signifying 01 , 06, and 08 along with Mars when transits
agree. If the period at the time of accident and during hospitalisation
also involves houses like 01, 05 or 1 1 , there will be recovery. If this
period does not get connected to 0 1 , 05 or 1 1 , but gets connected
to 06, 08 and 12 along with maraca and badhaka, it should be
signaled by Astrologer as a dangerous period.
In the chart under consideration, Saturn is lord of 01 si house
(lagna) and signifies 01 , 02, 04, Ve» 05, 10, 05. Lagna falls in the
star of Sun (Uthara Ashada). Sun signifies 08, 06, Ju» 12, 03, 09.
Sun gets the aspect'of Mars. Hence houses 01 , 06, 08 and Mars
are connected. Venus also gets aspect of Mars. This indicates that
the native will meet with vehicular accidents in his life, when the
pertinent dasha, bhukti and antara operate along with transits.
One Accident took place on 01-Dec-2008 nearTralee, Ireland
at 08.00 a.m., during Jup-Jup-Jup-Ven VMD period. Jupiter signifies
houses 03, 12, 09, Su» 08, 06. As we have already seen Sun
signifies 01, 06, 08 and is aspected by Mars. Hence the star lord of
Jupiter is very well connected to 01, 06, 08 and Mars to give
accidents. Sookshma lord Venus also gets aspect of Mars. Venus
signifies vehicles and is posited in Sun star, Krithika. Since Jupiter
signifies 12* house, the native should have been hospitalized.

Chapter 37: Misfortunes
The transit on the date of accident (01-Dec-2008) are given
Another Accident took place on 4th March 2010 near Ballyduff,
Ireland, at 19.15 (approx.) during Jupiter-Jupiter-Moon-Moon. In
this respect, the significations of Jupiter are already discussed.
Moon signifies houses: 07, 05, Su» 08, 06 and is conjoined with
Venus. The transit chart on the date of accident is appended below:
Chart (No. 143) shown below is that of Mohandas Gandhi,
the father of the Nation, born on 02 Oct 1869 at 7-11 a.m. LMT,
Porbandar, Gujarat, Western India, with Asc is in Libra and Moon is
in Aslesha star in Cancer.

268 Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Rashtra pitha was assassinated by Nathuram Godse, on 30
Jan 1948, 5:41 PM in Delhi, India. Period ran for Gandhiki was
Jupiter dasha, Ketu bhukti and Mercury antara at that time.
Ma: 11 Li 50- DK Ju (R): 28Ar14-AK Ve: 24U30-MK Sa: 2DSc26-PiK
The Asc is in Libra. Lagna lord and 08* lord (longevity), Venus,
is posited in lagna, and is aspected by Jupiter being lord of 06*
(injury). Mars (planet of injury) is conjoined in lagna (self) and
aspects 06* lord (injury) Jupiter. Lagna is in between Saturn and
Sun on both the sides.
These combinations entail lagna and the 8* house weak, and
are connected to Mars as well as 06* house caused injury by weapon
(Mars).
Dasha lord Jupiter is in Aries (fiery sign) — 7th (maraca) and is
in the star of Sun (badhka and moksha). Bhukti lord Ketu is in 04*
house, will signify Saturn, Mars, Moon. Saturn is in Mercury star
Jyeshta (self, 2 (maraca) and 12 — moksha). Moon also signifies
12— moksha through Mercury, being in Aslesha star. Antara lord
Mercury is also connected to self and 12, is conjoined with 02nd
and 07* (maraca) lord Mars. Hence the period favoured eventual
departure from this world.
04* house signifies Public. Bhukti lord Ketu is in 4* house. 3rd
house always signifies arms. Hence 3rd house of a person from
public shall be 06* house. 06* house is vacant. Its lord is Jupiter.
Jupiter is aspecting lagna and lagna lord. Jupiter is a Brahmin.
Nathuram Godse was a Brahmin by birth. Mars signifies young

Chapter 37: Misfortunes
age. Mars is aspecting Jupiter. Godse was a young man at the time
of his killing Mahatma Gandhi.
Note: Caste systems are done away with in modern
times. Here, the caste is mentioned only for astrological
purpouse.
Chart (No. 144) given below is that
of 35* US President, John F. Kennedy,
Brookline, MA, USA, with Virgo rising
and Moon is in Purva star in Leo.
John F. Kennedy was a charismatic and
alluring personality and the youngest
President to have directly elected, was
the 35* US President.
John F. Kennedy
President Kennedy was shot dead by suspected assassin, Lee
Harvey Oswald, in Dallas, Texas State, on 22nd Nov 1963 during
VMD of Jupiter-Saturn-Saturn period, when he has traveling in the
open-top Presidential Limousine along with first lady Jacqueline
Kennedy and then Texas Governor, John Connally and his wife.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In the chart, one could see that lagna lord Mercury is posited
in Aries, a fiery sign, and is conjoined with 08* lord Mars. They are
aspected by Saturn, who is lord of 06* house. Mars also aspects
Saturn in turn. Saturn also aspects Lagna (body). These
combinations made lagna and 08* weak and got involved with 06*
and Mars causing death by a bullet fired from a rifle by Lee Harvey
Oswald.
President Kennedy was shot dead while traveling in open-top
Limousine in Dealey Plaza, Dallas, Texas, on 22 Nov 1963, by
suspected assassin Lee Harvey Oswald.
Suicides
Vincent Van Gogh, born on 30 Mar 1853 at 11-00 am
Zundert, Netherlands (30 March 1853 - 29 July 1890) was a painter
whose work had a far-reaching influence on 20th century art for
its vivid colors and emotional impact. He suffered from anxiety and
increasingly frequent bouts of mental illness throughout his life,
and died largely unknown, at the age of 37, from a self-inflicted
gunshot wound.
Little appreciated during his lifetime, his fame grew in the
years after his death. Today, he is widely regarded as one of history's
greatest painters and an important contributor to the foundations
of modern art. Van Gogh did not begin painting until his late
twenties, and most of his best-known works were produced during
his final two years. He produced more than 2,000 artworks,
consisting of around 900 paintings and 1,100 drawings and sketches.
Although he was little known during his lifetime, his work was a
strong influence on the Modernist art that followed. Today many of
his pieces— including his numerous self portraits, landscapes,
portraits and sunflowers— are among the world's most recognizable
and expensive works of art.
At the time of his death he was a failure, a misfit who had sold
only two paintings in his lifetime, an artist who was later known as
one of the most famous painters of all time. Two years after his
death, a Dutch museum gave him a retrospective. His tragic story
first became the basis for a novel in 1907. Irving Stone's "Lust For
Life" came out in 1934 and was made into a movie in 1956. In

Chapter 37: Misfortunes
1987, a collector paid close to $54 million for his "Irises," now
placed in the Getty Museum in Los Angeles.
Some of the combinations for suicides are given below:
01 . Lagna is connected to 02nd, 07*, 08* houses and Badhaka
lord / badhaka house.
02. 08* house is connected to Mars or Saturn and linked to houses
03. 1 2* house when connected to maraca, badhaka, Mars, Rahu
The chart no, 145 is given below:
Lagna is falling in the star of Rahu in Gemini. Rahu signifies
Mercury, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn.
Saturn aspects Rahu and signifies 08, 09, 11, 12 and 05 houses.
Rahu is in Mars star as well as Mars aspects Rahu and signifies 06,
11, 10, 08and 09 houses. Rahu will signify Mercury being in Gemini.
Mercury signifies 01 ,04, 11 and Ketu (07). Jupiter aspects Rahu
and signifies 07, 10, Ke (07).
Hence lagna star lord Rahu signifies 08, 09, 11, 12, 05, 06,
10, 01 , 04 and 07 houses. Out of which 01 (self), 07 (maraca and
badhaka), 12 (moksha), 06 (Injury), Mars - weapon and injury,
etc. are prominent.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Death took place on 29-July-1890 in
VMD of Moon-Rahu-Moon by self
inflicted gun shot. Dasha lord Moon is
lord of 02 (maraca) is in the star of
Mercury (lagna— self). Moon is in 06*
house - house of injury. Mars, who is
signifying injury, is aspecting lagna.
Bhukti lord Rahu is posited in lagna
(self) and is aspected by Jupiter from
07th house (maraca and badhaka).
„ , Being Node, Rahu gives the result of
Vincent Van Gogh Jupjter
On seeing the chart, one could mistake
the conjunction of 08* lord Saturn is
with that of lagna lord Mercury. This
combination, in normal circumstances,
should give good longevity. Van Gogh
took away his own life with a gun in his
37th year which obviously granted
medium life.
Moon is in 06* house will make the native to have conflict of
mind or some disorder connected to mind. Moon is in Mercury star,
Jyeshta and signifies 01 , 06 and 04. Star lord of Mercury is Ketu,
the mokshakaraka. Mercury being lord of lagna (brain) and 04
(mind) as well as the intelligent planet who handles nerves system
is conjoined with Saturn (slow). Saturn is the lord of 08
(impediments). Hence the native could suffer from some sort of
nerves or mental disorder.
A maraca or badhaka planet connected to lagna or lagna lord
shall be a detrimental factor for good longevity. Here maraca and
badhka is Jupiter, who aspects both lagna and lagna lord.
When lagna is connected to 02, 07, 08 houses and badhaka
lord / house, one could commit suicide. Here we should take Mars
also. Here 02nd lord is Moon, who is in Mercury star and hence
connected to lagna. Saturn, being lord of 08 is conjoined with
lagna lord and aspects lagna. Jupiter is badhaka is aspecting lagna,

Chapter 37: Misfortunes 273
lagna lord and 08* lord Saturn. These combinations should make
one commit suicide. Mars (from Saturn star) aspects lagna.
Chart No. 146: Adolf Hitler
Adolf Hitler (20 April 1889 - 30 April
1945) was an Austrian-born German
politician and the leader of the National
Socialist German Workers Party
(German: Nationalsozia/istische
Deutsche Arbeiterpartei, abbreviated
NSDAP), commonly known as the Nazi
Party. He was the totalitarian leader of
Germany from 1933 to 1945, serving
as chancellor from 1933 to 1945 and
as head of state (Fuhrer und
Adolf Hitler Reichskanzlet) from 1934 to 1945.
A decorated veteran of World War I,
Hitler joined the Nazi Party (DAP) in
1919 and became leader of NSDAP in
Hitler was born on April 20, 1889 at 06-30 pm Braunau, Austria,
with Libra rising at Mars star Chitra and the Moon in Purva Ashada
star in Sagittarius.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Lagna star lord is Mars. Mars is in 07* house at 24 deg. 10
min., which commensurate with Bharani star 4* pada. Bharani is
ruled by Venus. Venus is lord of 01 and 08 and is posited in own
star. Hence Mars gives the result of 01 , 02, 07, and 08. Mars and
Venus are conjoined with Sun in 07* house, which is a maraca
house.
When the lagna and 08* house are not strong, and are
connected to maraca / badhaka / moksha, the longevity of the
native is threatened.
But in this case, the mutual aspect of Saturn and Mars cannot
be ignored. The death took place in Rahu-Sun-Moon period.
Dasha lord Rahu is posited in Gemini in Punarvasu star ruled
by Jupiter. Jupiter is also aspecting Rahu. Hence Rahu will give
result of Mercury (07, 09, 12, Ke) and Jupiter —in Purva Ashada
star— (03, 06, 01 , 07 and 08), Bhukti lord Sun is in Ketu star and
signifies 11, 07and Ketu. Antara lord Moon is in Purva Ashada star
Hence the houses connected are 01 (self), 3 (hands), 06
(injury), 07 (maraca), 08 (longevity), 11 (Badhaka), 12 (Moksha),
Mars (weapon and injury) and Ketu (Mokshakaraka) become
prominent.
When 08th house is connected to Mar or Saturn and they are
linked to houses such as 01,06,07,08 and 12, one could commit
suicide.
Here 08* lord is Venus, who is conjoined with 07* lord Mars in
07* house. Venus is connected to 01 (lagna lord), aspected by
Jupiter (06), Venus herself is 08* lord. Venus is further conjoined
with Mercury (12*).

Imprisonment or Jail Yoga
Is the person with whom you are finalizing your marital life,
has got any prison yoga as seen in the following charts?
In Vedb method, the definition of imprisonment is that if the
lord of Lagna and the 6th join a kendra or trikona with Saturn,
Rahu or Ketu, the above yoga is given raise to. If Rahu becomes a
significator of lagna and 1 2* house, this yoga is observed. If planets
like Saturn, Mars, Sun, Rahu and Ketu signify both 2nd or 08* or
12* house, imprisonment is seen. Houses 03, 08, and 12 shall
contribute for restriction in movement or away from home in a
confined place.
Results is that the native will be incarcerated.
Mahatma Gandhi (Chart No. 147) was born on 02-Oct 1869
at 7-45 a.m. LMT at Porbandar, Guiarat, Western India.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession 5 Health)
Gandhi was arrested several times
during his life time by the British.
The lagna falls in Rahu starSwati, while
Rahu signifies 1 2* house through Moon,
who is in 1 2* lord Mercury star. Rahu is
in Pushya star ruled by Saturn.
Lagna and lagna lord Venus falls in
between Saturn (2nd house) and Sun
(in 12* house). Saturn is posited in
Mercury star, and Mercury signifies 12*
house. Sun is badhaka. Lagna lord
Venus is in quadrant to Nodes. 06* lord
Mahatma Gandhi Jupiter is in quadrant to Nodes.
Lagna and 08* lord is Venus and is aspected by Jupiter (lord
of 03). 12* lord Mercury is conjoined with Venus.
Hence the combination of 03, 08 12 are connected to lagna,
paying way for restriction of movement and imprisonment.
Chart No.148 given below is that of former South African
President, Nelson Mandela:
July 18, 1918 Time: 2:54:00 pm Time Zone: 2:00:00 (East of
GMT) Place: 28 E 47' 00", 31 S 35' 00" Near Johannesburg, South
Africa.

Chapter 38: Imprisonment or Jail Yoga
Mandela was first arrested on 05-Dec-1956, but acquitted in
1961 . The date of arrest commensurates with operating period of
Mercury VMD, Guru Bhukti.
Later he was again arrested on August
5, 1962, and was in jail until February
On 02-Feb-1990, President F.W. de
Klerk reversed the ban on the ANC and
other anti-apartheid organisations, and
announced that Mandela would shortly
be released from prison. Mandela was
eventually released from Victor Verster
Nelson Mandela Prison in Paarl on ll-Feb-1990.
As per this, lord of lagna, Jupiter is not in 6*, but in 7* house
It is not conjoined with 6* lord nor is in Kendra or Kona to Sat'
Rahu or Ketu. But 06* lord is in trine to Ketu.
But the lagna lord is posited in 7* house in Rahu sta;
hemmed in between Saturn, Sun and Mercury on one side,
lord of 6, Venus and Ketu on other side.

Basics of Nakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Rahu and 12* house will throw more nature of imprisonment.
Lagna lord Jupiter is in Rahu star while Rahu is posited in 1 2*
house. So lagna lord Jupiter is connected to Rahu and 12* house.
This would definitely be a combination for imprisonment. Besides,
Saturn is lord of 03rd house in 08* house. Ketu is in 06* house and
signifies 1 2 through Mars. Jupiter is in 07* house and is in between
Ketu and Saturn.
Chart (No. 149) shown below is that of Pandit Nehru, who
was a prisoner under British Government, born on 14-Nov-1889 at
0 Sc 22- OK Mo: 18CH01-AK Ma: lOVj05-PK
15 Sg 17- MK Va: 7U28-GK Sa: 10Le54-PiK
The Asc falls in Mercury star, Aslesha,
in Cancer while lagna lord Moon is
posited in Aslesha star 1 st pada. Mercury
is lord of 1 2* house.
Rahu posited in Gemini in own star,
Arudra, will also give result of Mercury,
the sign lord. Hence Rahu becomes
strong for 12* house (imprisonment)
along with lagna. Mercury, being lord
of 3 and 12, is also posited in Rahu star
Swati. 06* lord Jupiter is in quadrant &
trine to Ketu and is in quadrant to Rahu.
08* lord Saturn is posited in 2nd house
while Rahu is posited in 12* house.
These combinations really warrant life
in prison.
Pandit Nehru

Chapter 38: Imprisonment or Jail Yoga
Sirhan Sirhan, born on 1 9-Mar-1 944 at
1 4-00 pm Sunday at Jerusalem, Israel,
Latitude 31 N 47, Longitude 35 E 1 0, is
confined to California State Dept jail
for killing Robert Francis Kennedy,
younger brother of Late US President,
John F. Kennedy.
On June 5, 1968, Sirhan fired a .22
caliber Iver- Johnson Cadet revolver at
Senator and Presidential candidate
Robert Kennedy and the crowd
surrounding him in the Ambassador
Hotel in Los Angeles shortly after
Kennedy had finished addressing
supporters in the hotel's main ballroom.
The natal chart no. 1 50 of Sirhan is given below:
Me: 7 Pi 24- PK Ju (R): 24Cn60-BK Vs: 9Aq58-PiK Sa: 27Ta26-AK
The crowd surrounding Kennedy overpowered the assassin
Sirhan. He was tried by the judiciary. He was awarded capital
punishment, but later it was commuted to life in prison. As of
2010, Sirhan has been in jail for last 42 years since then, having
denied parole 13 times.
Rahu is posited in lagna, and is conjoined with Jupiter who is
in Mercury star. Hence Rahu is giving the result of 03,12* house
through Jupiter. Rahu, a catalyst, is posited in Saturn star, Pushya.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health
Saturn is lord of 08. Rahu alone creates 03, 08, 12 results through
Mercury (via Jupiter) and Saturn.
On the date of his arrest, June 05, 1968, Sirhan was running
Rahu-Rahu-Mercury VMD period, clearly indicates 03, 08, 12 houses
connected. He ran Rahu dasha upto 1985, Jupiter dasha upto 2001
and shall run Saturn dasha upto 2020. Since Rahu, Jupiter and
Saturn — though in 11*, signify 03, 08, 12* houses and hence do
not foresee release from prison.

General Observations
There are some general, but vital points which could be kept
in mind while evaluating the marriage matching.
Intelligence and Communicational Skills
The intelligence and memory skill of the spouse plays an
important role in the marital life..
Ascendant and 5th house, besides Jupiter and Mercury are the
points to be considered for intelligence. If the 5* house or 5* lord
gets the aspect of Saturn, a slow planet, the native gets very less
intelligence. If Jupiter and Mercury are also either afflicted or placed
in Papa-kartari yoga or connected to Dush-sthanas, there is
likelihood that the native lacks sharp intelligence. If the spouse
does not even get average intelligence, there could be cracks in
marital life.
3rd lord, if connected to 1 2* house, one will be having very
short memory and problem in hearing or listening. (Chart No.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
In the chart illustrated above, the planetary positions are given
below:
Sun is in Moola star ruled by Ketu,
Moon in Ashwini star ruled by Ketu,
Mars in Hasta star ruled by,
Mercury is in Jyeshta by himself.
Jupiter is in Pushya ruled by Saturn,
Venus is Purva Ashada ruled by Venus herself,
Saturn is in Purva Bhadrapada ruled by Jupiter,
Rahu is in Bharani star ruled by Venus,
Ketu is in Visakha star ruled by Jupiter
The lord of the stars in which all the planets posited are
indicated in brackets.
3rd house will signify hearing / listening. 3rd house is vacant.
Its lord Saturn is in Pisces and gets the aspect of 1 2* lord Mars.
Saturn is posited in Jupiter star who is occupant of 08* house
(impediments) while Jupiter himself is aspecting Saturn.
From Moon sign, 03rd lord is Mercury, who signifies hearing
and listening, is posited in 08* house in Scorpio, which is a watery
(mute) sign. Mercury is aspected by Jupiter who is in Saturn star.
Saturn is posited in 1 2* house. Jupiter himself is lord of 12. Saturn,
Mercury and Jupiter are in watery (mute) signs
Hence the native will have problems with reference to hearing
/ listening, which hampers communication skills.
Intelligence
For intelligence, take 05* house along with 03rd house. In the
case referred above, 03rd house has been dicussed. 05* lord is
Mars, who signifies 05, 12, 10, 08, 05. Mars is aspected by Saturn,
who signifies 03, 02, 04, 08, 01 houses.
Moon and Rahu are occupants of 05* house. Moon signifies
05, 08, 1 1 while Rahu signifies 05,06,1 1 , and 01 through Venus.

Chapter 39: General Observations
Rahu is in Aries and will signify Mars. (Signification of Mars is
discussed). Hence it is felt that 05* house has got 06, 08, 12 links
along with Saturn, the planet of slow moving. Mercury, the planet
of intelligence is posited in 12* house in own star (strong) in a
mute sign.
These combinations and significations has resulted in a very
average intelligence level for the native.
If the spouse lacks intelligence, communicative skills and
memory, it is felt that marital life will have to be compromised by
the partner to a larger extent.
Exalted Planet
If As c. or Asc. lord is found somehow connected to exaltation,
the native is found to be very egoistic. Such types of persons do
stand unconvinced. This could happen if:
a) Asc. is posited by an exalted planet.
b) Asc. lord is exalted.
c) Asc. is aspected by an exalted planet.
d) Asc. lord is conjoined with an exalted planet.
e) Asc. lord is posited in the star of a planet, who is exalted.
The Asc lord is Jupiter, who is exalted in Cancer. The native, either
female or male, shows the tendency to be adamant.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Sun's Connection with Lagna or 07th House
In the chart given above (No.152), Sun is posited in lagna
and is aspecting 07* house. Sun is treated as cruel planet (not a
malefic), who sheds the sunrays relentlessly without any favour.
Hence it transfers some sort of non-caring attitude towards 07*
house, which deals with spousely matters.
Mars and Venus in Trine
When Mars and Venus are posited in trine (01 , 05, 09) houses
in a female chart, it is bound to create some sort of marital discord.
But for Taurus and Libra, Mars is the lord of 07* house whereas for
Scorpio and Aries, Venus is the lord of the 07* house.

Chapter 39: General Observations
In this chart illustrated above (No.153) of a female, Venus
and Mars are in trine, which in most of the cases promote quarrels,
if the 07* house is afflicted or 07* lord is not properly placed. 07*
lord Jupiter is posited in 12* house along with Mars. 06* lord
Saturn is aspecting 07th house from lagna.
Because of these combinations, native found it difficult to adjust
with her husband on several occasions. This has happened especially
during the saade-saath period (transit Saturn's traverse over natal
Moon).
Jupiter in 7th House
Jupiter is treated as pure benefic and said to add crores of
guna (good) to the chart. But Jupiter also is treated as a planet
who escalates or swells any signification connected with it, besides
making the native quite adamant in nature.
In female charts, if Jupiter is placed in 07* house, and in such
condition, if the 7’ lord is having negative connections, then the
native is likely to suffer from difficulties in marital life. She will find
an adamant, slightly sadistic husband.
In the chart of female mentioned above (No.154), Jupiter is
exalted and is posited in 07* house. The 7* lord Moon is in 06*
house, making the marital life difficult and uneasy. Jupiter in 07*
house has added fuel to fire, making her spouse as suspicious and
sadistic.

Basics ofNakshatra Padhathi (Marriage, Profession & Health)
Laziness
If the lagna lord is posited in a fixed sign, native is found to be
lazy. If Saturn & Rahu are conjoined and is connected with Asc,
then also the native is found to be lazy.
In the chart mentioned above (No.155), the lagna lord is
posited in a fixed sign, Leo and is conjoined with Rahu, making the
native to become lazy.
Mars and Arguments
If Mars is connected to lagna, Moon or 02nd house by
conjunction, aspect or lordship, the native is found to speak logically.

Chapter 39: General Observations
In the chart given above (No. 1 56), 02nd lord Saturn (signifying
speech) is aspected by Mars, the planet of courage, logic and
arguments. The native is found to be arguing courageously.
Moody Nature
If Ketu is found to be connected to 04* house either from
Moon or Lagna, the native is found to be moody.
Me: 2 Vi 20- GK Ju (R): 4Cp50-PK Va: 10Cn60-PiK Sa (R): 0Cp32-DK
In this chart (No. 157), Ketu is an occupant of 5* house in
Aquarius. A Node in Aquarius will also signify Saturn. Here Saturn
is lord and occupant of 4* house (mind). Hence Ketu becomes a
significator of 4th house, making the person moody. Also, from
Moon sign, Rahu is posited in Ketu star Makha, further making the
person extremely moody some times, especially in Rahu dasha.
