READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_applications_of_cuspal_interlinks_part_1_baskaran_banned.json
Dataset number: 223 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 267,309 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_Applications of cuspal interlinks part 1_Baskaran_banned
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_Applications of cuspal interlinks part 1_Baskaran_banned
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 287
  • total_words: 45113
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.953
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
K.B's
APPLICATIONS
OF CUSPAL
INTERLINKS
GENERAL STUDY PART -1
Author:
Prasanna Jothidamani
K.BASKARAN
( Late S/o Shri.SKrishnan Naidu )

CONTENTS
1 . Acknowledgements Xv
2. Introdution 1
3. Casting 3
4. Principles 6
5. Application 10
6. Planets 11
7. Cusps 14
8. Potentials 15
9. Ascendant Potential 16
10. Dasa Potential 17
11. transit - 18
12. The Basics for Studying a Horoscope ...20
13. About this Book 34
14. Abbreviation 35
15. Chapter 1 37
16 Reactions 106
17. Conclusion 117
18. II House 120
19. Ill House 166
20. IV House 202
21. V House 239

OUR SINCERE
THANKS TO
S.P.KHULLAR, i.
RETD. G.M; TELECOM
NEW DELHI
In Formatting This Book

Shri VALAMPURI JOHN
“ SANDHANAM “
I have the privilege of knowing Shri
K.Baskaran of Madurai, for a few years. I have
watched him making good predictions through his
wonderful system of Interlinks theory in Modern
Astrology which has its roots in the well known
Krishnamoorthy Pathathi method of Sublord theory
He has propagated hundreds of interesting
points to substantiate his conviction that only the 12
cusps with their interlinks are responsible to carry out
the events in one's life rather than the planetary
significations as many of the traditional astrologers
believe.
I am sure that this work will be well received
in the world of astrologers of the new Millennium as a
useful tool for successful predictions.
I wish Shri K.Baskaran all the very best in his
keen research works in this field.
CHENNAI
VALAMPURI JOHN

Sri Maha Ganapathaye Namaha
Dr. D.G.R.Sharma
FOREWORD
Astrology has deep roots in the history of
mankind and we hear many success stories of
the ability of the astrologers to predict the future
events with great precision. However, for every
successful prediction that we hear, there are
many dozens of inaccurate predictions. Then
we hear that in addition to the knowledge of the
rules of^astrology (I do not know how many
hundreds are there), one should have divine
grace to give predictions. If it is based on
divine grace, then the doubt arises whether it is
a scientific method.
While, I was interested in astrology only
as a bystander, a few years ago I had an
opportunity to meet Sri K. Baskaran of Madurai
and get exposed to the enchanting world of
astrological predictions. In fact, with his
guidance, I was able to make accurate
predictions for the simple questions like "When
can I meet a person?" and to the more advanced
questions like "What is the nature of disease?"

etc. His method is unique and the rules are much
simpler. He blended the concepts of Kalapurusha
Thathva and the Placidus system of house
divisions elegantly into his basic theory of Cuspal
Inter Links. When one applies cuspal interlinks
directly, one is bound to meet situations where
the same planet is connected to more than a
single cusp. This gives rise to "complex effects".
Death of child on the day of inauguration of a
new house, birth of child and death of mother,
etc., are examples well known to all of us. The
cuspal links, which cause such effects, are clearly
brought out by studying compound links and I
think this prompted him to bring out the present
book.
Mr Baskaran is a person who is willing to
share his knowledge unlike many others. With
his love for the subject of astrology, his years of
experience in studying and carrying out research,
he has written this excellent book " Applications
of Cuspal Interlinks" I had an opportunity to
go through this book and I see that he has
presented such a complicated subject in a very
lucid manner by taking a sample horoscope.
While the possible number of combinations is
extremely large, the style of presentation helps
one to evaluate new cases with confidence and
develop explanations for new combinations and
situations.

/ am very confident that this book,
along with its previous two companion
books, is going to be a handy reference
book for all serious students of astrology
who are interested in giving accurate
predictions. I am confident that this book
will certainly get the same great reception
from fellow astrologers as his previous
books did.
Mr. S.Gnanasambandan who is also a
personal friend of mine, deserves all the praise
for doing a great job of translating the text into
English.
Kajang, Malaysia. Dr. D.G.R.Sharma.
21 January, 2002

Om Mahaganapathaye Namaha
TO THE READERS
Shri A. R . B A LA N
Madurai -625 Oil.
Friends,
We have just entered into the new
millennium with new questions and challenges
placed before astrology. This science of
futurology, has to prove its validity and
credibility as with any other science. The
science of calculation in astrology was made
to perfection by Prof Shri K.S.K. But still
something was required to be appended as
astrologers have been facing certain difficulties
in predictions with the usual significators.
Some of them even went to the extent of
substituting with the tradition based ideas for
predictions. But, Shri K.Baskaran, with his
faithful study, has proceeded for solutions to
complicatedand complex questions of modern
day life with the use of Cuspal interlinks based
on the prime concepts of Prof Shri K.S.
Krishnamoorthyto evolve a new and novel
system of astrology as "Krishnamoorthy -
Baskaran" (KB system).

I feel proud about my disciple Shri
K.Baskaran all the time, and this present work
is really going to glitter as a jewel in the crown.
He has indeed opened a floodgate for all the
modern thinking astrologers to delve in
gleefully to quench their thirst in this great
science. It is my desire now to request all the
dear readers to take up and carry on with this
research work for the benefit of humanity in
general. It is with great appreciation that I must
herewith record about the support, suggestions
and able guidance of Mr S.P.Khullar in the
format of this book.
I should also appreciate the efforts
of Shri S.Gnanasambandan, Senior
Announcer, AIR, Madurai and Shri J.Rama
Subramaniam for their commitment in
bringing out this translation work. They have
properly understood the inner meanings of
what Shri K.Baskaran intended to say and
elaborated the same according to the point
of view of readers. I pray God Almighty to let
the spirit of this team to continue in all their
future efforts.
Good luck.
Madurai-11
Shri A.R.Balan,

NOTE OF TRANSLATORS
Dear friends,
Astrology is amidst the recent
controversies for its possible inclusion as a
branch of study in universities. It has been
condemned by its critics as an act of saffronizing
the education system with Hindu
fundamentalism. If we know what had happened
to other empricial sciences, we ourselves would
not demand for such a dogmatic inclusion of
Astrology as a subject of study, as it could only
defeat the very purpose and the significance of
astrology.
But our concern here is the scienceworthiness of astrology as rightly questioned by
its critics. Though it is painful to admit, it is a fact
that the present day astrology could never
withstand before the specifications for
deeming it as a science. Even if Astrology could
succeed in finding a place as a faculty of study
in universities due to the political patronage that
it may possibly gain, we don't believe that the
traditional astrologers would be generous enough
to award due credit to Shri R.Gopalakrishna
Rao(Meena) & to the Jothida Marthand Shri
K.S.KrisHhamoorthy. What is more painful to
us is the fact even the so called followers of Shri
K.S.K have not rendered due justice to his

teachings. "The objectives are often defeated
when they are institutionalized", Is the prime
propogation of Shri J.Krishnamoorthy, the
popular philosopher of our times. Unfortunately
this was what had happened also to the
teachings of Shri K.S.K,. The non-availability of
calculators and computers and lack of needed
proofs to withdraw courageously and
scientifically from the remains of a set of
traditional concepts like aspects, retrogression
etc., have limited Prof K.S.K., to leave certain
shortcomings in his methodology.
Only in this context, Shri K.Bhaskaran,
the author of this book, is to be appreciated for
his contrjjbitions for the enlightenment of the
teachings of his guru, Shri K.S.K by innovating
the theory of “Cuspcil Interlinks", At this
moment, we feel really very proud for being the
associates of this unique astrological work,
"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks". We are
aware that this book would stand as a milestone
in the history of astrological researches. There
were a few such attempts, in the footsteps of Late
-Shri K.S.K,. The basic differernce between such
earlier attempts and this book lies in the
scientific, the complete and the rational approach
in applying the principles of astrology with the
use of “Kaalamsas or Sublords".

After the release of the previous book,
"Principles of Cuspal Interlinks", there were
a few murmurs by a set of KP followers who
preferred to show themselves as the saviours of
the sanctum sanctity of KP system rather than
upholding it as a system of science. We believe
that the god of times would make them to accept
and realize the contributions of Shri
K.Bhaskaran, in the times to come. We are
confident that the readers would find this book
as a completely different and thoroughly useful
one on astrology.
Good Luck
Madurai:
S. GNANASAMBANDAN, J. RAMA SUBRAMANIAM,
JAWAHAR

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Om Mahaganapathaye Namaha
OM gurubyo Namaha
I would like to thank Shri.
T. Ramesh kumar, Mother
mera Publications,
Madurai, for providing me
with this golden opportunity
in bringing out this book on
"Applications of Cuspal
interlinks".
I have my special regards
to my Guru Shri A.R.Balan, who has moulded
me with the inner meanings of astrology. I convey
my thanks to Shri S.Gnanasambandan,
Senior Announcer, AIR, Madurai & Shri J.Rama
Subramaniam, Madurai for their efforts in
translating this book from its Tamil original.
I should also thank Shri Maharishi
Dayananda Jyothi the author of the leading
Tamil Monthly on astrology, "Gnana Sinthamani”
and its readers for their response to my articles
on astrology. I would like to convey my sincere
thanks to Shri C. Subramaniam, Editor, "Jothida
Bhoomi”, also a leading Tamil Monthly on
astrology for the publication of many of my
articles. I must thank Shri Valampuri John,
former MP, a great Tamil scholar and a renowned

astrologer for providing me a valuable foreword
to this book. I thank Prof A.Vaithiyalingam,
Salem, and his students for providing me
platforms to share my research experiences.
Above all, I am highly thankful to Shri
S.P.Khullar I.T.S., Retired GM, Telecom, New
Delhi, for his useful Suggestions in Formatting
this book. But for his helps, I could not have
dreamt about publishing this voluminous book.
He has indeed helped us by posing more number
of doubts and suggestions to add more simplicity
to this book.
Of course, I should also thank my parents,
wife, children, brothers, sisters, relatives, friends
Especially Shri. Dr. D.G.R. SHARMA Of
Malasyia.Shri.S.GNANASAMBANDAN Air
Madurai, Shri K.A.D.SARAVANARAJ Dindugul,
and Shri. BALASUBBARAMANI (vasiyoki)
Madurai, and STUDENTS for their timely help
and Financial Assistance without which I could
not have completed this book.
. Good luck to all
Madurai
K.Baskaran

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
OM MAHAGANAPATHAYE NAMAHA
INTRODUCTION
In geometry, only one straight line is
possible to connect any two points. Thus
science finds out the simplest way of doing things.
What makes a science to deem it as a science?
Whereever be and whenever be, an experiment
carried by whomsoever be, the result ought to
be one and the same everywhere. Philosophy
with different logics, tries to detail the "Cause and
Effects". Is astrology a Science or a Philosophy?
Though it contains certain elements of
mathematics, astrology uses different logics for
predictions-: In astrology, on a few occassions,
4+4 may not become 8. Since there are multiple
and complex parameters, astrology is made to
depend more on intutions rather than on a
scientific perception. Hence, astrology is forced
to be a subject with certain limitations.
While we, the astrologers wish to call it
as an occult or empirical science, we forget to
realize the shortcomings in calling it so, because
of the usage of different ayanamsas, planetary
positions, methods of calculations, inferences of
Yogas and Doshas, references to exceptions,
preferences of aspects etc., Unless we agree
to an uniform method of casting an horoscope

"Applications of Cnspal Interlinks"
by adhering to a similar set of principles,
astrology could never be recognized as a
science.
It is worthwhile to mention here an
occassion in which the Government of India,
through the Ministry of Human resources &
Development, had attempted to singularise
almanacs and to bring out a commonly
accepted and a scientifically credible one. After
lengthy discussions for more than a reasonable
period, astrologers of different schools failed to
successfully meet with the demand of the
Government. It shows the attitude of Indian
astrologers towards common interests. So, it is
mandatory to seclude the scientific elements of
astrology from the myths of faiths and
spiritualism. Though it may take decades to
compile and uphold the meaningful studies in
astrology, we must, at least ensure that we are
in that direction. In the process to improve the
scientific contents in the philosophy of astrology,
first of all, we must adhere ourselves to
uniformity in
a) Casting a horoscope
b) Identifying a set of rational principles
c) Applying the said set of principles.

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks ‘
CASTING
In casting a horoscope, western astrology
begins and ends with the 12 signs, based on the
transit of Sun. It takes the births between the
dates 22 nd March and 21 st April of every year
as included in one and the same sign, ARIES.
Whereas the Hindu traditional astrology confines
to its own classification of 12 Signs or Rasisto
distinguish every horoscope with the other. The
Drik-kanitha followers, to multiply the scope of
distinctions, included the calculations of precise
beginings of the Bhavas, the Cusps. For example
in "Deva Keralam”, a traditional Nadi astrology
work, we can find the tools to divide a Lagna,
i.e., the Ascendant with a span of approximately
two hours, into 150 parts as "Soorya Nadi &
Chandra Nadi" etc. The difficulty in following
"Deva Keralam" is the lack of specified
applications of these Nadi divisions to charts. The
“Kaalamsa” method of Late Shri R.Gopalakrishna
Rao (Meena) and the Krishnamoorthy Pathathi
method of Sublords, respectively extended the
scope of divisions by including the principle
of the "Bhukthi / Antara periods, i.e., the
proportionate divisions of the 9 planets
according to UDU MAHADASA, to identify the
planetary positions and to precisely fix the cuspal
beginings.

"Applications of Cuspal Interfm^s"
There are 12 Houses/Signs in Zodiac.
At the time of each birth, we actually mark
that point of Zodiac that is rising 180 degrees
in the east, as Ascendant to that particular birth.
Even for the same time of birth on a particular
day, it gets varied according to the latitudes and
longitudes of the places of birth and even for the
same place it varies with every 10 seconds
(Space & Time to specify the uniqueness).
As an ascendant SIGN, the Lagna, a new
Sign/Rasi would appear approximately in every
2 hours; A new star would appear as. the star of
Lagna in about every 50 minutes; A new Bhukthi
(Kaalamsa or Sublord) would appear in every
6 Minutes; A new antara (Subsub) would
appear in every 50 seconds. "How precise that
we are going to measure an Ascendant", is the
factor that would ultimately decide the
accuracy of a horoscope.
Ifwe confine ourselves only to the Sign/
Rasi of the Lagna/Asc, then from the following
example, we can see for ourselves as how it
becomes unscientific.
Rabindranath Tagore is a great Indian poet
and a nobel prize winner of the 20th century.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
Date of Brth: 07.05 1861
Time Of bi th 02 51 A.M
Place of Birth: Calcutta (22 35 N; 88 23 E)
If we presume that he Lagna is the only
factor to decide the "unique poetic excellence"
of Poet Rabindranath, then all those who had
their bi th betwe n 02 17 a.m to 03 48 a..m on
the same day, same place or correspondingly
with the other places must have had the same
ability of excellence Hence, the method of
considering the sign of "Lagna" alone as the
factor to decide, could not be a rational and
scientific one.
Here comes the signifcance of stellar
astrology. Identifying the planetary movement in
relation to the immovable stars in the background
is what we call as stellar astrology. Thus Zodiac
has been reclassified for study with the use of

" Applications of Cuspal iMterfinfes" 6
27 stars. The use of stars was later extended to
identify the Lagna/Asc. Though the stellar
classification is an advanced version while
compared to Rasi/ Sign classification, it
still required something to be complemented with.
Only at this juncture, the use of “Kaalamsa/
Sublord" gains significance. For a
comprehensive study, the subsub (Antara)
details of the remaining 1 1 cuspal beginings would
also be required.
The ephemeris used by the modern
astronomers and the Placidius System of cuspal
divisions, as per the Newcombe’s ayanamsa
remain as more scientific in casting horoscopes.
To avoid controversies, I would like to reserve
my comments regarding the shortcomings of
various schools of astrology in arriving the much
needed accuracy of casting horoscopes.
I request the readers to kindly refer my earlier
book on this subject," The Secrets of Birth Time
Rectification and RPs".
PRINCIPLES
While studying the logics of astrology, the
differences in interpretations are numerous and
are self-contradictory. Sometimes, exceptions are
more in number than the principles, since our

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" J
ancestors in their Granthas, as in the cases of
Indian traditional Medicines, had given the
derivations only in capsules leading to
ambiguity. They have not unfolded the logics
behind such derivations. With the dead fishes,
one could never predict the size and shape of
the net or the rod that was used in fishing.
Any principle to survive in times, must
be simple and rational. Complexities would lead
only to confusions. The Karaka significations
of planets and the bhavas as detailed in the
traditional granthas are simple and rational. The
description of the Kalachakra (The Zodiac) by
the Hindu traditional astrology is a noteworthy
one. Hence, by identifying the reliable
information from our traditional astrology, Jothida
Mannan Late Shiri K.S.Krishnamoorthy,
Chennai, had advocated a set of principles. As I
felt that, some of these principles are to be
enriched as suited to our present times, I have
carried on the same by explaining the objectives
and the logics behind these sceintific
principles, in my second book, "The Principles
of Cuspal Interlinks", brought out by Sagar
Publications, New Delhi.
I would like to list the meanings of a few
words that would often be used hereinafter in this

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 8
book, so as to assist the readers in proceeding
further.
a) CUSP: By cusp, we mean the
beginning point of a bhava / house, {SIGN,
STAR, SUB & SUBSUB positions of Zodiac}
derived as per the Placidius system and
according to the latitude of the place of birth and
the accurate time of birth.
b) SUB (Kaalamsa) (Bhukthi): One of the
9 parts of a star, due to anyone of the 9 planets
according to their due proportion of UDU
MAHADASA. A star is of a fixed length, i.e., 800
Minutes of arc and is ruled by a planet. Each
star is further divided into 9 parts. The ruler of
the first part is the ruler of the star itself and the
successive rulers are as per the sequence in
Vimsottari dasa rulers. The length or the range
of each part is calculated by dividing the period
of every star, i.e., 13 Deg 20 Min or 800 Minutes
in the same proportion of years allotted to the
rulers in the total span of 120 years of Vimsottari
Dasa. Each part is called as a Bhukthi or a
Kaalamsa according to Shri.R.Gopalakrishna
Rao (Meena) or "Sub" according to Prof.
K.S.Krishnamoorthy. The lord of this "Sub" is
known as "SUBLORD". For example, the range
of the sub ruled by the planet Sun will be
equal to 6*800/120=40 Minutes and that of Moon

"Applications of Cuspal lute links"
c) SUBSUB (Antara): One of the 9 parts
of a Sub, due to anyone of the 9 planets as per
their ratio of UDU MAHADASA. {as above for
the "SUB"}
d) CUSPAL INTERLINKS:
Type A: The link of a Kaalamsa (SUB) of
a cusp to the remaining 11 cusps, through its
STAR/ SUB/ SUBSUB lords.
Type B: The link of the lords of Kaalamsas
(Sublords) of the other 11 cusps, which are
either in the Star or in the Sub or in the Subsub
of the Kaalamsa lord or sublord of the concerned
cusp under study.
e) RULING PLANETS:
i) The SIGN, STAR, SUB, SUBSUB Lords
of Asc & the planet Moon at the time of study:
ii) The planets that rule the moment of
event or the planets that rule the question under
study, are called as "Ruling Planets". For
example, if a person asks a question about his
marriage, then the sublord of the relevant cusp

"Applications of Cuspal Iwte links" 10
for marriage, i.e., the 7th cusp, is deemed as the
house that rules his query. Hence the sublord of
the 7th cusp becomes a ruling planet.
APPLICATIONS
This book, "APPLICATIONS of CUSPAL
INTERLINKS" attempts to provide details of the
applications of a set of scientific principles of
astrology, i.e., Cuspal Interlinks, to a particular
horoscope which was cast scientifically.
This book relies on the prime conception
that every horoscope is unique in itself. Place
{Latitudes and Longtitudes} and Time are the two
different factors to identify the unique distinction
of a horoscope. From the time of origin of
Homo-sapiens, to this day {or till the DAY of
JUDGEMENT, as believed in certain religions},
we can never identify a pair of similar horoscopes.
Hence to analyze a particular chart, we have to
accumulate our concern on the factors that would
constitute the uniqueness of that chart.
PLANETS:
In Traditional Hindu astrology, they
believed that only the planets become the
factors of differentiation. The residential strength

"Applications of Cuspal Inte links" 11
of a planet (Shadbalas), its aspects, the aspects
that it gains from the other planets, the Karakas,
the Yogas and the Doshas resulted by the
occupations of the planets in different signs
or Bhavas, the movements of planets like
retrogressions, Asthamanams etc are studied
in detail with numerous rules and their inherent
exceptions to provide us with varied results.
But let us study how this belief fails before
rational way of analysis.
It is a traditional belief that the planet
Saturn, when it is in the 8th house would call for
dangers. Saturn could be in the 8th house for
8.33 % of natal horoscopes of 6 billion persons,
who are currently living in our globe. If we
believe that only the planets are the deciding
factors of constituting the "uniqueness" of a
horoscope, then we can check the same through
the example chart of Rabindranath Tagore.
ii) In Tagore's chart, Sat is in Leo; Jup in
Cancer; and Rahu in Sagittarius. Ketu would
always remain at 180 degrees opposite to the
position of Rahu. Sat, Jup and Rahu takes 30,
12 &18 years respectively for a full cycle; The
LCM of 30, 12 & 18 would be 180 years. That
means, approximately, in every 180 years, we
may derive similar rasi charts and the world has

"Applications of Cuspal Inte links"
to see similar Tagores and Geetanjalis. {On
11.9.2215 at 1830 hrs, a similar chart could be
prepared} Will it be a rational way of
understanding astrological principles? There
could only be one Mahatma, one Buddha, one
Prophet Mohammed, one Tagore, one Newton
and only one Kavi Bharathi in the entire span of
human history.
iii) Let us imagine that we have to shoot
with a rifle, at a mark placed just a few meters
away from us; even a little shake of our forearms would deviate the angle; And. even this
minor variation in angle, though the distance is
reasonable, would leave us in missing the
target. But, our tradition-bound friends believe
that the aspects of the planets like Jupiter and
Saturn would fall for an entire span of 30
degrees of a sign (i.e., 8.3% of the space), and
that too after crossing a distance of a few million
kilometres.
iv) Shadbalas are the strengths gained by
a planet through its Nature (Naisargika Bala),
Position (Sthana Bala), Direction (Dig Bala),
Motion (Chesta Bala), Aspects (Drik Bala),
House (Bhava Bala), and Time (Kala Bala)
alongwith their Istha (Benefic) and Kasta
(Malefic) Balas. But please remember that these

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 13
rules, unscientifically, presume the span of 30
deg of a sign as a single unit.
v) What do we mean by Yogas and
Doshas ? Yogas are the favourable positions
ofthe planets and doshas are the unfavourable
ones. Both these are mostly defined with the use
of residential signs of planets. Once again a sign
as a whole is taken as a single unit.
vi) Planets could never retrograde.
Retrogression is only an apparent event, a
relative measurement only to the motion of our
earth. It has nothing to do with our predictions.
But study of the significations or karakas
of planets, according to their cuspal linkage, could
serve better for the purpose. It is true that in
staging an incident, every planet has its own
way and style of presentation. But they are NOT
empowered to decide the nature and course or
to say, the potential to ensure an incident. Hence
the use of karakas of planets are to be confined
only to the minute variations in colours and tastes
of any event. The significations {Karakas} of
CUSPS alongwith their interlinks alongwith the
current DBA periods are the ones that decide
the nature and the actual timing of an event.

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
CUSPS:
Our ancient Granthas have provided with
morethan a few hundred karakas (Significations)
for every house. I would advocate to divide these
karakas into two, i.e.,
i) according to their degree of relation to
the Asc, since the other 1 1 cuspal points are only
the abstract extensions of the Asc. The prime
50% of the significations of each house is bound
only with the ascendant, i.e., the native himself.
ii) At the same time, every Bhava or Cusp,
with its relatively independant significations from
Asc, would react on the remaining 1 1 Bhavas or
Cusps.
Thus every house acts on the other 11
houses while it receives reactions from the other
11 houses at the same time.
1. Imagine that Moon is the II cuspal
sublord. It transits in the star of Mars, the cuspal
sublord of say, 4 & 6, and in the sub of Rahu, the
cuspal sublord of say, 8 & 12. Now, the II house
is said to be linked with houses 4, 6, 8 & 12.
This linkage is used for finding the

"Applications of Cuspal interlinks" 15
timings of the events as assured by the houses
4, 6, 8 & 12. (Action of the II cusp as an agent
2. Some planets may transit in the star
or the sub or the subsub of the planet Moon.
For example, presume that the planets
Jupiter, Saturn and Mercury are either in the
star or the sub or the subsub of Moon.
Supposing that 5, 7, 9 &11 are the cusps to
which the planets JUP, SAT and MER are the
sublords, then these cusps would act on the II
house or to say in other words, the II house is
supposed to receive reactions from the cusps
POTENTIALS
Now we have two different tools in our
hands to study a horoscope.
a) Significations of planets to "colour "an event.
b) Significations of cusps alongwith their
baggage of interlinks to decide the nature and
the timing of an event.
How do the cusps alongwith their interlinks
function to decide the nature and course of an
event? They act according to their potential; If

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
so, what do we mean by "Potential"?
A. ASCENDANT POTENTIAL :
Every ascendant sublord would transit in
a star, sub & subsub and would act accordingly
to its star / sub/ subsub lords. While the star
draws into an involvement, the sub stands either
positively or negatively to such an involvement.
Some times, we can also replace the star with
the sub for involvements and the sub with the
subsubs for deciding the nature of favour. Thus
Asc is bound with certain cusps. If the star of
the Asc sublord does commit with the 5th cusp,
then naturally the person would be fond of
music or sports. Thus to become a musician
{Permanent Nature}, one's Asc has to maintain
a cuspal linkage with the 5th cusp. This is called
as the potential ensured by the Asc, THE FATE.
The same principle could be extended
to arrive at the respective potentials of the
remaining 11 houses, but only to their relatively
independant matters. Houses 1 , { 3 & 11, the
Vrithisthanas}& {5 and 9, the Kona Sthanas}to
a cusp would favour the functioning of the
concerned cusp. Houses 4, 7, 8 & 12 to a cusp
would block the favourable functioning of the
concerned cusp. Houses 2, 6 & 10 to a cusp

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 17
would stand neutral to the functioning of the
concerned cusp. (Please refer the chapter, "The
Inner Thread", in my earlier book, "Principles of
Cuspal Interlinks")
B.DASA POTENTIAL :
A dasa would be owned by anyone of the
9 planets; this planet must be transiting in a
Star, Sub, Subsub. The Starlord, Sublord and
Subsublord of this planet, may be appearing as
the lord of Star, Sub & Subsub to certain other
cusps also. Now the Dasa is bound to certain
cusps through its lords. These cusps would
naturally permit certain beneficial events and
would defeat certain others. Thus, the Dasa
carries a favourable or unfavourable weightage
to provide a particular set of results to the client.
This is called as Dasa potential or THE MIND.
The word Dasa means the direction. Thus Dasa
drags a client to a particular direction through
its potential.
For example, the capacity of the engine
fixes the driving specifications of a vehicle
regarding power, speed etc. This is the Asc
potential. But the vehicle can be driven only if
there is fuel of the right type. This is the dasa
potential. However, the fuel can only drive the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
vehicle with the power and the speed to its
engine capacity i.e., dasa can only lead to
results subject to the limits of the Asc potential.
C. TRANSIT :
Gochara, (Gadhi) or Transit, the current
stellar positions of the concerned planets, i.e., the
Dasa lord, the Bhukthi lord, the Antara lord and
the Sookshma lord stand as the third dimension
of predictions.
For predicting an event, we need to study
the following:
1. Whether the event is promised or
not ? FATE (as per cuspal interlinks )
2. Whether the Dasa, Bhukthi, Antara
& Sookshma of the relevant cusps are in
operation? MIND
3. Whether the transit of lords of Dasa,
Bhukthi, Antara, Sookshma & the luminiaries
Sun & Moon favour the event?
The Asc potential is the potential in
principle which specifies the quantum and the
quality of one's life. Though the Dasa potential is

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
the means and the source to tap the Asc
potential, it is the Transit that gives the final green
signal for the execution of the above.
To explain it broadly, we may assume that
we have a car which can be driven, say upto a
maximum speed of 150 km/h. Suppose we have
two drivers who have the respective capability
and confidence to drive the car
a) Only upto 100 km/h or
b) Upto 200 km/h
In the first case the car, though has the
potential to be driven upto 150 km/h., yet is
being driven only upto 100 km/h due to the
potential of the driver.
In the second case though the driver has
the potential to drive the car upto 200 km/h, yet
the speed is limited only to 150 km/h due to the
engine potential of the car.
Assuming that both the car and the driver
have the potential to drive upto 150 KM/h but if
the road is uneven or is facing obstructions from
the traffic, the car cannot be driven to its fullest
potential. This is what we call the role of the
transit.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
The Asc potential is the foundation or
platform on which the flight of fortunes or
misfortunes is constructed by the Dasa
potential.
For a comprehensive study, we need both;
but remember that both these potentials are
inseparably tied together with their cuspal
interlinks. Asc potential is like the subject of a
book; Dasa potential is like the style and the
flow of the language used to portray the said
subject. Style without a subject would stand
as dross: Subjects lacking artisitic styles, would
end as dry wines. Likewise, Asc and Dasa must
and would always complement each other.
THE BASICS FOR STUDYING A
HOROSCOPE
1 . Check the accuracy of the given birth
time with the use of Ruling Planets.
Readers would have had miserable
experiences from varied predictions by different
astrologers. Answers to a specific question and
reasons fora specific event are often misjustified
due to lack of rational applications and
comprehensions. Every horoscope is unique in
itself. To ensure the uniqueness, the correlations

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 21
of a natal chart with the ruling planets are
required to be studied. This correlation could be
found in two ways.
1. The ruling Moon position is to
correspond with the birth Ascendant & the
ruling Ascendant is to correspond with the birth
Moon position.
2. The present Moon position is to
correlate with those houses of study (as per the
recent questions of the client)
For example, if the client puts a question
regarding his profession, naturally, the Moon is
expected" to transit either in the star or
sub(Kaalamsa) or subsub of the 10th cusp of the
natal chart.
Lack of anyone of these pre-conditions
could lead us to failures in predicitions.
Subsequently, the natal chart may require
minor corrections and alterations according to the
ruling planets. For a detailed study of making
birth time rectifications,
the Readers are suggested to refer my first book
on astrology, "Secrets of RPs and the Birth
Time".

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 22
2. Instead of misadventures due to
overconfidence, it is better to gather past events
to correct the birth time. Even in pathology, for
successful diagnosis of diseases, the past
informations of symptoms from the patient are
called for. With this information, fine tune all the
12 cusps upto subsub level with the use of given
facts. Remember that even for the same Asc
subsub, though it may last only for a few
seconds (for example Venus subsub), there is a
possibility of erecting at least 4 to 5 different
charts.
3. Decide the Ascendant potential :
Note down the Asc sublord. Now note
down the starlord, sublord & subsublord of the
Asc sublord. These three lords might be
appearing as star, sub & subsub lords of
different cusps also. List these cusps. If they
are 1 , 3, 5, 9 & 1 1 to the Asc then things would
become favourable. If they are 4, 7, 8 & 12,
then things would become unfavourable. 2, 6 &
10, being neutral, would require more efforts of
the native or assistance from the society to
render him favours.
4. Potential of the remaining 11 houses.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 23
Please note down the sublords of the
remaining 11 houses. In the same method used
for finding the Asc potential, the natal potentials
of the remaining 11 houses could also be
derived. These potentials could be used in two
ways.
i) For example, the 5th sublord is Jupiter
which is in the star and sub of Mercury, which is
the sublord of houses 2, 4 & 10. Now the
significations of Jupiter becomes 2, 4 & 10 or to
say 10, 12 & 6 to the 5th house. It is an
unfavourable potential to the 5th house.
ii) What is this 5th house going to render
to the Asc?'Through its potential of 2, 4 & 10, the
5th house, with its karaka of arts and culture
would enable the native to gain money (2), to
acquire properties (4) and to lead a successful
profession (10). Hence the natal potential of the
5th house is unfavourable to itself but may favour
the materialistic life of the Asc as it contains the
potential of 2, 4 & 1 0 with it.
5. Note down the potential of the current dasa.
Note down the Dasalord. Find the cusp
or cusps, wherein the Dasalord has appeared
as lord of the cuspal star or the sub or the subsub.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 24
The dasalord has to act for the above cusps
during this current dasa.
Now note down the starlord, sublord &
subsublord of the dasalord. These three lords
might be appearing as star, sub & subsub lords
to different cusps. List these cusps. If they are
1,3,5,9&11 to the prime significations of the
dasalord, then things would become favourable.
Ifthey are 4, 7, 8 & 12, then things would end in
vain. Houses 2, 6 & 10 would demand more
efforts on the part of the native to earn favours.
Supposing that the dasa lord is not the
lord of the star or the sub or the subsub of any
cusp, then the said dasalord would act commonly
to all the 12 houses. The same rule could also
be extensively used for bhukthi, antara and
sookshma lords.
6. In the following pages it has been
suggested to study the star or the sub of a planet
to determine and to ascertain the potential. In
transit, slow moving planets like SAT, JUP, RAH
and KET take more than a month to cross a "sub".
Hence for the slow moving planets it is better to
study the "sub" for involvements and the "subsub"
for confirmation. For the remaining fast moving
planets, it is better to stick to the system of

"Applications of Cuspal Interfiles"
studying the "star" for involvements and the "sub"
for confirmations.
7. If it is for a general study of a
horoscope, begin to study from the Asc and the
longevity. If it is for a specific study, look only into
those houses that are related to the question.
Asc and Dasa potentials would lead to the
prospects.
8. Questions under study could generally
be classified into two categories, for example.,
a) Will I get back the money?
b) When will I get back my money?
Readers could easily note the difference
between the above two questions. The first one
doubts the occurrence itself whereas the
second question requests the timing of the
event with the presumption that the event is
certain to occur. This classification should be kept
in mind while giving predictions.
9. i) Prospects to a cusp are to be studied
through the sublord of the said cusp. Its starlord,
sublord and subsublord would decide the
prospects.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
EX: a) Will I getback the money?
Note down the sublord of the 12th cusp
If it resides in the star or sub of 1, 5, 8 & 9, then
the person could never dream about getting back
his money. If it is in the star or sub of 2, 4, 6 &
10, he is going to get back the money.
Likewise, only when things are assured, we can
proceed to time the event.
ii) To time an event, note down those
planets, that reside in the star, sub & subsub of
the cuspal sublord under study.
Ex: b) When will I getback the money?
Find the planets which are in the star or
sub or subsub of the sublord of the 2nd cusp.
From the above list, we have to omit the planets
that are linked to 5, 8 & 9, the unfavourable
houses of the 2nd house. The money can be
recovered only during the combined DBAS
periods of the favourable planets.
10. Here comes a problem. For the
matters of money transactions, who will carry
more weightage? the Dasa lord? or the Bhukthi
lord? or the Antara lord? or the Sookshma lord?

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 27
i) For matters of fixed nature, we have to
look for the potential of the Dasa.
Ex: Life & Longevity, Family, Love and
affection, Personality and Satisfaction through
various walks of life are to be studied only through
Dasa.
ii) For matters of fairly frequent in nature,
we have to study the Bhukthi Potential.
Ex: House, Lands, Vehicles, Marriage,
New ventures and Status are to be studied only
through Bhukthi periods.
iii) For matters of common or repetitive in
nature, we have to study the Antara potential.
Ex: Temporary diseases, disturbances,
court cases, stress and pain, commission and
brokerage, worship, pilgrimage, foreign trips,
investments, borrowings and loans are to be
studied through Antara periods.
iv) For the matters that begin and end
within a span of a few days, Sookshma should
be considered.
Note*: Readers need not be dogmatic and

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 28
rigid in following the above as they are only
basic suggestions.
1. However, for any significant event to
happen, the potential of Dasa, Bhukthi, Antara &
Sookshma alongwith the transit must remain
either favourable or neutral.
2. The Sookshma cannot supersede
the Antara while the Antara cannot supersede
the Bhukthi and the Bhukthi cannot supersede
the Dasa. For example, if the Antara is totally
unfavourable to long journey, the sookshma,
though it is highly favourable, will not permit the
planned long journey.
Or to say in other words, native would
enjoy only those significations of the Bhukthilord
in its bhukthi, which are not negated by the
Dasalord. On the reverse, the Dasalord, to carry
on its personal agenda would await for a
favourable or a neutral Bhukthi.
11. Venus would be the 7th cuspal sublord
to anyone in a set of nine horoscopes. Venus
would transit in its own stars for at least 27 days
in a whole year. People who have had their birth
either in Mercury or in Ketu star, would face
Venus dasa during their teenage periods. If so,

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 29
can we come to a conclusion that all of them
would get married during the Sookshma period
of Venus, in its own DBA and in this 27 days
transit period?. It could not be so, as it would
again defeat the concept of uniqueness.
i) The sub in which the VII sublord Venus
is actually in, at the time of birth, would decide
the prospects for marriage and the married life.
{Potential of the chart}
ii) All those planets which are in the star
or sub of Venus, are expected to favour the
marriage. All these planets have to appear as
the lords of the Dasa, Bhukthi, Antara and
Sookshma,' so that the event of marriage of the
native is unique in nature, with the combination
of karakas of all those planets who have a link
for marriage. {Dasa potential}
iii) The Transit would add further colour
and variety to the occasion.
In application of Cuspal Interlinks, the
derivations are possible only through the
planets. After all, it is the DBAS periods of a
planet or planets that would ultimately guide the
day-to-day routines alongwith the major events
of ones life.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
All the 9 planets are acting continously on
all of us. A planet has two ways to act. It derives
a commitment from the natal chart. Say, for
instance, Jupiter is the 5th sublord in a chart.
Jupiter resides in the star and sub of Mercury,
the sublord of houses 2, 4 & 10. Now, the planet
Jupiter would always carry 2, 4 & 10 with it.
Hence, during Jupiter Dasa, in a period of 16
years, the native would be able to enjoy the
combined effects of the houses 2, 4 & 10.
But what about the remaining cusps and
their effects. Will they remain dormant for the
entire span of 16 years? They would come to
stage at a time when the Dasalord Jupiter
transits in the stars of the respective cuspal
sublords.
Let us assume that the planet Jupiter
transits in the star of Saturn, the 7th sublord. Now
what would happen? With its baggage of 2, 4 &
10 or to say 8,10 & 4 to the 7th house, the planet
Jupiter would cause for unexpected troubles and
dissatisfactions in married life to the life partner
of the native. Hence with its 2, 4 & 10 the planet
Jupiter, would give varied results during its DBA
periods, according to its transit. For example,

Applications of C us pal Interlinks"
Asc : Materialistic favours and mental
dissatisfactions : (2, 4 & 10 to Asc)
II: Materialistic benefits (1, 3 & 9 to II)
III: Problems in writings and break in short
journeys, Quarrels with younger brother
and father-in-law (12, 2 & 8 to III)
IV: Accumulation of properties through
own money (11,1 & 7 to IV)
V: Health problems to the first child,
Saturation in artistic interests
VI: Ability to obtain loans and easy success,
Co-operation from servants
(9, 1f&5toVt)
VII: Accidents to wife, Dejections of the
business partner (8,10 & 4 to VII)
VIII: Gains to the partner, Savings of wife
IX: lllhealth of the father or second wife,
Problems in foreign journerys
X: Smooth sailing in professional life
XI : Dissatisfactions in life (4, 6 & 12 to XI)
XII: Secret plans, Favours from investments

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
Thus a single planet, at the same time,
acts on all the 12 houses. In reverse, all the 9
planets would act on the same house at the same
time. Only when all the 12 houses and the 9
planets combinedly act for an event, be it a daily
routine or a major event of our life, it
matures into a reality.
CUSPS: For example, presume that we
have decided to meet a person on a particular
day at a particular time. What are all the
subsequent questions that would arise?
1. Are we going to meet him? (I Bhava)
2. Is he going to come to meet us?(VII Bhava)
3. Where is the venue of our meeting?
Our office? (IV Bhava)
or his residence? (X Bhava)
4. What do we wish to communicate?
(IX bhava)
5. What does he wish to negotiate? (Ill Bhava)
6. What do we gain out of this meeting?
(II bhava)
7. What does he gain? (VIII Bhava)
8. Will the talks be fruitful? (V & XI)

Applications of Cusycil Interlinks'
9. Who would force the meeting to fail
(VI or XII)
If the person is unable to come to meet
us, then cusps 2 & 8 are said to be in operation.
A communication from our friend to postpone the
meeting would be received if 3 & 9 are in
operation. During the course of meeting we may
taste groundnuts and a cup of coffee (6) ; But
he may prefer cashewnuts and a cup of tea
(12); We may pick him up in our car (4); He may
drop us in his motor-bike (10); We might have
satisfied him (5) or he might have satisfied us
(11); Thus all the 12 houses through the
planets, stand to matter for each and every
moment of our being. Using a single bhava or a
single planet to predict an event would mean
that we are perfunctory in our approach and that
would lead us to end in vain.
PLANETS: For example, let us presume
that two parties are meeting in a negotiation
table. Sun, the karaka planet for legal validity of
such a meeting, Moon, the karaka planet for the
duration of such a meeting, Mars, the karaka
planet for the areas of disputes, Mercury, the
karaka planet for the phases and schedule of
talks, Jupiter, the karaka planet for mutual trust

"Applications of Cuspctl Interlinks" 34
between the parties, Saturn, the karaka planet
for unexpected failures and dejections in the
process of negotiations, Rahu, the karaka planet
for traces of doubts in the minds of the parties,
and Ketu, the karaka planet forthe inner
criminal motives and the intentions to cheat the
other, must find appropriate docks with cusps so
as to ensure success out of the meeting.
ABOUT THIS BOOK
In this book on "APPLICATIONS of
CUSPAL INTERLINKS", there are three parts
Part 1. General Study of a Horoscope
This would be required for a complete and
total study of a chart, when there is no specific
question from the client.
Part 2. Specific study of a Horoscope
There may arise situations to study the general
trend on
i) Health & Longevity
ii) Finance & Fortunes
iii) Marriage & Children
iv) Dwellings, Vehicles and Properties
v) Profession & Status
vi) Higher education
vii) Foreign Journeys etc,.

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
These questions are to be studied
combinedly with the relevant set of houses and
thus would naturally carry complexity.
Part 3. Horary study
Study of a Horary chart for specific
questions when the natal chart is unavailable.
ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THIS BOOK
ARE AS BELOW ;
BT... BIRTH TIME
DOB... DATE OF BIRTH
POB... PLACE OF BIRTH
ST... SIDEREAL TIME
SUN. ..SUN
MOO... MOON
MAR... MARS
MER... MERCURY
JUP... JUPITER
VEN... VENUS
SAT... SATURN
RAH... RAHU
KET...KETU
AY...AYANAMSA
LA... LATITUDE
LO... LONGITUDE

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 36
1ST... INDIAN STANDARD TIME
LMT... LOCAL MEAN TIME
TC...TIME CORRECTION
ASC ...ASCENDANT
SGL...SIGN LORD
STL... STAR LORD
SBL...SUB LORD
SSL... SUBSUB LORD
PLA... PLANET
DAS... DASA PERIOD
DBA... DASA, BHUKTI, ANTARA
BHK... BHUKTI PERIOD
ANT... ANTARA PERIOD
SOO... SOOKSHMA PERIOD
YMD... YEAR, MONTH, DATE
HMS... HOURS, MINUTES, SECONDS
DMS... DEGREES, MINUTES, SECONDS
GP...GHATIKAS, PALAS
LVP ... LANDS, VEHICLES, PROPERTIES.
SG & AC... SPORTS, GAMES, ARTS, CULTURE
L/B... LIFE/BUSINESS PARTNER
P/W/H.L PARTNER/WIFE/HUSBAND
Nl... NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
W/H... WIFE/HUSBAND
PCI... Principles of Cuspal Interlinks

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
{GENERAL STUDY}
Let us now try to learn the methodology
of the general study of a horoscope with the
following example. Due to the differences of
various ayanamsas, in softwares and in systems
of casting horoscopes, there may be some
minor variations in the planetary positions and
the cuspal divisions. Herlce let us confine
ourselves with the following example to learn only
about the methodology.
CHART
CHAPTER I
STUDY OF ASCENDANT
(Please refer to the Example Chart)
In studying the Ascendant-dependant
matters of every house, first of all, it is
mandatory to assess the potential of the
ascendant before analyzing the strength of any
house. Note the starlord of the sublord of each
cusp and study its position of favour to the asc
and not to themselves. Only to the matters of
their own entity, the position of favour is to be
studied to themselves.
Personal capacity to think and act, gain
or loss of energy, attraction, pleasures and
character are the prime significations of the I house,
the Asc.

Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
DATE
DAY
TIME
PLACE
STATE
COUNTRY
LAT.
: SUNDAY
: BODINAYAKANOOR
: TAMIL NADU
: INDIA
AYANIAMSA : 23 20 37
DASA BAL SUN : 4 Y. 1 04 D
CUSP S D M S SGL STL SBL SSL

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 39
FOR 4 23 04 43 MOO MER MOO KET

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 40

"Applications of Cusnal Interlinks"
RAHU BHK
JUP BHK
SAT BHK
MERC BHK
KETU BHK
VEN BHK
SUN BHK
MOON BHK
MARS BHK

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 42
ASC & I (PHYSICAL STRUCTURE)
We have to use common sense in
deciding about the height and the colour or
complexion of a person. The region and the
social group to which a person actually belongs
to would also matter a lot in deciding the height
and the colour or complexion of a person. For
example, the average height of a few tribal groups
is^around 4.5 feet, while the average height of
an Australian stands at 6 feet.
Our ancestors have used different signs,
stars and planets for identifying different colours.
White coloured Europeans, Dark coloured
Africans, Yellowish Mangolians, Brownish
Indians are all living in this world. Even amongst
the same coloured people, we can notice a few
minor differences in colours. An African born
with the starlord of the sublord of the Asc in
Taurus, whatever may the complexion of his
basic colour be, would appear as handsome.
And also that the colour of a person is subject to
changes due to the climatic conditions and the
exercise of physical labour in his profession.

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
Body structure of a person could be
traced from the Sign, Star & Sub, wherein the
starlord (Sun, in this example chart) of the Asc
sublord (Mars, in this example) is in. But please
remeber that it would stand as common to all
those who are born with Mars as Asc sublord on
that particular day on which, the starlord Sun
would remain in the same sign, star and sub. To
differentiate, we need to identify the cusps
wherein the starlord of the Asc sub, is the sublord.
The signs of these cusps would combinedly
indicate the structure of a person.
In this example Sun, the starlord of the
Asc sublord Mars, is the sublord only to the 6th
cusp. Since' Aries is the sign wherein the 6th cusp
has fallen, the client would appear as per the
significations of Aries {Tall, Masculine in
appearance, with long, straight and black hair
etc}.
CHARACTER OF A PERSON :
Character of a person changes as per the
current DB lords. We know that a person with
very good character occassionally falls from his
own standards. Take the case of the former US
president Bill Clinton; all of a sudden, his name
was involved in a sex scandal. The successful
captain of the South African cricket team, Late

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
Hansie Cronje was accused of bribery charges.
It is a fact that no one could ever be good to
everybody else, no one could ever be good to
all at all times and on all circumstances;
Qualities of contrast natures like pervertions and
morality, vengeance and magnanimity, selfish
attitude and social service are tied together in
the same mind and heart; they blow in and wear
out as per the Dasa and Bhukthies. The
consistency factor of one's character remains
more with the DB lords. Please note that we
have not included the Antara and the Sookshma
periods because their periods are relatively
smaller.
During the DB periods that are related to
the Asc, the character significations of natal
nature of the Asc leads the stage. But, in the
periods of Dasas and Bhukthies, that are
unrelated to the Asc, the character gets
modified according to their respective lords.
However, the basic character of an Ascendant
could be studied as follows.
The starlord of the Asc sublord is Sun in
this example:
Planetary signification ( Sun ):
i) Status, Leadership, Selfish, Power &

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 45
Authority, Fond of Hot and Spicy Foods,
Short-temper, Bold decisions, Convincing others
to his views etc (Vide P.N 46 of Principles of
Cuspal Interlinks)
Here, we have taken only those Karakas
of Sun that are meant only for the Ascendant.
We have not included the 6, 7 & the 8th houses
and their related karakas of Sun as they would
become immaterial here. {P.N 21 , “PCI”}
Sun is connected to Aries, a movable and
fiery sign:
ZODIAC significations:
ii) Initiative, Violent, Endeavour,
Thoughtful, Active, Encouraging, Rumourmonger, Doubting others, Adamant, Careless,
Concoctor of lies, Harsh words, Provocative,
Hurting others and Insulting sentiments etc.,
(Vide P.N 45 of Principles of Cuspal Interlinks)
SUN is connected to the 6th cusp
Cuspal significations:
iii) Industrious, Hard-labour and a Debtor etc.,
In case if the planet Sun is connected to
more than a single cusp, then the significations

" Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 46
of all those cusps could be taken into account.
In these cases of multiple ownerships, we have
to depend more on the cusp to which the sublord
of the Ascendant sublord would favour more.
Sun is in Aries and it is the I Bhava of
Zodiac
iv) Helping tendancy, Popular, Bold in
undertakings, Social status etc.,
The sublord of the Ascendant sublord is
Rahu, which is the sublord of thejth cusp, a
neutral position to Sun, the starlord of the Asc
sublord. Hence the planet Rahu would uphold
the results provided by the Sun.
GRAHA KARAKA
(PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS)
Saturn and Ketu are the two planets
which are either in the star or sub of Mars, the
Asc sublord.
SATURN would give Mental Depression,
Doubting Natures, Stress and Pains, Telling Lies,
Lack of Cleanliness, Violence, Inferiority
Complex, Laziness, Lack of needed interest in
sexual pleasures etc.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 47
KETU would give Criminal Thoughts,
Magics, Cunningness, Faith in God, More aciditity
in body, Subversive actions etc.
While the karakas of Mars remain
permanent, karakas of Saturn & Ketu would
temporarily come to the forefront by
superseding the karakas of Mars, during their
own Dasa, Bhukthi & Antara periods.
Notes :
1 . If the sublord of the Asc sublord owns
an unfavourable position to the starlord of the
Asc sublord, it would distract the results
indicated by the starlord.
2. Supposing that the sublord of the Asc
sublord is sublord to more than a single cusp
while the starlord of the ascendant sublord is
owner only to a single cusp, a set of combined
results is to be expected.
3. If both the lords of the star and the sub
of the Asc sublord are owners to more than a
single cusp, then a proper combination of all
those significations of the above linked cusps, is
to be studied.
4. If the starlord of the sublord of the Asc

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
does not appear as sublord to any cusp, then we
must find its appearance in the series of starlords
and subsublords of all the 12 cusps, before
going in for studying with its residential sign, star
& sub of the said starlord of Asc.
Let me list a few principles of linkage of the Asc
to itself:
1,1: Resistance to diseases, long life, own
ideas, activeness
1,2: Financial motives through self efforts
and thoughts
1,3: Courageous, communicative, fond of
travels
1,4: Inclination to education, Interested in
accumulating wealth, Lesser interest in
romance, Atheist
1,5: Interests in music and arts, sports,
romance
1,6: Frequent illness, fond of success
1,7: Envious towards others, sociable
1,8: Dejections, attempts to commit suicides,
criminal intentions
1,9: Illegal affairs, excellence in higher
education

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
1,10: Status through profession
1,11: Satisfaction through self efforts
1,12: A man of secrecy
Here in the given example chart, the Asc
sublord is permanently linked with the houses 6
& 7 to mean that the native is prone to frequent
illnesses and may envy others. These would
become explicit when the Asc sublord Mars
transits in its own stars during its DBA periods.
To help the readers, I would like to
suggest them the art of classifying the
significations of the nine planets as suited to the
cuspal requirements with the following example.
It is always better to teach the art of fishing rather
than to donate fishes. Hence, I have provided
the Asc related significations of the ascendant,
by giving an example each for the physical and
the mental karakasfor every planet. In the same
way, I request the readers to learn the art of
classification for the remaining 11 bhavas or
cusps. For the details of significations of
planets, readers are advised to refer some good
traditional texts, until I could find time to write a
separate book on "Cuspal Interlinks and Graha
Karakas".
SUN: Bones of the body; Honesty

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 50
MOO: Blood in the body, Intelligence
MAR: Fleshes in the body, Courage and
hard labour
MER: Nerves of the body, Memory and
activeness
JUP: Fats in the body, Generosity and
devotion
VEN: Glands of the body, Handsome
appearance and pleasures
SAT: Skin of the body, Doubting and inferiority
complex of the mind
RAH: Respiratory function, Addictions
KET: Acids of the body, Criminal and
subversive thoughts
ASC & II
Certain significations of the II cusp are
meant only for Asc, such as fortunes and favours,
one's abilities and smiles of lucks, capability to
express, softness in expression, memory,
imagination, capacity to digest food, allergy,
vision and the right eye, voice and the tongue,
nose, teeth, cheek, jaws etc.
General principles of linkage of the II
house with the Asc are as follows:

Applications of Cuspal Interlines"
1,1: Expenditures from personal savings
1,2: Earnings through own ideas.
1,3: Sale of gold and valuables for personal
needs
1,4: Purchase of goods and articles for
personal needs, out of own income
1,5: Gamblings with own money
1,6: Personal medical expenditure out of
income
1,7: Expenditures from his money left at
other's hands
1,8: Dejections on financial matters
1,9: Financial crisis out of extravagant
expenditures
1,10: Expenditures for safeguarding the
prestige
1,11: Savings to the optimum level to satisfy
personal materialistic desires
1,12: Extravagant expenditure for personal
needs
DIMENSION 1 : POTENTIAL:
To study the Asc related matters of the II
house, we have to use only the sublord of the II

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 52
cusp; In the given example, Mercury the II
sublord, is in Venus star, the sublord of the 12th
house and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord.
12th house is a house of unfavour to the Asc.
But the sublord of Mercury, Rahu negates the
star and hence the unfavours shown by the star
become null and void.
Planetary significations:
Venus, as the starlord of the sublord of
the II cusp, would mean love and affection in
conversing, convincing, pride in speech etc.
(Vide 6 of P.N 65- Principles of Cuspal Interlinks)
Zodiac significations:
We have to identify the cusps wherein
the starlord of the II sublord is the sublord. The
signs of these cusps would combinedly decide
the skills of expressions of a person.
The starlord Venus appears as the sublord
of the 12th cusp, which has fallen in Libra, the
airy, the movable and the inorganic sign.
Selfishness in speech, bogus presentation,
clear and pleasing speech etc,. (12-P.N 66,
"Principles of Cuspal Interlinks")
Cuspal significations:

Applications of C us pal Interlinks
Since it is the 12th cusp, the native
would involve in research works, inventions,
inclination to express secrets but with ambiguity.
DIMENSION 2: (DASA , BHUKTHI)
With the above potential, the sublord of
the II cusp Mercury, persuades its agents i.e.,
the planets that are in its star or sub, for
execution of its potential. Here in this example,
Jupiter is the only planet which is in the star and
sub of Mercury, the II sublord. Hence at the time
of execution of the Asc related significations of
the II cusp, the planet Jupiter would use its own
karakas for the style of functioning.
GRAHA KARAKA
(PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS)
Jupiter, as the sublord of houses 5 & 1 1 ,
and as a planet in the star and sub of Mercury,
the II sublord, would lead the native to reveal the
truths, to provide needed advice, to prefer only
hygienic foods etc., and to have a clear eye-sight,
to increase fat in eyes, to gain knowledge through
listenings, to get mellowed in
conversations etc,.
While the reactions of Mercury, as the II

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks"
sublord on Asc (DIMENSION 1) remains
permanent, Jupiter would act (DIMENSION II)
in the forefront during its own DBA periods.
DIMENSION III:
The remaining 7 planets would act
temporarily for the Asc related significations of
the II cusp, while they happen to transit in the
star of Mercury, but depending upon their
potential of favour / unfavour to the Asc.
Planetary significations of the Asc related
significations of the II bhava could be read with
the use of the following example:
SUN: Strength of bones, Prideful speech,
MOO: High % of hemoglobin in blood, Thought
provoking speech
MAR: Strong muscles, Boldness in speech
MER: Active nerves, Humorous speech
JUP: Excessive fats in the body, Soft spoken
VEN: Watery body, Attractive speech
SAT: Rough skin, Exaggerated speech with lies
RAH: Deep breaths, Ambiguous speech
KET: High and speedy flow of acid with
increased capacity to digest, Spreading

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 55
rumours and provoking confusions
through speech
Thus the readers can classify the
remaining physical and mental significations of
planets for the asc related significations of the II
bhava, for precise predictions.
ASC & III
Memory power, courage, inclination
towards studies, stability, writings and style of
writings, communications, rumours, journeys,
leaving the native place, right ear, right hand,
right leg, neuro- system, blood circulation,
sleeping, sound and light, listening etc of the III
house are meant only for lagna.
General principles of linkage of the III
house with the Asc are as follows:
1,1: Courage and self-confidence through
own ideas
1,2: Courage and self-confidence to earn
income
1,3: Winning through own ideas, confidence
and intelligence
1,4: Confidence, developing skills towards

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
education
1,5: Knowledge, wisdom and confidence
by birth {Prodigy}
1,6: Success in litigations and competitions,
through confident approach
1,7: Courage and confidence gained from
society
1,8: Confident to go after criminal means
1,9: Confidence and courage in negotiations
1,10: Confidence shown in professional
excellence
1,11: Happy and harmonious life gained through
mental toughness
1,12: Confidence gained through maintaining
secrecy
DIMENSION I : (POTENTIAL)
In this example, the III sublord is Mars,
which transits in the star of Sun, the sublord of
the 6th cusp and is in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord. 6th house is a neutral house to the Asc
and the 7th house is a neutral house to the 6th
house. Hence, the potential of the Asc related
significations of the III house is potentially
neutral to the Asc.

" Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
Sun, starlord of the sublord of the III cusp,
would denote mental toughness. (Planetary
signification)
We have to identify the cusps to which
the starlord of the III sublord, appears as the
sublord. The signs of these cusps would
combinedly decide the mental strength of a
person.
Sun is the sublord of the 6th cusp, which
falls in Aries, the fiery and the movable sign. It
adds quick, fiery and courageous reflexes of
mind. (Zodiac signification)
Sun is connected to the 6th house from
Asc:- Courage to carry self-endeavours. (Cuspal
signification)
DIMENSION II:
(DASA BHUKTHI PERIODS)
The planet Mars would drive the residents
of its star or sub to execute its natal potential.
Saturn and Ketu are the two planets in the star
or sub of Mars, the III sublord.

"Applications of C us pal Interlinks"
GRAHA KARAKA
(PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS)
Saturn would give tise to rumours,
defects in nerves and blood circulation,
defects in the parts of sound and light, mental
agony, lack of needed courage and problems due
to signing of surety documents.
Ketu would lead to involve in forged
documents, overflow in the glands, infection in
ears, increase of acidity in blood, weakness in
nervous system etc.
While the karakas of Mars, as the sublord
of the III house, a naturally favourable house to
the Asc, remain permanent, karakas of Saturn &
Ketu would temporarily come to the forefront by
superseding the karakas of Mars, during their
respective DBA periods.
DIMENSION III: TRANSIT
The remaining planets would act temporarily for the Asc related significations of the III
cusp, while they happen to transit in the star of
Mars, but depending upon their nature of favour
to the Asc with respect to their natal cuspal
interlinks.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
Planetary principles:
SUN: Strength of bones; Mental toughness
MOO: Blood pressure, Wavering mind
MAR: Well-structured body, Boldness
MER: Active physical reflexes, Grasping
capacity
JUP: Dullness in physical actions, Steady and
calm mind
VEN: Brisk physical functioning, Engaged and
industrious mind
SAT: Lethargic physical actions, Lazy mind
RAH: Strains in physical actions, Lack of
balance in mind
KET: Active digestion, Considerate mind
Thus the readers can learn the art of
classifying the remaining karakas of the planets,
as suited to the requirements of the Asc related
significations of the III cusp.
ASC & IV
Primary education, private affairs, chest
and lungs, movements of the body, prolonged
diseases, irregular food habits, productivity of
inner organs, are some of the karakas of the 4th
house, a naturally unfavourable house, that are
related to the Asc.

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
What the IV house would render on the
Asc could be identified from the following list of
priniciples of linkage:
1,1: Status and respect through Lands,
Vehicles and Properties
1,2: Income and status through LVP
1,3: Contacts and status through LVP
1,4: Landlord
1,5: Expressing artistic tastes involving LVP
1 ,6: Respectable hardwork in the fields of LVP
1,7: Sociable and popular in the fields of LVP
1,8: Death due to vehicle accidents
1,9: Landlord like a king or a Zamindar
1,10: Authority in the fields of LVP
1,11: Satisfaction of desires by owning LVP
1,12: Secret plans with regard to acquiring LVP
DIMENSION 1 : POTENTIAL:
In the above, we have chosen the factor
of "STATUS" by selecting it from the pool of
numerous significations of the Asc to match it
with the karaka of "OWNERSHIP" from the pool
of significations of the IV house. Thus we have
to practice the application of matching the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 61
remaining karakas of the Asc with all the other
significations of the IV house.
NOTE: The meaning of the words,
"Primary Education" is subject to the changing
times and to the average education standards
of a society.
In the example chart, the 4th sublord
Mercury is in the star of Venus, which is the 12th
sublord. Thus the star denotes dangers to his
educational efforts.
The sublord of the sublord of the 4th house
is Rahu which is the sublord of the 7th house,
i.e., 8th to the 12th house. Hence the scope for
getting educated is not wide and is potentially
limited to learnings through experience.
DIMENSION II (DASA BHUKTHIES):
Certain Bhukthies and Antaras of Jupiter
would have helped the client to continue his
studies for a while, since it is in the star and sub
of the 4th sublord Mercury.
GRAHA KARAKA
(PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS)
Jupiter is the only planet which is in the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
star of Mercury, the IV sublord.
Jupiter would lead the Asc to have
higher interest in gaining knowledge, increase
in fats, interest to produce, neatness through
make-up etc.
While the reactions of Mercury as the IV
sublord on Asc remains permanent, Jupiter
would supersede the same during its DBA
periods.
DIMENSION III: TRANSIT
The remaining planets would act
temporarily for the Asc related significations of
the IV cusp, while they happen to transit in the
star of Mercury but depending upon their nature
of favour to the Asc with respect to their natal
cuspal interlinks.
Planetary significations of the Asc related
significations of the IV bhava could be read with
the use of the following example:
SUN: Production and growth of bones, Interest
in political studies
MOO: Production of blood, Interest in
psycological studies
MAR: Production of fleshes, Interest in

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
production technologies
MER: High % of neurons, Interest in
information and communication
JUP: High % of fats in bodies, Interest in
religious and moral education
VEN: High % of flow from glands, Interest in
artistic education
SAT: High % of hair in the body, Interest in
research fields such as Archaeology etc.,
RAH: Higher consumption of carbon di oxide,
Interest in historical studies
KETU: Higher flow of acidity in the body, Interest
in magics
Tnus the readers can classify the
remaining physical and mental significations of
planets for the asc related significations of the
IV bhava, for precise predictions.
ASC&V
The following significations of the V
house, like lineage, gaiety, happiness, taste,
celebrations, decorations, interest in arts,
music and sports, tendancy to gamble and
speculate, love and romance, being raped,
rational thoughts, habits, morality, IQ level, faiths,

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 64
beliefs, body cells, heart, relief from diseases etc
are related to Asc.
What the V house would render on the
Asc could be identified from the following list of
priniciples of linkage:
1.1 Status as an artist
1.2 Income in the fields of SG & AC
1.3 Flow of deep thoughts as a writer and a
poet
1,4: Excellence shown as a craftsman
1,5: Natural exhibition of artistic talents as a
prodigy
1.6 Service as an artist
1.7 Entertainer of society as an artist
1.8 Loss of reputation and respect in the
field of arts
1,9: Spiritual beliefs as an artist
1,10: Professional artists, reputed astrologers
1,11: Inclined towards enjoyments and
pleasures through involvements in the
field of arts
1,12: Getting retired from the artistic fields

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
DIMENSION 1: POTENTIAL:
If the 5th sublord gets linked to the
following, then one would become as :
- Sportsman
- Actor
- Singer
- Politician
- Writer
- Production of films,
Institution of arts.
* For further details refer PCI- Chapter V Bhava.
In this example chart, the 5th sublord is
Jupiter, which is in the star and sub of Mercury.
Mercury happens to be the sublord of houses 2,
4 & 10. Not a favourable combination to the
spiritual cycle of life. The native would run after
materialistic benefits as his mind would never get
satisfied with desires.
Arts would lead as a part of his
profession (10) and source of income (2) added
to running an own institution of arts (4). Since
the starlord of the sublord of the 5th cusp is
Mercury, it would denote the field of interest and
the native is, in fact, an astrologer.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 66
ROMANCE & LOVE:
5th sublord Jupiter is in the star and sub
of Mercury, which is the sublord of 2 (Neutral), 4
(Unfavourable) & 10 (Neutral).
Houses 4 & 1 0 would give failures in love
affairs to the Asc. Linkage of 4 & 10, would
detatch his committment of love affairs. The
person could satisfy only his own ego (10).
INTERESTS:
Since the 5th sublord is linked to the
houses 2, 4 & 10, through its starlord, the
natural interests of the native would be towards
collection of valuable articles and wealth (2),
acquisition of lands, vehicles and household
appliances (4) and venturing into own business
(10) etc.This will be more prominent for him
during the DBA periods of Jupiter.
DIMENSION II (DBA PERIODS):
The planets Sun & Saturn are in the
sub of Jupiter, the 5th sublord. No planet is in
the star of Jupiter.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 67
GRAHA KARAKA
(PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS)
Sun would give generosity, pride,
participation in government functions etc.
Saturn would increase immunity to
diseases, friendship with persons of lower
status, taking dry foods etc.,
While the karakas of Jupiter as the 5th
sublord to Asc remains permanent, Sun &
Saturn would supersede the same during their
own DBA periods.
DIMENSION III: TRANSIT
The remaining planets would act
temporarily for the Asc related significations of
the V cusp, while they happen to transit in the
star of Jupiter, but depending upon their nature
of favour to the Asc with respect to their natal
cuspal interlinks.
Planetary significations of the Asc related
significations of the V bhava could be read with
the use of the following example:
SUN: Self-satisfaction in physical pleasures,
Artistic interests with nobility

"Applications of Cuspal interlinks" 68
MOO: Quick in copulations, Artistic interests with
Imagination
MAR: Harsh approach during copulations,
Artistic interests with arrogance
MER: Sexual pleasures with more fore-plays,
Artistic interest with cleverness
JUP: Prolonged copulations, Artistic interests
with devotion
VEN: Artistic approach during copulations,
Artistic interests with entertaining natures
SAT: Pains and dejections in copulations,
Artistic interests with traditional styles
RAH: Immoral sexual pleasures, Artistic
interests with investigating natures
KETU:Sexual pleasures in indecent ways,
Artistic interests with criminal natures
Thus the readers can classify the
remaining physical and mental significations of
planets for the asc related significations of the
V bhava, for precise predictions.
ASC & VI
Care and maintenance, service, food
habits and dressing sense, taking medicines,
food poison, stomach and digestion system,

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 69
hurdles and problems in self-efforts, diseases
and problems to health are some of the Asc
related significations of the 6th Bhava.
(HEALTH)
I) Asc Potential
a) Asc sublord is Mars and it is in SATSUN-RAHU-MERC. (RECEIVER) (Potential 1)
i) Starlord Sun is the 6th cuspal sublord.
Hence, generally speaking, the native
would be unhealthy.
ii) Sublord Rahu is the 7th cuspal sublord.
Since it is neutral to 6, it would favour and
increase the problems to health and would
reduce the power of immunity for the native.
b) Asc subsublord is Moon and it is in
MER-SUN-RAH-VEN (Potential 2)
i) Starlord Sun is the 6th cuspal sublord.
ii) Sublord Rahu is the 7th cuspal sublord.
Potential 1 +2 would denote the potential
of reception of the health by the Asc, when the
6th house renders diseases to the native.

Applications of Cuspal Interlinks'
HrPOTENTIAL of the 6th CUSP:
(TRANSMITTER)
6th cuspal sublord Sun is in JUP-VENJ UP-SAT.
i) Starlord Venus is sublord of 12.
(Unfavourable house to the Asc)
ii) Sublord Jupiter is sublord of 5 & 11
(Favourable houses to the Asc)
Though diseases are generally referred
by the 6th house, they are actually being
suffered by the Asc. Through its starlord, the
sublord of the 6th cusp, Sun links with the XII
house to the Asc leading to prolonged illnesses,
unbearable pains, stress, expenses through
hospitalization etc.,
The sublord (Jupiter) of the 6th sublord
(Sun) is the sublord of 5 & 11th cusps and the
subsublord of 9th. Here Jupiter almost negates
the significations of Venus, the starlord of Sun,
thus providing the native some relief.
II!) KINDS OF DISEASES:
Kinds of diseases could be traced by

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
compiling the significations of
i) the actual cuspal point of the 6th house
• i-a) 6th cusp fails in Aries sign (Mesha)
Head ache, pain in nerves, coma,
giddiness, disorders in brain & blood vessels,
bacterial diseases & mental stress.
i-b) 6th cusp falls in Bharani Star.
Native will suffer through diseases in the
body parts denoted by Bharani - Head ache
caused by blood pressure, chest pains etc.
i-c) Sun is the sublord and subsublord of
6th cusp. Diseases in bones.
i-d) Moon, Mars & Rahu are the planets
that transit in the star or sub of Sun, the 6th
sublord.
Mars is sublord of Asc & 3.
* Hard labour or overjoy would bring diseases.
* Communication parts (Nerves) of the body.
The karaka of Mars: Highly painful, flesh
& muscles.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 72
Moon is sublord of 9th and subsublord of Asc.
Changes in the general structure of the body.
The karaka of Moon: Blood, sudden
and immediate illness, infections through liquids
and importantly genetical diseases.
ii) The residential Sign, Star and Sub of
the 6th SBL(Sun)
ii-a) SAGITTARIUS: Hips, troubles in
anus, piles, fistula, (9th to the Kalachakra)
Nerves in legs & cancer etc.
ii-b) POORVASHADA: Diabetes,
respiratory disorders, cancer etc.
ii-c) JUPITER: Tissues, cholesterol &fats.
IV: DASA POTENTIAL (II DIMENSION)
Moon, Mars & Rahu are the planets that
are connected with the Sun, the 6th sublord.
Though linked with the 6th cusp, Rahu,
the 7th sublord has no link with the Asc. Hence
Rahu is not empowered to cause for diseases
for the native.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
MOO Dasa upto the age of 1 3}
MAR 20}
RAH 38} [Average human
JUP 54} life cycle]
SAT 73}
Mars, Asc sublord and Moon, the Asc
subsublord would damage the health of the
native during their respective DBAS periods.
V GOCHARA (TRANSIT)
a) The starlord (Sat), the sublord (Mars)
the subsublord (Moon) of the Asc, while they
get to transit in the star of Sun, the 6th cuspal
sublord, would make the client to suffer from
diseases. v
b) The lords of the current DBAS, while
transiting either in the star of the Asc starlord or
Asc sublord or Asc subsublord, ( to mean a link
and to stand as a matter to the Asc ) and also in
the sub of the 6th sublord (Sun, in this case) would
make the client to suffer from diseases.
The nature and the type of the diseases
would vary according to the sign, star and the
sub in which the concerned planet is actually in
transit, in addition to its own significations
(karakas).

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
These diseases would only be temporary.
Until the Gochara (Transit) turns to normalcy,
during the DBAS periods of Mars & Moon, the
diseases may get prolonged.
VI: DURATION OF A DISEASE
The length and the period of the diseases
could be studied from the DBAS periods of the
concerned planet, which are empowered to
cause diseases to the client. To say it in other
words,
a) As per the potential, the planets Mars
and Moon are to give diseases during their
respective periods. Since the periods of Bhukthi,
Antara and the Sookshma of Mars would
immediately succeed the periods of Moon, as per
the sequence of UDU MAHADASA, the periods
of illness would relatively be a little longer and
the nature of diseases would also change from
one kind to the other.
b) Whenever the planets Mars & Moon
are transiting in the star of Sun, irrespective of
the changes in the periods of the Udu
Mahadasa, they would cause for problems in
health. On all Sun star days, health could not
remain sound. Until the planets Mars and Moon

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
move out from the star of Sun, the problems of
health would sustain.
c) Fortunately in this chart, the 6th cuspal
sublord is Sun, a planet with the least proportion
of UDU MAHADASA. Also the Asc sublord is
Mars and the subsublord is MOON, both fast
moving planets with smaller proportions. So, the
duration of illnesses for this native would
relatively be for short periods only.
VII: NOTES
1 . In this example chart, the planet Sun
is both the sublord and the subsublord of the
6th cusp. It would not be so in 8 out of the 9
cases; Hence, the subsub alongwith the sub is
to be studied before finalizing the due merit of
the chart.
2. Readers could have noticed from the
above example that almost all the diseases have
been listed as the probable diseases. It is so,
because a person suffers due to gastric
problems for a few minutes; suffers from
head-ache for a few hours; suffers due to toothache for a whole night; suffers due to an injury in
the legs or limbs for a week; suffers from some
sort of swellings or the other for about a month;
suffers from a fracture for almost 8 to 1 0 months.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 76
All of us at least once or twice in our life, suffer
from tooth decay, viral fever, food poisoning and
infections. Hence we need not get scared about
this long list of diseases.
3. Diseases can be classified into two
categories as temporary and permanent.
Temporary diseases are caused mainily by the
Gochara/ Transit of the planets. Diseases
remain as permanent due to the DBAS lords.
Health gets deteriorated when the factors
of the permanancy are favoured by the
temporary factors. For example, when the Asc
gets connected to the 6th and the 8th cusps at
the same time, { this could be possible only
when the star or the sub or the ssl of the 6th
cusp is also the star or the sub or the subsub of
the 8th cusp} the diseases would lead upto
surgery or the removal of that part of the body or
considerable loss of blood or amputations etc.
4. Supposing that a person without a
natal chart queries about his health problems,
then we will have to erect a Horary chart. Use of
this chart should be restricted only to one
current question on health.
5. The details of the nature and kinds
of diseases for different cusps, planets, signs,
stars could be read from the book, "Principles

"Applications of Cusyal Interlinks" 77
of Cuspal Inter links", written by this author, and
published by Sagar Publications, New Delhi.
MORE on VI:
What the VI house would render on the
Asc, could be identified from the following list of
priniciples of linkage:
1,1: Losing consciousness because of food
habits
1 ,2: Diseases caused by excessive intake of
food
1 ,3: Arrest of movements due to food habits
1,4: Excessive production in the organs of the
body caused by food habits
1 ,5: Cure from diseases, preserving health by
diet control
1 ,6: Diseases caused by food shabits
1,7: Contagious diseases, marrying the
servant
1,8: Increase in diseases
1,9: Changes in the structure of body due to
food habits
1,10: Excessive production in the body due to
food habits
1,11: Increase in resistance capacity due to food

"Applications of Cusycd Interlinks" 78
habits
1,12: Frequent illnesses and subsequent
medical expenditures
1 . In the example chart, the 6th sublord
Sun is in the star of Venus, the sublord of thel 2th
and is in the sub of Jupiter, the sublord of 5 & 11.
Only with the help of others (5 & 11), the native
can overcome difficulties.
2. The starlord Venus indicates vegetables
and fruits, while the sublord Jupiter indicates oily
and fatty foods to denote the food choices of the
native.
3. Venus & Jupiter would denote the
costlier clothes of mild and soft colours like
yellow, white, orange and light blue to identify
the dressing sense of the native.
DIMENSION II (DBA PERIODS):
Sun is the 6th sublord; Moon, Mars &
Rahu are the planets which are in the star or
sub of Sun.
GRAHA KARAKA
(PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS)
Moon: Water, blood, thoughts and mind,
vegetables that contain more percentage of

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks"
water and white coloured dresses.
Mars: Muscles and flesh, diseases
caused by excess heat, red coloured vegetables,
dal varities, non-vegetarian foods etc,.
Rahu: Resipiratory functions, fatty foods,
liquor, drugs, smoking etc.
While the significations of Sun, as the
6th sublord on Asc remains permanent, Moon,
Mars and Rahu would supersede the same with
their significations during their DBA periods.
DIMENSION III: TRANSIT
The remaining planets would act
temporarily for the Asc related significations (Like
diseases) of the VI cusp, while they happen to
transit in the star of Sun, but depending upon
their nature of favour to the Asc with respect to
their natal cuspal interlinks.
Planetary significations of the Asc related
significations of the IV bhava could be read with
the use of the following example:
SUN: Diseases in bones, Mental courage
MOO: Diseases in blood, Wavering mind

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 80
MAR: Diseases in flesh, Bold attitude
MER: Diseases in nerves, Cunning mind
JUP: Diseases caused by fats, Composed
in nature
VEN: Diseases in glands, Happy and romantic
nature
SAT: Diseases in skin, Dull and lethargic mind
RAH: Diseases in respiratory system, Obesity,
Lusty
KET : Diseases caused by acidity, Criminal mind
Thus the readers can classify the
remaining physical and mental significations of
planets for the Asc related significations cf the
IV bhava, for precise predictions.
ASC &VII
Marriage and Business partnerships,
Questioning, Law abiding citizen, Victory in
litigations and winning enmity, Exchanges,
Change in journeys, Threat to longevity,
Meetings, Sentiments, Persons whom one
meets at his business place, Opponents,
Contagious diseases, Kidney, Uterus and
Urinary system etc are the few among the Asc
related significations of the VII house.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 81
What the VII house would provide for the
Asc could be identified from the following list of
priniciples of linkage:
1,1: Dependancy and inclination of Life/
Business partners on the native
1,2: Income for the native through L/B
partners and short life of L/B
1,3: L/B partners as suited to the likings of
the native
1,4: Dissatisfactions through L/B partners
1,5: Happy and harmonious relationships
with L/B partners
1 ,6: Indifferent attitude of L/B partners towards
the native
1,7: Compromising and understandings with
L/B partners
1,8: Being murdered or threatened by L/B
partners
1,9: Second marriage
1,10: Dissatisfaction in married life caused by
spouse
1,11: Marriage with the person of native's choice
1,12: Secret troubles caused by L/B partners
DIMENSION I (POTENTIAL):
In the example chart, the 7th sublord is
Rahu which transits in its own star and in Sun

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
sub. Sun is the sublord of the 6th cusp. The 6th
is a house of materialistic success to the Asc
and so, the native could succeed in his social
relations. This could be possible during the dasa,
bhukthi and the antara periods of Rahu, the 7th
cuspal sublord.
DIMENSION II (DBA Periods)
Rahu is the 7th sublord and Moon, Mars,
Rahu & Mercury are the planets which are
either in the star or the sub of Rahu.
GRAHA KARAKA '
(PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS)
Moon: Meeting young partners, persons
without stable mind, highly sensitive persons,
thinkers etc.
Mars: Persons with short-temper,
immoralities, more inclined to sexual pleasures,
liars
Mercury: Persons with knowledge,
activeness, wavering mind and thoughts, more
sense of humour etc.
Rahu: Aged persons, more interested in
sexual pleasures, obese persons.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" S3
While the karakas of Rahu, as the VII
sublord on Asc would remain permanent, the
karakas of Moon, Mars & Mercury would come
to the forefront during their respective DBA
periods.
DIMENSION III: TRANSIT
The remaining planets would act
temporarily for the Asc related significations (Like
diseases) of the VII cusp, while they happen to
transit in the star of Rahu, but depending upon
their nature of favour to the Asc with respect to
their natal cuspal interlinks.
Planetary significations of the Asc related
significations of the VII bhava could be read with
the use of the following example:
SUN: Lecherous, Egoistic towards spouse
MOO: Quick in copulations, Flexible attitude
towards spouse
MAR: Arrogant apporoach in sex, Rough and
tough towards spouse
MER: Imaginative in sex, Understanding
approach towards spouse
JUP: Loves decent sex, Respecting the
sentiments of the spouse
VEN: Artistic approach and fond of variety in
sex, Romantic approach towards spouse

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 84
SAT: Indecent and irreverent towards sex,
Wavering attitude towards spouse
RAH: Excessive sexual interests and intentions
of home-sexuality, Attached towards
spouse
KET: Ugly and cruel attitude in sex, Criminal
and sadistic towards spouse
Thus the readers can classify the
remaining physical and mental significations of
planets for the Asc related significations of the
VII bhava, for precise predictions.
ASC & VIII
Longevity, Mode of death, Accidents,
Surgery, Sorrows, Mental agony and tension,
Failure of productive organs of the body, End of
journey, Stress and pain, Allegations, Private
parts of the body, Hurdles, Distress, Delays,
Being deceived, Suicides or being murdered,
Rapes, Failures in fulfillments of ambitions,
Harrassrhents by others and Sudden events are
the 8th house significations which are related to
ascendant.
What the VIII house would render on the
Asc could be identified from the following list of
priniciples of linkage:

Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
1,1: Long life
1,2: Unexpected profits through self efforts
1,3: Sudden demise
1,4: Unexpected acquisitions of properties
& respect
1,5: Unexpected interest in politics
1,6: Unexpected success and diseases
1,7: Unexpected meetings and sudden
marriage
1,8: Unexpected death or suicides
1,9: Unexpected illegal affairs or research
1,10: Unexpected promotions
1,11: Unexpected pleasures
1,12: Unexpected worries and losses
LONGEVITY. DIMENSION I
I.Asc Potential : (The RECEIVER)
To decide about one's potential to
ensure the approximate period of his life,
Asc sublord is to be studied.
In this example, the Asc has fallen in
Scorpio, a fixed sign. For any fixed sign, houses
2 & 7 would stand as maraka sthanas ( Houses

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
of Death ). 9 would be the badaka sthana ( House
of Danger ). Linkage of Asc sublord to any one
or two of the above houses, i.e., 2, 7 & 9 would
mean a short life. Houses 1 , 3, 5 & 1 1 would be
favourable for a long life. The remaining houses
Asc sublord Mars is in the star of Sun, the
6th sublord. Hence, we can presume that the life
of the native is confined to a middle age (33-66)
range only.
Note: It is difficult to mark boundaries for
the short, middle and the long life etc., While
we divide the 120 years of Udu Mahadasa into
three equal parts, we get 40 years each; Or if we
take the normal span of life as 100 years for
division, we get 33 years each. It becomes
more difficult to mark a distinction to predict
the death at the age of 32 years and at the age
of 33 years; Even in the same sect of middle
age, deaths at the age of 33 and at the age 65
are completely different with one another.
Anyhow, for time being, or till that time when
we could find a better classification, let us stick
to the suggestions made by Shri M. Bhaskar
Rao in his work, "Graha Saptha Sthithi".

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 87
2. VIII POTENTIAL: (The TRANSMITTER)
8th is the house of death.
8th sublord is Saturn and it resides in Mars
star, the sublord of cusps 1 & 3 { Scorpio &
Capricorn }.
Houses 1 & 3 indicate sudden death.
Death due to boiled wafer (35 of P.N 54- PCI)
Death near machineries {37 of P.N 54 -PCI}
Jupiter, the sublord of the houses 5 &
1 1 , is the sublord of the 8th cuspal sublord. It
presumes death at a happy moment, i.e., when
the native is enjoying his reputation.
3. PERIOD of DEATH:
The 8th sublord when linked to the Asc
gives death to the client. Death would occur
during the combined DBA periods of planets in
the series of the 8th house, which happens to
carry a linkage to the Asc or to its vrithisthana,
the III house.
8th cusp is: Mercury sign; Rahu Star;
Saturn Sub; Sun subsub.
Mercury, Rahu and Sun are not

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 88
connected to the Asc either by their direct
appearance or through their starlords. Saturn is
the only planet which is empowered to cause
death.
Saturn, during its dasa would give death
to the client. No one is in the star or the sub of
Saturn. Hence Saturn alone is to give death to
the client.
Saturn dasa, Saturn bhukti would be fatal
to the native, while it happens to transit in the
star of Asc sublord (Mars) and in its own sub
(Saturn).
NOTES:
1. This author does not believe in taking
the Maraka and Badaka periods for calculating
the time of death: Only when these sthanas are
linked both to the Asc & to the 8th, they are
empowered to cause death.
2. The starlord of the sublord of the 8th
cusp is the supreme commander of the sublord
of the 8th cusp; In this example, the starlord Mars
is the sublord of 1 & 3; With its significations of 1
& 3, the planet Mars would drive Saturn to cause
death.
i) Since Mars is not the sublord of the 6th

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" &9
cusp, or anyone of the Vrithisthanas of Diseases,
i.e. , the 7th (2 to 6), or the 8th (3 to 6) or the 4th
(11th to 6th), diseases would not lead to death.
ii) Since Mars is not the sublord of the
8th cusp, or anyone of the Vrithisthanas of
accidents, i.e., the 9th (2 to 8), or the 10th (3 to
8) or the 6th (11th to 8th), accidents would not
lead to death.
iii) Since Mars is not the sublord of any one
of the baraka or badaka sthanas {2, 7 & 9}, the
possibility of natural death by attaining old age may
also be ruled out.
3. The use of subsubs both for cusps
and for the planets have been deliberately
avoided in this example, for simplification.
Hence the above derivations are subject to
certain limitations.
4 . " What we are going to take, while we
sit in the dining table on the immediate next
occassion and the death would always remain
as secrets to human knowledge" according to
holy Qur-an. Hence it is better not to waste too
much of our time and energy in predicting the
time of death; Let us be free from the fear of
death.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
5. I would like to request the readers not
to draw hasty predictions with their own
horoscopes in determining longevity. Selfanalysis would always carry more elements of
subjectivity. Afer all, certain aspects of life, only
when they are kept secret to our knowledge,
would make us to carry on with our daily
routines happily with hopes.
DIMENSION II (DBAS)
8th sublord is Saturn; No planet is in the
star or the sub of Sat. Hence the karakas of
Sat, as the 8th sublord would remain for ever.
DIMENSION III (TRANSIT)
Since no one is linked with the 8th sublord
in natal chart, the transit of all the planets while
they happen to transit in the star of Saturn, would
cause for damages and dangers to the native
through their respective natal potentials.
Planetary significations of the Asc related
significations of the VIII bhava could be read with
the use of the following example:

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 91
SUN: Damages in bones, Tensions created
by false prestige
MOO: Damages in blood, Confused mind
MAR: Damages in muscles, Adamant
MER: Damages in nerves, Forgetfulness
JUP: Damages caused by cholesterol,
Sacrifices
VEN: Damages in glands, Self pride
SAT: Damages in skin, Inferiority complex
RAH: Damages in respiratory organs,
Pretending as a sacrificial person
KET: Damages in digestive organs, Rumour
monger
Thus the readers can classify the
remaining physical and mental significations of
planets for the Asc related significations of the
VIII bhava, for precise predictions.
ASC & IX
Loyalty, Sincerity, Wisdom, Higher
education, Anus, Illegal affairs, Long journey,
Communications, Messenger, Ambassador,
Faith in god and moral values, Fortunes,
Devotion, National leader, Thoughts, Deep
sleep, Meditation, Research and discoveries,
Creations and innovations, Counselling and

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 92
worships, Foreign journeys etc are some of the
IX house matters related to Asc.
What the IX house would render on the Asc
could be identified from the following list of
priniciples of linkage:
1,1: Status through Higher education
1,2: Income and status through higher
education
1,3: Publicity through higher education
1,4: Acquisition of ancestral properties
1,5: Winning ancestral respects
1,6: Genetical diseases
1,7: Getting married to a divorcee
1,8: Punishments by law, return journeys
1,9: Affectionate person through illegal affairs
1,10: Holding higher posts through excellence
in higher education
1,11: Third wife or satisfactory illegal affairs
1,12: Secret illegal affairs
DIMENSION I : Potential
In the example chart, the 9th sublord is
Moon, which transits in Sun star and Rahu sub.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 93
Sun is the 6th sublord { Neutral to the Asc},
while Rahu is the 7th sublord { neutral to the 6th
house }.
They render success through hard labour
and self-ventures.They do not favour the Asc for
higher education.
DIMENSION II: (DBAS)
Moon is the sublord of 9 th cusp. Venus is
the only planet which is in the star of Moon.
GRAHA KARAKA
(PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS)
Venus would lead to illegal activities, Sex
education, Capacity to research, Pilgrimage,
Obesity, Changes in the appearance etc.
While the significations of Moon, as the
sublord of the 9th cusp on Asc remain
permanent, the significations of Venus would also
come to stage during its DBA periods.
DIMENSION III: (TRANSIT)
While Venus is the only planet which is in
the star of Moon, the 9th sublord, the remaining
planets, according to their natal strength, would

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 94
react temporarily on the 9th house, while they
happen to transit in the star of Moon .
Planetary significations of the Asc related
significations of the IX bhava could be read with
the use of the following example:
SUN: Unnatural growth in bones, Honest in
research activities.
MOO: High % of hemoglobin in blood, Speedy
research mind.
MAR: Well structured body by birth, Arrogant
approach in research activities.
MER: Extra fingers in hands and legs, Sharp and
mathematical approach in research
activities.
JUP: Obesity, Committed towards research
VEN: Excessive secretion of glands, Artistic
approach towards research
SAT: Rough skin, Dedicated and hard working
in research activities
RAH: Masculine females / Feminine males,
Team- spirited research mind
KET: Excessive appetite, Criminal intentions in
research
Thus the readers can classify the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
remaining physical and mental significations of
planets for the Asc related significations of the
IX bhava, for precise predictions.
ASC&X
Inclination to career development,
Interest in profession, Respect, Lordship,
Generosity, Name and Fame, Power and
authority, Status and prestige, Excessive
production by organs, Thighs, Incurable
diseases, Awards from government, Progress
and development, Permanency, Pilgrimage,
Detatchment from material life etc of the 10th
cusp are dependent on the Asc.
What the X house would render on the Asc
could be identified from the following list of
priniciples of linkage:
1,1: Status through profession
1,2: Status and income through profession
1,3: Statusful transfer in profession
1,4: Industrialist or in the field of transports
1,5: Easy labour in profession with job
satisfaction, love affairs at the place of
profession.
1,6: Success in professional life

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 96
1,7: Break in professional life caused by
business partners, marrying a colleague
1,8: Stress and strains in respectable posts,
Incapability in managing etc.
1,9: Honesty and credibility through
profession, Illegal affairs at the place of
profession.
1,10: Status and Improvements in professional
life
1,11: Statusful profession with job satisfaction
1,12: Secret activities in professional life,
heavy work loads
DIMENSION I:
In the example chart, the 10th sublord
Mercury is in Venus star, the 12th sublord, and
in Rahu sub, the 7th sublord.
Link of 12 & 7 is not a factor to favour
the Asc, though the sub denies the star. The
native could not make gains or reputation in his
professional life during the DBAS periods of
Mercury.
DIMENSION II: (DBAS)
Jupiter is the only resident in the star and
sub of Mercury, the 10th sublord.

Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
GRAHA KARAKA
(PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS)
Jup: Generosity, status and honour, lack
of interest in attending feasts, celebrations.etc.
While the significations of Mercury would
remain permanent as the 1 0th sublord on Asc,
the significations of Jupiter could also come to
play in the forefront during its DBA periods.
DIMENSION III: (TRANSIT)
The remaining planets would, according
to their natal strength, would react on the X house,
while they happen to transit in the star of
Mercury
Planetary significations of the Asc related
significations of the X bhava could be read with
the use of the following example:
SUN: Majestic in appearance, Honest in
..... profession
MOO: Fresh and neat in appearance, CiU&tive
works in profession
MAR: Authoritative in appearance, Industrious
in profession

"Applications of Cuspcil Interlinks" 98
MER: Brisk in appearance, Active and brisky
in profession
JUP: Calm in appearance, Unique in profession
VEN: Charm in appearance, Artistic in
profession
SAT: Dull in appearance, Lackadaisical
approach in profession
RAH: Artificial in appearance, Social approach
in profession
KET: Cruel in appearance, Criminal intentions
in profession
Thus the readers can classify the
remaining physical and mental significations of
planets for the Asc related significations of the X
bhava, for precise predictions.
ASC &XI
The following significations of the 11th
cusp, Friends, Elder brother, Supports,
Son-in-law, Daughter-in-law, Confidence,
Success, Resurrection, Renovations, Happiness
and^atisfaction, Selfish attitude, Getl^pg
disclrarge# from hospital, Total cure from
diseases, Wishes and wants, Friendships and
Co-operations and fulfilment of desires, left hand,
left ear, Knees, Body Functioning etc which are

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
Asc dependent.
What the XI house would render on the Asc
could be identified from the following list of
priniciples of linkage:
1,1: A happy and joyous personality among
friends
1,2: A morale booster with helping nature
towards friends
1,3: Confidence and support gained through
friends
1,4: Education as desired
1,5: Sexual pleasures in love affairs, Interest
in music, acting, politics etc.
1,6: Bacterial infections, AIDS
1,7: Marriage with a person of native's choice
1,8: Suicides after failures in love affairs
1,9: Illegal affairs with the lover, statusful
education
1,10: Getting expected postings as desired
1,11: Self prides
1,12: Secret activities of personal choice,
dedication

"Applications of C us pal Interlinks" 1 QQ
DIMENSION I:
In the example chart, Jupiter is the 11th
sublord.
Its starlord Mercury is the sublord of 2, 4
& 10. {Neutral and unfavourable significations
to the spiritual cycle of Asc }
Fulfilments of desires by acquiring
lands, buildings, vehicles and income through
profession are assured to the Asc..
Mixed favours could be experienced
during the DBA periods of the 11th sublord
Jupiter.
DIMENSION II (DBAS):
Jupiter is the 11th sublord; Sun and
Saturn are the planets, which are in the sub of
Jupiter. There is no planet which is in the star of
Jupiter.
GRAHA KARAKA
(PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS)
Sun: Fame, success in attempts and court
cases, satisfaction, cure from diseases etc.
Saturn: Delayed success, liar, doubting
natures, cure from diseases, participation in

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 101
celebrations, feasts and festivals etc.
As the significations of Jupiter as the 1 1th
sublord on Asc would remain permanent, the
significations of Sun & Sat would also come to
the forefront duing their respective DBA periods.
DIMENSION III: (TRANSIT)
The remaining planets would, according
to their natal strength, would react on the 11th
house, while they happen to transit in the star of
Jupiter.
Planetary significations of the Asc related
significations of the XI bhava could be read with
the use of the following example:
SUN: Natural strength of bones, Selfish in
satisfactions
MOO: Natural resistance power in blood, Easily
satisfied
MAR: Natural strength in muscles, Greedy in
satisfactions
MER: Natural strength in nerves, Pride in
satisfactions
JUP: Natural strength through fats, Generous
in satisfactions

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 102
VEN: Good secretion from Glands, Joyful in
satisfactions
SAT: Attractive skin, Self-consoling in
satisfactions
RAH: Attractive structure of body, Strange
feelings in satisfactions
KET: Lean and attractive body, Expressive in
satisfactions
Thus the readers can classify the
remaining physical and mental significations of
planets for the Asc related significations of the
XI bhava, for precise predictions.
ASC & XII
Loss of materials and relations,
Troubles, Hurdles, Enforcements, Controls,
Expenditures, Threat from enemies,
Imprisonments, Jealousy, Sabotage,
Disobedience, Exile, Self-destruction, Life at
foreign countries, Foot, Beds, Dreams and
visions, Left eye, Pessimisitic thoughts,
Malfunctioning of the body, Loss of organs, Hard
labour, Being deceived, Separations, Going
abroad, Bad luck, Vengeance, Cruel thoughts,
Pervertions, Amputation, Surgery, Cheating and
absconaing are some of the 12th house

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
significations that are related to Asc.
What the XII house would render on the
Asc could be identified from the following list of
priniciples of linkage:
1,1: Status and respect through secret
activities
1,2: Monetary benefits and status earned
through secret efforts
1,3: Self confidence and courageous secret
activities
1,4: Properties earned through secret
activities
1,5: Learning secret arts, secret affairs
1,6: Secret diseases
1,7: Motivations and secret activities to
damage the reputation of the native
1,8: Suicide resulted by secret activities
1,9: Illegal affairs or research through secret
activities, investigations
1,10: Respects earned through secret activities
1,11: Satisfaction in self-desires through
secret activities
1,12: Absconding due to secret activities

"Applications of Cusyal Interlinks" 104
DIMENSION I:
In the example chart, the 12th sublord is
Venus which is in the star of Moon, the 9th sublord;
and is in its own sub and thus linked back to the
12th house. { Not so favourable to the Asc }
i) Ability to disclose secrecy and
inclination to invent.
ii) Secret and illegal affairs.
iii) Law-abiding (9) citizen.
iv) Long journeys.
This could be possible during the DBAS
periods of Venus, the 12th cuspal sublord.
DIMENSION II (DBAS)
Venus is the sublord of the 12th house.
Planets Sun, Mercury, Venus & Ketu are either
in the star or the sub of Venus.
GRAHA KARAKA
(PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS)
Sun: Disturbances from government,
secret activities, troubles from women in
government service etc.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines"
Mercury: Research in mathematics,
sharp Instruments, thoughts around stories,
secret notes etc.
Venus: Secret activities through women,
research etc.
Ketu: All kinds of anti-social activities,
cheating, illegal contacts with widows etc.
While the significations of Venus as
sublord of the XII house on Asc remains
permanent, the significations of Sun, Mercury &
Ketu would come to the forefront during their
respective DBA periods.
DIMENSION III: (TRANSIT)
The remaining planets, according to their
natal strength, would temporarily react on the
12th house, while they happen to transit in the
star of Venus.
Planetary significations of the Asc related
significations of the XII bhava could be read with
the use of the following example:
SUN: Weakness in bones, Loss of prestige and
status
MOO: Weakness in blood, Loss of memory

"Applications of Cusyal Interlinks" 106
MAR: Weakness in muscles, Loss of energy
MER: Weakness in nerves, Loss of sensing
capacity
JUP: Weakness due to fat contents, Loss of
pride
VEN: Weakness in glands, Loss of enjoyment
SAT: Weak skin, Loss in strenuous efforts
RAH: Weakness in respiratory system,
Alienated from society
KET : Weakness in digestive system, Inability to
maintain privacy.
Thus the readers can classify the
remaining physical and mental significations of
planets for the Asc related significations of the
XII bhava, for precise predictions.
REACTIONS:
Asc has a permanent linkage with the 6th
house and the 7th house. But, when its sublord
Mars happens to transit in various stars other
than that of Sun or Rahu, it is bound by the
respective starlords and sublords to act for them
and to react on the cusps to which its starlords
or sublords are the cuspal sublords. What the
Asc would render on the remaining cusps, as
reactions, could be aerived from the following

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
list of principles:
Asc on the II house
2.1 Self-pride in speech
2.2 Spontaneous flow of excellent speech
2.3 Counselling and dynamic in conversing
2.4 Educative speech
2.5 Artistic style of speech
2.6 Threatening and argumentative in speech
2.7 Attracting the audience by speech
2.8 Showing traces of fear while conversing
2.9 Memorable and spiritual speech
2,10: Respectable speech
2,11: Harmonious and happy, broad-minded
speech
2,12: Discontinuity in conversation
Asc, as seen before, carries 6 & 7 with it
in this chart. So during the DBA periods of Mars,
while it transits in the star of Mercury, the II
sublord, would force the native to behave as an
argumentative person and would threaten
others through his speech.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
Asc on the III house:
3.1 Steady mind
3.2 Fluctuating mind for short-term gains
3.3 Untiring efforts
3.4 Mental aptitude towards education
3.5 Mental stability and wisdom
3.6 Mental toughness and success
3.7 Courage gained from the support from
society
3,8: Fearful and a coward
3,9: Courage and confidence to have research
mind
3.10 Respectable mental balance
3.11 Confidence in mind to win challenges
3.12 Secret fears
Asc carries 6 & 7 with it in this chart. Thus
during the DBA periods of Mars, while it transits
in its own star as the III sublord, would make the
native to get the needed help from others to gain
mental toughness.

m
"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
Asc on the IV house:
4,1: Status through ownership of LVP
4,2: Status through monetary returns from LVP
4,3: Status through real-estates
4,4: Status as owner of estates and farms
4,5: Status as owner of Lodges, Marriage Halls
4,6: Status as owner of Hospitals and Hotels
4,7: Status as leader of a village or as a public
servant
4,8: Status as a dedicated person
4,9: Status as an excellent teacher or as a
Temple trustee
4,10: Status as an Industrialist
4,11: Status as an Educationist or as a
Parliamentarian
4,12: Status as a counsellor in secrecy and as
a research person
Asc carries 6 & 7 with it in this chart. Thus
during the DBA periods of Mars, while it
happens to transit in the star of Mercury the IV
sublord, would enable the native to behave like
a leader among his friends and associates.

"Applications of Cusval iHtertwfes" "| "10
Asc on theV house:
5,1: Status in the field of Sports, Games,
Arts and Culture
5,2: Status as critic or commentator in the
fields of music & acting.
5,3: Status as a writer
5,4: Status as a craftsman
5,5: Status as a counsellor in music and
acting
5,6: Status for the success in the fields of
music and acting
5,7: Status as an entertainer in music and
acting
5,8: Disrespect as a notorious personality in
the fields of music and acting
5,9: Status as a spiritualist or as a philosopher
5,10: Status as a professional in music or as
an actor
5,11: Status gained from the record-breaking
performance in music or in acting skills
5,12: Status for the innovations in the fields of
music and acting
Asc carries 6 & 7 with it in this chart. Thus
during the DBA periods of Mars, while it

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 111
happens to transit in the star of Jupiter, the V
sublord, would provide the native his due status
in the fields of his artistic interests.
Asc on the VI house:
6,1: Status as a body-builder or as a beauty
queen
6,2: Status as a highly paid employee.
6,3: Status for excellence in martial arts
6,4: Status as an industrial worker
6,5: Status as an employee with easy
workloads (Supervisors)
6,6: Status as a servant in the field of diseases
(Doctors)
6,7: Status as a self-entrepreneur
6,8: Disrespect as a daily labourer
6,9: Status as a corporate consultant
6,10: Status as a manager
6,11: Status through remarkable service
6,12: Status as a person of foreign service
Asc carries 6 & 7 with it in this chart. Thus
during the DBA periods of Mars, while it transits
in the star of Sun, the VI sublord, would enable
the native to gain practical experience in
managing diseases and a little bit of working

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
knowledge in diet controls.
Asc on the VII house:
7,1: Status gained through the Partner/Wife/
Husband
7,2: Status through the financial background
of the P/W/H
7,3: Status gained from harmonious personal
life (Best couple award)
7.4 Status gained in joint family
7.5 Status for the happy married life
7.6 Disrespect as a divorcee
7.7 Status for the public relations of the
native
7,8: Disrespect as threatened by P/W/H
7,9: Status for being a person of integrity
7,10: Status through partnership business
7,11: Status gained through friends and
social relations
7,12: Disrespect in social relations
Asc carries 6 & 7 with it in this chart.
Thus during the DBA periods of Mars, while it
happens to transit in the star of Rahu, the VII
sublord, would cause for disrespect to the
native for the differences of opinions with the

'Applications of C uspal Interlinks'
society or with his wife.
Asc on the VIII house:
8,1: Longlife
8,2: Disrespect by way of loss of savings for
unexpected personal requirements
8,3: Disrespect caused in changing the
residence
8,4: Unexpected failure in the productive
organs of the body
8,5: Unexpected romance
8,6: Sudden increase in diseases
8,7: Unexpected quarrels with others
8,8: Stress and severe pains and sufferings
8,9: Unexpected physical changes
8,10: Status gained through unexpected
professional opportunities
8,1 1 : Unexpected success in self-efforts
8,12: Loss of reputation and unexpected
problems
Asc carries 6 & 7 with it in this chart. Thus
during the DBA periods of Mars, while it
happens to transit in the star of Saturn, the VIII
sublord, would trouble the native with sudden
increase in diseases.

Applications of C us pal Interlinks"
Asc on the IX house:
9,1: Status through higher education
9,2: Status gained from ancestral gold and
valuables
9,3: Status through changes and transfers
9,4: Status through ancestral properties
9,5: Status as a vedic scholar, a priest or a
trustee
9,6: Status through successful agreements
9,7: Status through international relationships
9,8: Disrespect caused by cheatings
9,9: Status gained through integrity
9,10: Status through professional education
9,11: Status as a scholar or as an educationist
9,12: Status as a foreigner
Asc carries 6 & 7 with it in this chart. Thus
during the DBA periods of Mars, while it
happens to transit in the star of Moon, the IX
sublord, would enable the native to succeed in
agreements to gain due respect.
Asc on the X house:
10,1: Status through profession
10,2: Status gained from professional jncome

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" “( “| 5
10,3: Status through recognitions in profession
10,4: Status for the involvments in agriculture/
farms
10,5: Disrespect caused by professional hurdles
10,6: Consistency in professional life
10,7: Status through partners
10,8: Dedication in professional committments
10,9: Disrespect in professional life
10,10: Leader of a professional team
10,11: Status in a record-breaking professional
performance
10,12: Status through secrecy in profession
Ascwhich carries 6 & 7 with it in this chart,
during the DBA periods of Mars, while it
happens to transit in the star of Mercury, the X
sublord, would enable the native to have a
mental inclination to maintain consistency in
professional life.
Asc on the XI house:
11.1 Status by success through own ideas
11.2 Status gained from immense wealth
11.3 Status through bold efforts
11.4 Status through own properties
11.5 Status forthe skill of imagination

"Applications of Cuspal interlinks" 116
11,6: Status through self efforts
11,7: Attracting others to personal objectives
11,8: Sufferings due to failures in fulfilment of
desires
11,9: Status through excellence in education
11,10: Status through honorary posts
11,11: Status as a succesful person
11,12: Status as a man of secrecy as desired
by the native
Asc which carries 6 & 7 with it ip this chart,
during the DBA periods of Mars, while it
happens to transit in the star of Jupiter, the XI
sublord, would enable the native to gain due
status through self efforts.
Asc oh the XII house:
12,1: Status through researches
12,2: Change in status by liquidating the
capital
12,3: Status by donating the capital
12,4: Notorious for subversive acts and for
secret plans
12,5: Disrespect caused through secret affairs
12,6: Disrespect caused through secret
diseases

Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
12,7: Disrespect in secret activities
12,8: Disrespect caused by punishments
12,9: Responsible posts with status
12,10: Status through successive professions
12,11: Status gained from successful secret
activities
12,12: Disrespect caused by absconding
Asc carries 6 & 7 with it in this chart. Thus
during the DBA periods of Mars, while it
happens to transit in the star of Venus, the XII
sublord, would cause for disrespect to the native
by way of secret diseases.
CONCLUSION:
Notes:
I.Sun is in the star of Venus (12) and in
the sub of Jupiter (5 & 11). Now the
significations of Sun, on Asc during its DBAS
periods, as it is linked with 5, 11 & 12 would
have to effect on Asc. But some of these
significations may remain contradictory with
each other. If so, how would Sun perform
during its DBA periods ?
2. During its Bhukthi (Minimum 3 months
and 18 days), since it is a fast moving planet,
the planet Sun would be transiting in at least
9 consecutive stars. It means it would be

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 118
transiting in the stars of all the planets.
Here comes the role of transit. If Sun
transits in the star of Jupiter, then significations of
5 & 1 1 on Asc would be more; If it transits in the
star of Venus, then significations of the 12th house
on Asc would be more.
3. If Sun transits neither in the star of
Jupiter nor in the star of Venus, then what would
happen? As per the favourable position to the
prime significations of Sun (5, 6, 11 & 12) by
the concerned transit starlord of Sun would come
to the forefront. These combined significations
would lead to complexities. As I fear that it may
divert and confuse the readers, I would prefer
to explain the complexities of cuspal
significations in a different book.
4. From the given example, the
combined and the complex siginifications on
Asc (Excluding the reactions on the independant
siginifications of the remaining 11 houses ) of
the nine planets could be listed as below.
RAH : 6 & 7 + 8 (Residence, since it is a node)

"Applications of Cuspal interlinks"
KET : 1 , 3 & 1 2 + 2 (Residence, since it is a node)
Thus we have read the methodology of
identifying the Asc related matters of various
cusps and their positions of favour to the Asc.
The DBAS periods of the respective cuspal
sublords would render their due significations to
the Asc accordingly.
Thus all the 12 cusps and all the 9
planets, from the moment of birth to the time of
death, without likes or dislikes, as per their
bindings of cuspal interlinks, are always acting
on the Asc simultaneously.

plications of Ciispal Interlinks"
II HOUSE
HOUSE OF FINANCE
Every house has its own bundle of
significations. These significations are
interwoven with the remaining 1 1 houses so as
to form the interlinks. The karaka of Finance of
the II house or the karaka of Arts and
Culture of the 5th house or the karaka of
Profession of the 10th house could be
identified in all the 12 bhavas or houses. It is
true that the II house is the house of finance; but
at the same time its significations have been
distributed to all the remaining 11 houses and
they would be the "UPA KARAKAS" or its
auxiliary significations.
In medical science, primarily, the
general condition of the patient is ensured
before going in for specific treatments to a
particular organ of the body. Likewise,
identifying the specific significations of a
particular house, with respect to its natural club,
in formulating a methodology of analyzing a
chart, would indeed be the scientific and the
logical way of study as per cuspal interlinks. For
example, II house when in the company of 6,
10 & 11 means finance and fortunes. When in
the company of 7 & 12, it stands to create
dangers to the life of a person.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 121
In anatomy classes, to gain academic
knowledge, the medical students would be
supplied with a piece of human leg or hand, or
brain or lungs of a corpse. But, in practice,
doctors would not attempt to make a heart
surgery by physically detaching the heart from
the body. Thus to simplify the procedure of
learning, the combined significations are
deliberately and artificially being isolated here for
study. But please remember that while
doing so, understandably, this artificial
isolation would tend to carry certain
ambiguities.
1. With its significations, every house
would surely act on the relatively independant
siginifications of the other 11 houses.
2. With their own significations, the
remaining 1 1 houses would definitely act and
influence on the relatively independant
siginifications of the particular house under study.
In the earlier chapter for the Asc, we have
studied the significations of all the 12 houses,
that are meant only for shaping the Asc. That
is why we have named those significations as
the Asc related or Asc dependant significations.
There are quite a few significations of the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" "122
II house that are almost unrelated to the Asc
such as money transactions, salary, profit or loss,
jewellery, gems, documents, metals, negotiable
instruments and sources of income etc. With
these significations, the II house acts on the other
11 houses as it receives reactions from them in
return.
The following are the general principles,
when the sublord of the concerned cusp
reside in the star or sub or subsub of the cuspal
sublord of the II cusp.
Asc on II: Money from self efforts.
II on II: Money as bank balance, cash, gold,
gems in hand.
on 19: Money as negotiable instruments
and from agreements.
IV on |l: Money as properties.
V on II: Money earned through commissions,
sports and gambling.
VI on II: Money through loans, service.
VII on II: Money through overdrafts and
cash-credits from banks
VIII on II: Money donated, insurance claims,
bribes, provident fund, unexpected
money

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 123
IX on II: Money through ancestral properties.
X on II: Money awarded, income through
profession.
XI on II: Money received as expected.
XII on II: Money as returns from Investments
and lendings, secret or black money,
Money from treasures.
It has been emphasized in PCI as well
as in the introduction of this book that the
linkage of a cusp to 1 , 3, 5, 9& 1 1 to itself favours
the house and its linkages to 4,7,8 & 1 2 unfavours
it and houses 2, 6, & 10 would require more
efforts to become favourable. As such linkages
of the sublord of the II cusp through its starlord,
sublord, or subsublord to houses 2,4,6,10 &
12 is favourable, and its linkages to houses 5, 8
& 9 will be unfavourable and its linkage to 3, 7,
11 would remain neutral. The link with the Asc,
though it becomes the 12th to the II, is NOT
unfavourable because it is an exceptional
exception.
The II house when linked i.e., when the
sublord of the II cusp is in the star or the sub of
each of the other 11 houses, it would
register its reactions on the respective houses
which are as follows:

"Applications of Cusyal Interlinks" 124
lion Asc: Status through money.
II on II: Improvement in the financial position.
II on III: Preserving the present financial
conditions.
II on IV: Multiplication of money.
II on V: Loss of money in gamblings or
transfer of money in the name of
partner or wife
II on VI: Financial support to self endeavours
II on VII: Financial assistance to partners
II on VIII: Money that is outstanding or spent for
insurance
II on IX: Financial crisis
II on X: Profession in financial institutions
II on XI: Immense flow of money
II on XII: Increase in the investments.
POTENTIAL of the II house:
In this example chart, Mercury, the II
sublord, is in Venus star and Rahu sub. Venus is
the cuspal sublord of the 12th house.
Linkage of the II cuspal sublord to the XII house
means a position of gain to the II house. But
Mercury is in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord,
which becomes as 8th to the 12th house, to
negate this favour.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 125
In response, the II house, on 12, would
increase the investments & expenditures which
makes the native to become incapable of
saving his own income.
Combination of 1 2 & 7 would drive the
native to suffer from losses through wasteful
investments and extravagant expenditures etc.
The persons whom the native happens to meet,
would gain through him. Possibilities of his
money being stolen, could not be ruled out.
ii) The planets which happen to be in the
star or sub of Mercury, the II sublord, are
empowered to operate for the II house.(Please
refer the chart)
Jupiter is in the star & sub of Mercury.
Rahu is in the subsub of Mercury.
Star shows the involvement and Sub
confirms and favours the said involvement. Hence
Jupiter is a strong significator to execute the II
house significations. During the DBAS periods of
Jupiter the native would enjoy the benefits of the II
house. Jupiter, the permanent significator of the II
house, is the sublord of houses 5 & 1 1 , to mean
that the native could gain income through
brokerage or from friends and children. The
involvements in the fields of speculation and arts

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
can also bring him some success.
This is the general way of derivation. But,
friends, life is not so simple to be explained within
12 such formulae. The native is also able to gain
a reasonable income during the DBAS periods
of the remaining planets, other than Mercury, the
II sublord and Jupiter, the resident in the star and
sub of Mercury. How could it be possible? It is
because all the 12 house somehow contribute
for money through multiple means. Even in a
poor man's life, all the significations of the 12
houses, either jointly or separately,' operate on
few occassions to give him some financial
reliefs. If so,
1) What are the factors to make such things
possible?
2) How could it be possible?
3) When is it possible?
On the reverse, the II house does not
remain idle and dormant. It also contributes
something or the other to the remaining cusps,
with its tool, "MONEY". It induces the Asc to be a
money minded person, to save the income as
negotiable instruments, to purchase properties,
to provide a financial platform to gamble, to
deposit for contracts, to enter into partnerships,
to pay for his insurance premium, to enter into

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
export business, to work in a financial
institution, to fulfil his materialistic satisfactions,
to increase the investments etc.
Thus with its own potential, the II house,
i) Acts on the remaining 11 houses.
ii) Receives reactions from them in return.
Thus, only when we comprehensively
study the potentials of the remaining 11 houses
to react on the matters of the II house, we could
identify the general principles that would suitably
be applied for the chart under study.
The ROLE of TRANSIT:
The transits of the sublords of the
remaining 11 houses in the star of the II cusp
would act for the money transactions
according to their karakas of Cuspal & Planetary
natures but notwithstanding the potential of the
II cusp in the chart.
On the reverse, the II sublord, Mercury,
with 12 & 7 in its bag, during its transit in the
respective stars of the remaining cusps, would
register its reactions with the significations of
finance to those cusps, where the starlord of its
transit is the natal cuspal sublord.

"Applications of Citspai Interfiles"
STUDY OF A HOROSCOPE BY
USING CUSPAL INTERLINKS THEORY
STEP 1
STEP 2
STEP 3
STEP 4
STEPS
STEPS

"Applications of Cuspal
ASCon II:
What does the Asc render to the 11 house?
The Asc sublord Mars is in the star of Sun,
the 6th sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord. Generally speaking, Asc has no direct
linkage with the II house. But Asc will get a
linkage with the II house, when its sublord Mars,
happens to transit in the star or sub of Mercury,
the II sublord.
Asc, as an exception would favour the II
house though it is the12th house to it. In this

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 130
example Asc has the permanent linkage of 6 & 7
with it. Houses 6 & 7 would become houses 5 &
6 to the II house which would stand to favour the
II house.
Principles of linkages of the Asc on the II
house are:
2.1 Improvement in oratorical skills
2.2 Income through self efforts
2.3 Accumulation of valuables through self
efforts
2.4 Properties and income through self efforts
2.5 Singer through self efforts
2.6 Service through self efforts
2.7 Savings at other's hands through self
efforts
2,8: Voluntary donations
2,9: Voluntary gifts and trust activities
2,10: Professional success through self efforts
2,11: Expected monetary gains in self efforts
2,12: Voluntary Investments of savings
Now in the example chart, the Asc sublord,
as it carries 6 & 7 with it, would enable the native
to gain financial assistance in the form of
borrowings from the society. This could be

"Applications of Cusyal Interlinks" 131
experienced during the DBA periods of Mars,
while it transits in the star or sub of Mercury. Since
Mars is the karaka planet for brothers, copper
and for stating false reasons, the sources also
could be identified.
II on Asc:
(Reaction of the II house with the karaka
of Finance)
General principles of linkage of the II
house on the Asc are:
1,1: Prestige, Selfishness & Greediness
in money matters
1,2: Income through self endeavours
1 ,3: Courage and confidence to build financial
strength
1,4: Status and income through properties
1 ,5: Nature to gamble or tendency to take risks
for income
1,6: Gains from litigations and competitions
1,7: Income through opposite sex, society or
spouse.
1,8: Money through illegal sources,
unexpected income
1,9: Income through foreign contacts or

Applications of Cusyal Interlinks'
ancestral properties
1,10: Capitalizing the authority for financial
objectives
1,11: Accumulation of money to the satisfaction,
by own efforts
1,12: Own efforts to preserve money secretly,
Spendthrift in nature
In this example chart, the II sublord
Mercury is in the star of Venus, which is the 12 th
cuspal sublord. 12th becomes the 12th to the
Asc. But, Mercury is in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord. 12th house effect is thus negated by the
7th house. Hence, the spendthrift nature of the
native would frequently be in check by his wife
or by the society in which he belongs to.
non n
Mercury, the II sublord, transits in the star
of Venus, the 12th sublord. 12th is 11th to the II
cusp, and is thus showing a favourable scope. 2
on 12 would denote increased investments &
expenditures or probably the source which drives
the native to make extravagant expenditures. 7th
house is a house of danger to the 12th house.
Hence the investments made would not provide
due returns. The link of 12 & 7 would force the
native to incur losses. The possibilities of his

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 133
money being stolen could not be ruled out.
General Principles of linkage of the II
house, to itself are:
2,1: Utilizing the self earned money to himself
2,2: Savings as liquid cash
2,3: Savings as nagotiable instruments
2,4: Savings as properties
2,5: Extravagant expenditures through income
2,6: Profits earned through deposits
2,7: Saving the income with others
2,8: Lending the income for earning interest
2,9: Inadequate income
2,10: Income through profession
2,11: Sound financial status
2,12: Dividends of investments, income through
2nd profession
Mercury, the II cuspal sublord, would
render the following results to the native during
its DBA periods.
Mercury denotes modern appliances, hire
purchases etc. Hence the nature of
expenditures would be in the form of purchases
of unnecessary appliances.

"Applications of Cusyal Interlinks" 134
Jupiter is the only planet that is in the
star of Mercury, the II sublord. Jupiter is the
sublord of 5 & 11. Income and savings would
be possible as brokerage or from his children or
through friends. Involvements in the field of arts
and entertainments would improve his financial
position.
The above could be possible during the
DBA periods of Jupiter, the karaka planet for
gold and higher denominations of money etc.,
and the native would transact his money in the
above modes.
Ill on II:
III house is second house to the II house,
a neutral position to the II. In the given example,
III sublord Mars, is in the star of Sun, the 6th
sublord. 6th house is a house of favour to the II
house. Mars is in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord.
7th house would remain neutral to the 6th house.
Hence, in this example chart, the II house would
be favoured by the III house.
Principles of linkage of the III house on
the II house are:
2,1: Breach and breaks in negotiations and
agreements

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 135
2,2: Monetary gains through negotiations and
agreements
2,3: Receipt of cheques
2,4: Agreements on lands, vehicles &
properties
2,5: Writing poems and articles
2,6: Receipt of income through agreements
2,7: Harrassing the opponents through letters
and correspondence
2,8: Unexpected profits through
correspondence
2,9: Financial crisis resulted by agreements
2,10: Promotions
2,11: Receipt of large sums of money in single
payments, as desired
2,12: Loss of money in agreements
In this example chart, the III house by its
link of 6 & 7, would stand favour to the II house
to gain through will, documents, writings,
agreements and negotiable instruments etc.
Ill sublord would steadily increase the
small loans of the native (6) and finally drag him
into troubles(7) as a debtor. Ill suulord Mars
would also enable the native to gain through
contracts (6). The above would happen to the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 136
native during the DBAS periods of Mars, while
it happens to transit in the star of Mercury, the II
sublord.
II on III:
General principles of linkage of the II
house on the III house are:
3.1 Earnings through courageous efforts
3.2 Gains through communications
3.3 Changing stances for financial gains
3.4 Income through tenders and contracts
3.5 Income through lottery, poetry and articles
published in journals
3,6: Loans through agreements, profits
through promotions
3,7: Financial agreements with banks or
financial institutions
3,8: Mental depressions in financial matters
3,9: Earnings through ancestral documents
3,10: Profits through business contracts
3,11: Financial gains in communications,
advertisements etc
3,12: Profits through sales
The link of II house is to 12 & 7. II sublord
does not reside in the star, or sub or subsub of

Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
the III house. But even then, as a naturally
unfavourable house to negate the matters of the
III house, would lead the native to lose his
jewels, documents etc, during the DBA periods
of Mercury and while it happens to transit in the
star of Mars.
IV on II
IV house is a house of favour to the II
house. 4th sublord Mercury is in the star of
Venus, the 12th sublord (1 1th to the II) but in the
sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord (8th to the 1 2). Sub
denies whatever the star intends to provide.
Hence the IV house would modify into a neutral
house to the II house.
Principles of linkage of the IV house on
the II house are:
2,1: Residence as a palace
2,2: Owns a Bungalow
2,3: Sale/ Letting the bungalow for hire
2,4: Income through bungalow or two
bungalows or godowns
2,5: Marriage halls or Cinema theatres,
Guest houses, Resorts
2,6: Industries and buildings let out for rent
2,7: Taking charge of LVPs owned by others

"Applications of Cusyal Interfiles" 138
2,8: Godown of scraps or waste materials or
damaged articles
2,9: Lease of bungalow
2,10: Large scale industries, builders and
contractors
2,11: Bungalow at a disputed place
2,12: Rest house, hospitals
Because of the linkage with 12 & 7, the
unfavourable combination to the II house, the
sublord of the 4th cusp, would remain as an
impotent spectator. 4th on 12 & 7 (1 & 6 of the
7th house) would mean gains to the partners.
4th with its adverse link, has also denied the
native to enjoy any scholarship. Hence the
native would incur losses by attempting into
ventures in LVHP during the DBAS periods of
Mercury, while it happens to transit in its own star.
II on IV:
General principles of linkage of the II
house, on the IV house are:
4,1: Income with status through Land,
Vehicles, Houses and Properties (LVHP)
4,2: Income through construction of houses or
production
4,3: Financial gains as brokerage in real

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 139
estates
4,4: Financing for LVHP
4,5: Gains through Casinos, Cinema Halls
4,6: Profits in services in LVHP
4,7: Bank loans on properties
4,8: Insurance claims out of accidents
4,9: Subsidy, royalty and scholarships in LVHP
4,10: Income through profession in LVHP
4,11: Profits from the litigations in properties
4,12: Profits and gains through investments
in LVHP
The bag of II contains only 12 & 7. II is a
favourable house to the IV Hence it would
induce the native to make extravagant
investments on properties which carry very
limited scope for liquidation during the DBA
periods of Mercury while it transits in its own star.
V on II:
V house is 4th to the II and hence a
naturally unfavourable house. In the given
example, Jupiter, the 5th sublord resides in
Mercury star & sub. Mercury is the sublord of
houses 2, 4 & 10, which are 1, 3 & 7 to the II
house. So, the natural enemy has become a very
favourable friend indeed.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 140
Principles of linkage of the V house on
the II house are:
2,1: Loss of own money in gamblings
2,2: Profits through commissions and in
gamblings
2,3: Multiplication of income through
commissions and speculations
2,4: Collection of artistically valuable goods
2,5: Monetary benefits in A & C fields
(Astrologer and Cine Actors)
2,6: Income by rendering service in'A & C fields
2,7: Abduction of financial gains by the
partner
2,8: Losses in gamblings
2,9: Financial troubles in commissions
2,10: Monetary gains in A & C fields
2,11: Immense wealth in A & C fields
2,12: Losses in A & C fields
In this example, since the 5th house is
linked to 2, 4 & 10, would enable the native to
gain commissions without much physical
hardships during the DBAS periods of Jupiter,
while it happens to transit in the star of Mercury.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 141
II on V:
General Principles of linkage of the II
house with the V house are:
5, 1 : Gains in Sports, Games, Arts and Cultural
fields (SG & AC)
5,2: Income through singing songs
5,3: Income from writings, drawings
5,4: Income from craft works
5,5: Income from artistic performances
5,6: Service and income in the fields of
SG&AC
5,7: Gains as an agent or manager in SG &
AC/ Trade unions
5,8: Gains through sexy and obscene dances
and speech
5,9: Income through advertisements, contracts
in SG & AC
5,10: Respectable income in SG & AC
5,1 1 : Income as an entertainer in SG & AC
5,12: Income through secret arts or as a
prostitute
With 12 & 7 in its bag, the II house, a
neutral house to the 5th house, during the
DBA periods of Mercury while it transits in the

"Applications of C us pal Interlinks" 142
star of Jupiter, would force the native to face
difficulties in getting his money back which had
been kept with his partner's custody or lent to
others.
VI on II:
VI house, by nature, is a favourable house
to the II house. 6th sublord is Sun, which is in the
star of Venus, the 12th sublord and is in the sub of
Jupiter, the sublord of 5 & 11 (12th to the 6 & 12th).
It is not an unfavourable linkage to the II.
Principles of linkage of the VI house on
the II house are:
2.1 Loans for self enjoyments
2.2 Borrowings for savings
2.3 Interest in the deposits acquired through
borrowings
2.4 Purchase of LVHP through borrowings
2.5 Speculation by acquiring loans
2.6 Clearing debts by acquiring loans
2.7 Getting loans for lending to others
2.8 Increased borrowings
2.9 Borrowings for illegal affairs
2,10: Service in financial institutions
2,11: Commissions in the purchase of
negotiable

instruments
2,12: Borrowings for investments
Connection to houses 5, 11 & 12 by the
6th sublord in this chart shows that the native
cannot expect regular income from steady
employments. 12, 5 & 11 would also denote that
the native has the repaying capacity to clear-off
his loans. The VI, the house of servants, does
not favour any kind of monetary gains from his
employees or servants. The DBAs periods of
Sun, while it happens to transit in the star of
Mercury, would enable the native to clear-off his
loans.
II on VI:
General Principles of linkage of the II
house with the VI house are:
6,1 : Acquiring loans through own efforts
6,2: Income by rendering service
6,3: Loans raised through negotiable
instruments
6,4: Loans in LVHP
6,5: Becoming a debtor in the fields of
SG&AC
6,6: Borrowings in a service institution or
through servants

"Applications of Cuspcil Interlinks" 144
6,7: Loans through banks, or life/business
partners
6,8: Getting loans more than the expectations
6,9: Borrowings from father or unknown
persons
6,10: Pay and GPF advances, incentives for
service
6,11: Borrowings for friends, in-laws and elder
brothers
6,12: Borrowings for medical treatments or for
reinvestments
With 12 & 7 in its bag, the II house, a
favourable house (9th) to the 6th house, during
the DBA periods of Mercury and when it transits
in the star of Sun, would lead the native to repay
a part of his debts.
VII on II:
VII is a neutral house to the II house. In
our example, the 7th sublord is Rahu which transits in its own star and in the sub of Sun, the 6th
sublord (Denial of 7).
Principles of linkage of the VII house on
the II house are:

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 145
2,1 : Requesting the assistance of others for
self financial needs
2,2: Money with the assistance of others
2,3: Improvement in financial status through
the assistance of others
2,4: Acquiring LVHP with the assistance of
others
2,5: Pleasures with the financial assistance of
others
2,6: Borrowings with the assistance of others
2,7: Income and friendships with the
assistance of others
2,8: Unexpected gains with the assistance
of others
2,9: Financial crisis on behalf of others
2,10: Professional developments with
assistance of others
2,1 1 : Voluntary friendships by others to assist
the native
2,12: Investments with the assistance of others
Linkage to houses 6 & 7 would mean
gains, at least in the form of service or through
wife or partners and government servants (Sun).
This could be possible during the DBAS periods
of Rahu, while it transits in the star of Mercury,
the II sublord.

Applications of Cuspal Interlinks ‘
II on VII:
General principles of linkage of the II
house with the VII house are:
7,1 : Monetary gains in the association of life/
business partners
7,2: Monetary benefits through L/BP
7,3: Monetary benefits from the negotiable
instruments of L/BP
7,4: Monetary benefits through the visits of
relatives
7,5: Gains through feasts and occassions with
relatives
7,6: Bank loans
7,7: Leaving the money at the possession
of others
7,8: Unexpected gains through L/BP
7,9: Monetary benefits through II wife/husband
7,10: Profits through business partners
7,11: Dowry money
7,12: Earnings of wife/husband or through
illegal sources
With 12 & 7 in its bag, the II house, as an
unfavourable house to the 7th house, during the
DBA periods of Mercury while it transits in the

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 147
star of Rahu, would lead to loss of money by
thefts.
VIII on II:
VIII is an unfavourable house to the II
house. 8th sublord is Saturn which is in the star
of Mars, sublord of houses 1 & 3. The
combination of 1 & 3 would remain neutral to the
II house. Saturn is in the sub of Jupiter, the
sublord of houses 5 & 1 1 . Houses 5 & 1 1 would
uphold the neutrality of the VIII house.
Principles of linkage of the VIII house on
the II house are:
2,1 : Expenditures for unexpected self needs
2,2: Unexpected profits
2,3: Unexpected improvements of income
2,4: Unexpected acquisition of properties
2,5: Unexpected gamblings
2,6: Unexpected borrowings
2,7: Sudden marriage, accidents to L/B
partners
2,8: Unexpected outstandings of money
2,9: Unexpected financial worries
2,10: Sudden professional gains
2,11: Immense flow of money as unexpected
gains

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 148
2,12: Unexpected investments or expenditures
Receipt of donations, compliments, gifts,
insurance claims etc are possible by Saturn,
the 8th sublord, as it carries 1 , 3, 5 & 1 1 , during
its DBA periods, while it happens to transit in
the star of Mercury, the II sublord.
II on VIII:
General principles of linkage of the II
house with the VIII house are:
8.1 Gains from insurance claims
8.2 Bribes or unexpected income
8.3 Unexpected gains in documentation and
through cheques
8,4: Insurance claims in accidents
8,5: Unexpected income through commissions
8,6: Unexpected loans
8,7: Insurance claims of L/BP
8,8: Unexpected collection of outstandings
8,9: Unexpected gains in ancestral properties
8,10: Accepting bribes in profession
8,ii; Unexpected financial assistance, gifts
or donations
8,12: Unexpected capital gains

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 149
With 12 & 7 in its bag, the II sublord would
force the native to recommend someone to a
lender in raising loans. That someone would fail
to repay the loan and in fine, the native would be
forced to exchange words with the lender.
EX on II:
IX is a house of danger to the II house. In
this chart, 9th sublord Moon transits in Sun star,
the 6th sublord (5 to 2) and in the sub of Rahu,
the 7th sublord (2 to 6). Linkage of 9 to 6 (5 to 2)
& 7 (Neutral to 6) would thus mean gains to the II
house.
Principles of linkage of the IX house on
the II house are:
2,1 : Expenditures on illegal affairs
2,2: Profits from ancestral properties
2,3: Improvement in financial status through
father
2,4: Money and properties from ancestral
sources
2,5: Profits from ancestral trusts
2,6: Appointment on compassionate grounds
or on the basis of heirship
2,7: Foreign exchange with the assistance

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 150
of others
2,8: Income through the insurance claims of
father
2,9: Financial crisis by the debts of father
2,10: Income from the profession as suited to
educational qualifications
2,11: Immense growth of financial status
through ancestral sources
2,12: Expenditures incurred on ancestral
properties
9th, the house of father and strangers,
would give some relief to the native. 9th is also
a house of research. In this example chart, it
would render such benefits during the Moon DBA
periods, while it transits in the star of Mercury.
II on IX:
General principles of linkage of the IX
house, to the II house are:
9,1: Monetary gains through credibility,
integrity and status
9,2: Gains through father and strangers
9,3: Gains through agreements and
negotiations

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" *151
9,4: Monetary benefits through higher
education
9,5: Monetary gains through supernatural
forces
9,6: Income, by getting appointed in the same
job of the father
9,7: Gains through second marriage
9,8: Monetary benefits from the insurance
claims of the father
9,9: Earnings in researches, royalties
9,10: Income through foreign assignments or
in a honorary post
9,11: Financial gains through success in
research works
9,12: Profits through international contacts
With 12 & 7 in its bag, the II house, a
neutral house to the 9th house, during the DBA
periods of Mercury while it transits in the star
of Moon, would enable the native to invest money
in properties, that are unworthy for due returns.
X on II:
X house as it is 9th to the II house, is a
naturally favourable house to the II house. The
10th sublord Mercury is in the star of Venus, the
12th sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" "152
7th sublord. By negating the 12th house
significations, the 7th house would operate on
the 10th sublord to become unfavourable to the
II house. Thus a natural ally would transform into
a silent and neutral spectator here.
Principles of linkage of the X house on
the house are:
2, 1 : Personal enjoyment from entire earnings
2,2: Saving the income
2,3: Improving the financial conditions through
income
2,4: Converting the income into properties
2,5: Gamblings and speculations with the
income
2,6: Preserving the income for legal heirs
2,7: Saving the income at the hands of others
2,8: Income that remain as outstanding
2,9: Financial hurdles and crisis due to
profession
2, 1 0: Reinvestments of the income in the same
profession
2,11: Immense earnings and preserving the
same as savings
2,12: Reinvesting the income in different
professions

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines"
In the example, there lies no scope for
gains or developments in profession, during the
DBA periods of Mercury, while it transits in its
own star.
II on X:
General principles of linkage of the II
house with the X house are:
10,1: Financial gains with status and respect
through profession
10,2: Permanent income through profession
(salary)
10,3: Gains in money exchanges of the
profession (TA Claims)
10,4: Profits in the profession of LVPIP
(HRA & CCA)
10,5: Encashment of commutted medical leave
and earned leave
10,6: Gains in promotions, increments,
additional remunerations
10,7: Income through self ventures
10,8: Accepting bribes, pending arrears being
paid
10,9: Gratuity and pension benefits
subsequent to retirement
10,10: Gains for holding honorary posts

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 154
10,11: Income through professional
developments
10,12: Materialistic gains in second profession
With 12 & 7 in its bag, the II house, a
favourable house to the 10th house, during the
DBA periods of Mercury while it transits in its
own star, with the profits from the first
profession, the native would lead to initiate a
second profession but only to increase the
borrowings and subsequently to end in aborting
the new attempts midway.
XI on II:
XI is a neutral house to the II house. The
11th sublord Jupiter is in the star & sub of
Mercury, the sublord of houses 2, 4 & 10 or 1, 3
& 9 to the II house. Thus a neutral house
becomes a favourable house.
. Principles of linkage of the XI house on
the II house are:
2,1: Reduction in savings to fulfil self needs
2,2: Multiple savings to fulfil materialistic
desires
2,3: Small savings, as desired
2,4: Conversion of savings as properties, as

'Applications of Cusval Interlinks"
desired
2,5: Conversion of savings as artistically
valuable goods, as desired
2,6: Borrowings from the person of native's
choice
2,7: Borrowings with the assistance of
others as desired
2,8: Receipt of donations as desired
2,9: Giving gifts as desired
2,10: Profession in Jewellery shops or in finance
companies as desired
2,11: Income through multiple sources as
desired
2, 12: Investments or expenditures as desired
The XI house in this chart is highly
favourable to the II house and thus opening up
the gates of gains through friends and elder
brothers. The link of the 11th sublord to 2, 4 & 10
would give financial satisfaction, fulfilment of
desires and marginal success in professional
life during its DBA periods of Jupiter, while it
transits in the star of Mercury.

"Applications of Cusycil Interlinks" 156
II on XI:
General principles of linkage of the II
house, to the XI house are:
11,1: Benefits through self efforts and status
11,2: Immense growth of wealth
11,3: Gains, as planned in negotiations and by
way of agreements
11,4: Profits from the properties with litigations
11,5: Monetary benefits in festivals and
occassions
1 1 ,6: Success in financial litigations
11,7: Financial assistance from friends
11,8: Unexpected gains from the friends
1 1 ,9: Gains out of long journeys, and through
foreigners
11,10: Expected gains in profession
11,11: Profits and gains to the optimum level
of desires
1 1,12: Gains as expected through investments
With 12 & 7 in its bag, the II house, a
neutral house to the 11th house, during the DBA
periods of Mercury while it transits in the star of
Jupiter, would lead to loss or theft of large amount
of money that was earned and kept secretly.

'Applications of C us pal Interlinks
XII on II:
12th is a favourable house to the II house.
Tlie 12th sublord Venus is in Moon star, the 9th
sublord and in its own sub. Though the linkage
to the 9th house would not favour the II house,
connection to the 12th house would nullify the same
and would render a bit of relief to the native.
Principles of linkage of the XII house on
the II house are:
2,1: Liquidation of investments for self needs
2,2: Repayment of outstanding money that
was lent
2,3: Improvement in financial conditions
through deposits
2,4: Investments in LVHP
2,5: Liquidating the investments for gambling
needs
2,6: Borrowings for want of excessive
investments
2,7: Profits in investments with the assistance
of others
2,8: Outstanding capital
2,9: Financial crisis caused by excessive
investments

"Applications of Cusoal Interlinks" 158
2,10: Liquidating the assets for professional
needs
2,11: Immense profits in investments
2,12: Reinvestments by liquidating the
investments
In the example chart, it is 9 & 12 on the II
house to mean that the second profession would
render gains to the client during Venus DBA periods, when it happens to transit in the star of
Mercury.
II on XII:
General principles of linkage of the II
house with the XII house are:
12,1: Liquidating capital through self efforts
12,2: Liquidating the capital or outstanding
money
1 2,3: Getting back the things that were lost
12,4: Due returns from investments made in
LVHP
12,5: Commission to capitals
1 2,6: Borrowings on capitals
12,7: Getting back the capital with the help of
others
12,8: Unexpected gains through investments

"Applications of Cusyal Interlinks" 159
12,9: Winning back the properties that were
seized
12,10: Gains through reinvestments in the
profession
1 2, 1 1 : Immense growth of capital
12,12: Return of savings and thrift
With 12 & 7 in its bag, the II house, a
neutral house to the 12th house, during the DBA
periods of Mercury while it transits in the star of
Venus, would lead xo loss of money, that was
secretly invested, after being cheated by
someone.
Readers are requested to keenly note that
the study of the II bhava/ house have been so
far explained with the use of the karaka of money
or finance alone, selected from the bundle of
more than a few hundred karakas of the II
house. The remaining karakas can also be
studied in the same manner as explained above.
PLANETS & II
SUN: The karaka planet for father and
government.
Sun resides in Venus star(12) and Jupiter
sub (5 & 1 1). It is an unfavourable linkage to the

'Applications of Cuspal interlinks
II house.
Hence the native could not expect loans
from father or through employment from the
government.
MOO: The karaka planet for mother &
maternal sources.
Moon transits in Sun star (6) and in Rahu
sub (7). Hence gains are possible through mother
and maternal sources, but only during the DBA
periods of Moon.
MAR: The karaka planet for brothers and
machineries.
Mars transits in Sun star (6) and in Rahu
sub (7). Hence gains are possible through
brothers and machineries, only during the DBA
periods of Mars.
MER: Karaka for sensitive instruments.
Mercury is in Venus star (12) and in the
sub of Rahu (7). Hurdles and losses are the
results.
JUP: Karaka for education.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
Jupiter transits in Mercury star & sub, the
sublord of 2, 4 & 10. The native can gain through
teaching, though he had very limited scope for
his own education.
VEN: Karaka for opposite sex and
agriculture.
Venus is in Moon star (9) and in its own
sub (12). The native cannot dream of making
gains from sources of ladies and agricultural
yields.
SAT: Karate: planet for old and used goods.
Saturn transits in Mars star, the sublord
of 1 & 3, and Jupiter sub, the sublords of 5 & 11 .
This link of 1 , 3, 5 & 1 1 would lead to favourable
gains from such goods.
More on identifying the sources of finance:
Imagine that a person wants to construct
a house. It is nothing but conversion of money
into properties. That means, the II sublord must
maintain a linkage either in the natal chart or in
the transit to ensure flow of money, that is
required to carry on with the above-said
construction. Now the process of accumulation
of money for the construction of house gets

Applications of Cusyal Interlinks
started. The native may use part of his own
savings. He may raise a housing loan from a
finance company or a bank. He may divert a small
portion of capital from his profession. He may
get short-term loans from his parents, in-laws,
relatives and friends. He may raise money either
by mortgaging the jewels of his wife or by selling
part of his own lands etc.,
Thus, in the process of constructing a
house, within a span of about 4-8 months, all the
sources are being utilized by him. Hence, the
financial sources of all the 12 houses are being
tried, when their sublords happen to transit in the
star of the II sublord as non-returnable money
and when they get to transit in the star of the 6th
sublord as loans. Thus every house, subject to
its natal potential, at the time of transit of its
sublord in the star of the II sublord, enables the
native to tap its sources for money. In the
general principles, we have studied only to use the
combination of two cusps, i.e., 1 & 2, 1 &3etc.,
But let us bear in our minds that the cuspal
combinations are unimaginably numerous, such as
1, 11 & 12. (Combination of any three cusps)

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
XXXXXXXXX1.10, 11&12
(Combination of any four cusps)
XXXXXXXXXXX 1,9,10,11 & 12
(Combination of any 5 cusps)
(Combination of any 6 cusps)
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
1, 7, 8, 9, 10, 1 1 & 12 (Combination of any 7 cusps)
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
1 ,5,6,7,8,9,10,1 1 & 12 (Combination of any 9 cusps)
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
ikVl 5 67891011 & IPCCnmhinatinn nf anv 10 cusnsSIP

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 164
cusps) From the above combinations, if we
exclude the Asc, we start getting another set of
combinations such as,
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX iii) to viii)
In the same manner, every time when we
exclude a house, we are able to get a new and
different set of combinations. Thus we can
derive over 39,916,800 cuspal combinations to
solve the riddles of our materialistic life. I know
that my lifetime is too small to detail and list these
significations of each and every one of the above
such combinations. Every one of these 40
million cuspal combinations is different from
others; combination of 1 & 3 does not mean as a
mechanical addition of karakas of 1 & 3; instead,
the combination explicitly shows about an unique
combination of courageous character. Thus we
have to be objective in identifying the true nature
of every other combination.
Added to the above, we have the
significations of "SIGNS" of Zodiac {Principles of
Kalachakra} and the "PLANETS". Please refer

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 165
the previous chapter on the Ascendant wherein
the relevant Planetary Significations have been
provided as examples. The permutations and
combinations of cuspal interlinks to the
significations of each and every planet, would
render more and more options. Thereby conclude
that only a small fraction of these options are
sufficient to identify the unique financial cycle of
each one of us. Hence, Dear readers! Best of
luck in trying these combinations in making
predicitions. Shall we move on to the III house
now?

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks” 166
III HOUSE
HOUSE OF COMMUNICATION
In this chapter, we are going to study the
link of the III house with and by the remaining
cusps in analyzing a chart. As you know, the III
house is the house of significations for
Communications, Writings, Documents and
agreements, Accounting, All kinds of
informations, Signs, Mediator, Negotiator, Lease,
Business and Commercial activities etc.
Nature of the III house:
It is favourable to the houses : 1 , 3, 5, 7 & 1 1
Unfavourable to the houses : 4, 8, 9 & 12.
Neutral to the houses : 2, 6 & 10
Ascon III- Short journeys, information &
communications
II on III- Conversion of savings as negotiable
instruments
III on III- Courage, self confidence, agreement
and lease
IV on III- Loss of properties, change of
residence,
V on III- Agreement to commissions, love

letters, innovations, deep thoughts.
VI on III- Loans through agreements,
appointment orders, success in
negotiations or litigations.
VII on III- Information from wife, partners.
Leaving the native place.
VIII on III- Insurance Agreement, Will or Charter,
mental worries caused due to change
of residence etc.,
IX on III- Agreement in writing, end of
information or journey.
X on III- Transfer of job, agreements in
business.
XI on III- Happy news and mental satisfaction.
XII on III- Loss of properties, share certificates
etc.,
The above could happen, if the sublords
of the concerned cusps reside in anyone of the
stars or the subs of the sublord of the III cusp.
The readers might have noticed that whenever
an odd house joins hands with the III house, it
improves the favourable scope of their
common signification; It is the reverse in the case
of linkage by an even house. Ill house is a
member of "Odd Houses" or a house of
spiritual cycle. When it conjoins with the 1 2th

"Applications of Cuspcil Interlinks" 168
house, jointly stand for negating the
materialistic scopes.
3 & 12 jointly with 2 would stand for sale of gold
3&12 jointly with 4 would signify sale of
properties.
3 & 1 2 jointly with 6 would denote loss of labour
and mortgages.
3 & 12 jointly with 8 would denote mental agony
on losses.
3 & 12 jointly with 10 would denote transfer
of job.
Ill house is also a house of negotiations
on sales, accounts & losses.
Houses 1, 3, 5, 7 & 11 would be
favourable to the III house, while houses 2, 6, 9
& 10 would be unfavourable to the III and 4, 8
&12 would stand neutral to the III house. These
favours or misfortunes could be possible
depending upon the residence of the sublord of
the third cusp in the star or the sub of the
relevant houses. In return, the III house would
register its mark on the cusps to which it gets
linked.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 169
on Asc: Courage of the native
on II: Enhancement of profits through
agreements
on III: Improves the trend of negotiations
on IV: Return journey, return of goods or
properties
on V: Mutual satisfaction in negotiations
on VI: Small loans,
on VII: Contacts with opposite sex
on VIII: Forgery and false propaganda
on IX: Filing of tender documents
on X: Change in the nature of job
on XI: Satisfactory agreements
on XII: Breach of agreements or misplacing
valuables.
POTENTIAL of the III house.
In every horoscope, it is possible that the
sublord of a particular house may also appear
as sublord to anyone or more houses. Here in
this example chart, Mars is the sublord for both
the Ascendant and for the III house.
i) Mars is the sublord of the III house
and it resides in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord,
and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlines" 170
III house is unfavourably connected to the
VI, as it becomes 4th to the III house. This
unfavourable connection is upheld by Rahu, the
7th sublord and the sublord of the sublord of the
III house. Hence potentially the III house is very
weak in this chart.
ii-b) Ketu, (Neither starlord nor sublord to
anyone of the 12 cusps) is in the sub of Mars.
Hence, we opt for the residence of Ketu, i.e.,
the II house. Linkage of II on 3 would enable the
native to convert his savings as negotiable
instruments.
ASC on III
Asc is a naturally favourable house to
the III house. Mars, the sublord of the Asc, as
it resides in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord and
in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord, always
carries 6 & 7 with it to react on the other 1 1
houses. Houses 6 & 7 would become houses 4
& 5 to the III house to disable the Asc to retain its
nature of favour to the III house.
The principles of linkage of the Asc on the
III house are as follows:
3.1 Courage and mental strength
3.2 Greed for money
3.3 Versatile in writing, good memory power

Applications of Cusval Interlinks
3,4: Inclination towards education
3,5: Deep thoughts and wisdom
3,6: ENT problems, courageous person,
sports personality
3,7: Sociable with very good public relations
3,8: Mentally retarded, fearful, coward
3,9: Fond oftiavels, research mind
3,10: Publicity in professional life
3,1 1 : Bold and courageous
3,12: Inability to reside in the native place
In this example chart, as the Asc is
carrying 6 & 7 with it or to say 4 & 5 to the III
house, during the DBA periods of Mars, while it
transits in its own star, as its reaction on the III
house as sublord of Asc, would negate the
inclination towards education and gaining
knowledge and would disable the native from
cordial communications.
Ill on ASC:
The principles of linkage of the III house
with the Asc are as follows:
1.1 Short journeys, transfers, mental strength
1.2 Statements
1.3 Courageous mind

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 172
1.4 : Loss of interest in education
1.5 : Love letters, poems
1.6 : ENT problems, loss of energy, diseases
1,7: Communication and exchanges of
informations with opposite sex
1,8: Mental depression, charge-sheet,
rumours, tremblings as a symptom of
neuro-disorders
1,9 : International relations, visa & tenders
1,10: Transfer of job, job satisfactions
1,11: Name and fame in negotiations and
communications
1,12: Secret research, loss of organs in the body
III house, with 6 & 7 in its bag, or to say,
3. 6 & 7, the specific combination of the III house
in this chart, while to act on the Asc, at the
periods of DBAS of Mars, when it transits in its
own stars, would enable the native to gain
success in negotiations.
II o n III:
II house, by nature, is a house of
negation to the III.
II sublord Mercury is in Venus star & Rahu
sub, thus linked to houses 12 & 7. Houese 12 &

"Applications of C usual Interlinks" 173
7 would become houses 10 & 5 to the III house.
Thus the II house would get modified as a
neutral house to the III house in this chart.
The principles of linkage of the II house
with the III house are as follows:
3,1: Disposal of valuables for self needs
3,2: Return of valuables mortgaged
3,3: Giving the valuables temporarily to the
use of others
3,4: Conversion of money into properties
3,5: Conversion of money into share
certificates
3,6: Frequent mortgage of valuables
3,7: Separation of one of the family members
3,8: Threatened by the financial strength
of the opponent
3,9: Issuance of cheques and subsequent
reduction of savings
3,10: Transfer through financial means,
TA claims
3,11: Financial agreements
3,12: Sale of gold and other valuables
II as it carries 1 2 & 7 or to say 1 0 & 5 to
the III house in this example chart, during the

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 1 74
DBA periods of Mercury, the II sublord, while it
is also in transit of the star of Mars, the III sublord,
would force the native to sell valuable articles
and would enable the native to get needed
assistance from others in the form of cheques or
demand drafts.
Ill on II
The principles of linkage of the house
with the II house are as follows:
2.1 : Converting savings as Negotiable
Instruments (Nl) for personal -reasons
2.2 : Liquidating Nl for re-investment in
the same
2.3 : Improvements in the financial position
through Nl
2.4 : Mortgage of valuables and properties
2.5 : Broker and commission agent
2.6 : Raising loans through Nl
2.7 : Financial assistance from others by
way of cheques
2.8 : Missing cheques and disappointments
2.9 : Negotiations and talks to avert financial
crisis
2,10: Financial benefits through transfers
2,11: Savings as Nl to the satisfaction of

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 175
desires
2,12: Documentation of valuable investments
III house with 6 & 7 in its bag, or to say,
3, 6 & 7, while to act on the II house, during the
DBA periods of Mars, the III sublord, while it is
also in transit of the star of Mercury, the II
sublord, would bring profits through negotiations
for the native.
Ill on III:
III when in company with 3 or 6 or 1 1 would
give success.
Ill when in company with 5 or 8 or 1 2 would
give failures.
Or in other words, it becomes obligatory
for the sublord of the III house to be
i) in its own star or sub to render success.
ii) or to remain in the star or sub of sublords
of 6 & 1 1 for success.
Ill is a favourable house to itself. Since it
is connected primarily with the 6th house, would
give success to the native through contracts and
agreements. This could be posssible during the
DBA periods of Mars, while it is also in transit in

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
its own star.
The principles of linkage of the III house
to itself are as follows:
3.1 Self advertisements
3.2 Profits through cheques or documents
3.3 Signatures, Information and
communication
3.4 Agreements to sell LVHP
3.5 Knowledge and wisdom in the fields of AC
3.6 Agreements to raise loans ,
3.7 Incidental meetings and contacts,
passing on the information
3.8 : Accounting faults
3,9: Telegraphs and tele-communications,
journeys
3,10: Transfers and business agreements
3,1 1 : Winning tenders and contracts
3,12: Loss of properties
i) As a house of signatures of the native
or means of sureity, the III house when
connected to 5, 8 & 12 would lead to loss of
money; 4, 8 & 12 would lead to seizure of
properties; 1,5 & 8 would spoil his reputation. In
this example, no such adverse linkage is found.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 1 77
ii) If the III house, a house of publicity, is
linked with 9 & 1 1 , then the native would be a
publicity-monger. If the ill house is connected to
the 8th, then one would spoil his own reputation,
losing his name and fame. Here in this example,
no such linkage is found.
Note: If we go on discussing about the
links that are not found in this horoscope, I am
afraid that it would deviate us from the main
purpose of this book.
IV on III:
IV is a neutral house to the III house. IV
sublord Mercury is in Venus star(12) and in Rahu
sub(7). Houses 12 & 7 would become houses
1 0 & 5 to the III house. Thus the IV house would
remain as a neutral house to the III house.
The principles of linkage of the IV house
on the III house are as follows:
3.1 Leaving the native place
3.2 Liquidation of properties
3.3 Mortgaging the properties
3.4 Re-mortgaging the properties
3.5 Re-modification of properties
3.6 Purchase of new properties after the sale

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
of old ones
3,7: Departure of guests and relatives
3,8: Forgery in documents of properties
3,9: Mutual exchange of properties
3,10: Residing in other's house by leaving his
own residence
3,11: Litigations on properties
3,12: Sale of properties
In this example chart, during the DBA
periods of Mercury, {carrier of 12 & 7 with it
always} the sublord of the IV house, while it
transits in the star of Mars, the III sublord, would
bring down the efforts on negotiations regarding
properties to end in vain.
Dl on IV:
The principles of linkage of the house
with the IV house are as follows:
4,1: Leaving the residence
4,2: Conversion of properties into gold and
valuables
4.3 Sale of properties
4.4 Regaining the properties that were lost
4.5 Repairs or modifications of properties

"Applications of C us pa l Interlinks " 179
4,6: Change of educational institution,
purchase of properties by selling own
properties
4,7: Living at the residence of the spouse
4,8: Repairs or damages in belongings, repairs
in wirings & pipe lines
4,9: Acquiring properties through mortgage
4,10: Sale of manufactured goods
4,11: Litigations on properties
4,12: Sale of documents
III house, with 6 & 7 in its bag, or to say,
3, 6 & 7, while to act on the IV house, during the
DBA periods of Mars at the time when Mars is
also in transit in the star of Mercury, the 4th
sublord, would lead to failures of negotiations,
as the other party would disagree to the demands
of the native.
V on III:
V is a naturally favourable house to the
III. Through its significations like interest in sports
and competitions, the 5th house is to stand
favourable to the III. In this example chart, the
5th sublord Jupiter is in the star and sub of
become unfavourable to the III house.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks " 180
The principles of linkage of the V house
with the III house are as follows:
3,1 : Deep thoughts and versatile knowledge
3,2: Lottery gains
3,3: Artistic excellence
3,4: Education in artistic fields
3,5: Writings of stories and articles
3,6: Loss of energy subsequent to viral
diseases
3,7: Love affairs
3,8: Disrespects, anonymous letters
3,9: Advertisements
3,10: Detained to the previous state in
profession, problems by changing the
place of business
3,11: Peaceful settlements in negotiations
3,12: Seller of artisitic goods
In this chart, since the 5th sublord Jupiter
is linked to houses 2, 4 & 1 0 or to say houses 12,
2 & 8 to the III house, would bring failures to the
native in competitive examinations during its DBA
periods, while it is also in transit of the star of
Mars, the III sublord.

"Applications of Cusyal Interlinks" 181
III on V:
The principles of linkage of the III house
with the V house are as follows:
5,1: Excellence in arts and culture
5,2: Profiting through commissions, brokerage
and agencies
5,3: Wisdom and thoughts
5,4: Seller and producer of artistic goods
5,5: Excellent memory power, spiritual servant
5,6: Loss of physical energy due to diseases
in the blood cells
5,7: Love marriage with a neighbour
5,8: Mental depresssions due to disrespects
in the fields of SG & AC
5,9: Pilgrimage to holy places
5,10: Professional seller of books and artistic
goods
5,11: Intelligence and sound health
5,12: Seller of artistic equipments and
supplements
III house, with 6 & 7 in its bag, or to say,
1 1 , 2 & 3, while to act on the V house, at the
periods of DBAS of Mars also when Mars is in
transit of the star of Jupiter, the 5th sublord, would

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 182
enable the native to satisfy other parties during
negotiations.
VI on III:
VI is a naturally unfavourable house to
the III house. But in this example, the 6th sublord
Sun, by being in the star of Venus (12), (10th to
the 111) and in the sub of Jupiter (5 & 11), { 3& 9
to the III house}, stands favourable to the
matters of the III house.
The principles of linkage of the VI house
with the III house are as follows:
3,1 : Courageous and bold efforts
3,2: Receipt of loans as cheques
3,3: Agreements for borrowings
3,4: Oppositions and motives in service
3,5: Voluntary retirements
3,6: Change of residence for service
requirements
3,7: Incentives and increments in service
3,8: Increase in workloads
3,9: Change in service
3,10: Transfer in service
3,11: Successful service
3,12: Service in commercial institutions and
business establishments

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 1 83
During the DBA periods of Sun, the 6th
sublord, the person would face difficulties in
raising loans, as assured to him. Since it is 5, 11
& 1 2 in the example case, the 6th house would
lose its strength to deny energy of the native and
thus, the native would be able to maintain his
health during the DBA periods of Sun, the 6th
sublord, while it transits in the star of Mars, the
III sublord.
Ill on VI:
The principles of linkage of the III house
with the VI house are as follows:
6, 1 : Litigations involving the prestige of the
native
6,2: Litigations regarding financial matters
6,3: Litigations regarding the pathways or
platforms
6,4: Litigations on properties
6,5: Litigations in service
6,6: Litigations regarding loans
6,7: Litigations motivated by the opponents
6,8: Litigations regarding criminal activities
6,9: Litigations on ancestral or temple
properties
6,10: Litigations regarding promotions in
profession

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 1 84
6,11: Litigations on the tenants
6,12: Litigations due to the secret activities like
Income tax raids etc
III house, with 6 & 7 in its bag, or to say,
3, 6 & 7, while to act on the VI house, during
the periods of Mars, when it gets to transit in
the star of Sun, the VI sublord, would enable
the native to sign promissory notes for getting
additional loans and would enable him to
gain success in negotiations etc
VII on III:
VII house is a beneficial house (5th to the
III) to the III house. But in this chart, the 7th
sublord Rahu is in its own star and in the sub of
Sun, the 6th sublord. Hence, whenever the 7th
house is referred, it automatically refers the 7th
(5th to the III) & the 6th (4th to the III) houses
also. Thus, it ends as a neutral house to the III
house matters.
The principles of linkage of the VII house
with the III house are as follows:
3.1 Talks with opponents
3.2 Breaks in long journeys of L/B-partners
3.3 Long journeys or separations of L/B

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
partners
3,4: Change of profession by L/B partners
3,5: Cordial relationships and understanding
with L/B partners
3,6: Divorce cases and notices
3,7: Illegal affairs of L/B partners
3,8: Threatenings by opponents
3,9: Agreements and information from
opponents
3,10: Separation from joint family
3,11: Cordiality with L/B partners
3,12: Separation of L/B partners
Since it is 7 & 6 in this example chart,
temporary separation does arise during the DBA
periods of Rahu, {the 7th sublord}, while it gets
to transit in the star of Mars.
In this example, the 7th house is 7 & 6.
Hence profitable but with a very few direct
contacts, is the only possiblity for financial
assitance by the opposite sex, during the AS
periods of Rahu, while it is also in transit in the
star of Mars.
Ill on VII:
The principles of linkage of the III house
with the VII house are as follows:

"Applications of Cusyai Interlinks"
7,1: Marriage brokers, maistry who selects
daily labourers
7,2: Broker to arrange for getting financial
assistance
7,3: Reporter, news correspondent, journalist
7,4: House brokers, industrial agency, brokers
for machineries
7,5: Registrar of marriages, pimp, festival
organizers
7,6: Registrar of litigations, adviser, bill
collectors
s
7,7: Advertising agencies, information and
communication agencies
7,8: Mortuary servants, charge-sheet
recording assistants, CID personnel
7,9: Microphones, telegraphs, tele
communications
7,10: Self-enterprise, partnership firms,
communication gaps with partners
7,1 1 : Satisfactory married life, Announcers
7,12: Rehabilitation centres, international
contacts
III house, with 6 & 7 in its bag, or to say,
3, 6& 7, while to acton the VII house, during the
periods of Mars when it transits in the star of

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 187
Rahu, the VII sublord, would stand as a
favourable period to initiate communications for
assistance or legal proceedings against
opponents for gains.
VIII on HI:
VIII is a neutral house to the III. In this
example chart, the sublord of the 8th house i.e.,
Saturn, is in the star of Mars, sublord of houses
1 & 3 and in the sub of Jupiter, the sublord of
houses 5 & 11. Hence, whenever the impacts of
the 8th house are under study, it becomes 8,1,
house of materialistic cycle, when linked to
houses of. spiritual cycle, would lead to
troubles in spiritual/family life.
The principles of linkage of the VIII house
with the III house are as follows:
3.1 Blind but bold
3.2 Mental depression
3.3 Unexpected information
3.4 Unexpected end of journeys
3.5 Unexpected love letters
3.6 Unexpected mental diseases/disorders
3.7 Unexpected marriage engagement
3.8 Receipt of bad news

"Applications of Ciispal Interlinks"
3,9: Unexpected journeys
3,10: Unexpected transfers
3,11: Unexpected agreements
3,12: Unexpected loss of belongings
In this example case, 8th is 1 , 3, 5 &1 1 ,
the houses of favour to the III house. This
combination would bring legal rights but not the
properties or valuables during the periods of
Saturn while it is also in transit of the star of
Mars, the III sublord. In the given example, the
8th sublord is linked to houses 1, 3, 5 & 11, in
such a way to enable all the members of his
family, to receive insurance claims after the death
of the native, during the DB periods of Saturn,
while it transits in the star of Mars, the III sublord.
Ill on VIII:
The principles of linkage of the III house
with the VIII house are as follows:
8,1 : Sudden death, mental depression, neuro
problems
8,2: Unexpected receipt of donations or gifts
8,3: Fear of death, mental depression
8,4: Sudden failure of organs of the body
8,5' Unexpected love affairs

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" m
8,6: Mental disorders, borrowings against
surety
8,7: Unexpected communications through
strangers
8,8: Heart attack or cruel death
8,9: Unexpected agreements and
communications
8,10: Transfer to a job with heavy workload
8,11: Unexpected happy news
8,12: Unexpected losses or amputation of
organs
III house, with 6 & 7 in its bag, or to say,
3, 6 & 7, while to act on the VIII house, during
the periods of Mars when it transits in the star of
Saturn, the VIII sublord, would cause troubles
to the native by way of documents and also by
having given surety to others.
IX on III:
IX house is an unfavourable house' to
the III. In this chart, the IX sublord is Moon and
it is in the star of Sun and in the sub of Rahu.
Sun is the 6th sublord and Rahu is the 7th
sublord. Hence whenever we study the 9th
house, it is 9, 6 & 7 or { 7, 4 & 5 to the III} which
confirms the unfavourable scope as far as the III

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks
house is concerned.
The principles of linkages of the IX house
with the III house are as follows:
3.1 Receipt of visa
3.2 Breach of agreements
3.3 Agreements
3.4 Litigations in agreements
3.5 Romance or love with a person of
different language
3.6 Cases filed by the opponents3.7 Negotiations for II marriage
3.8 Mental agony caused by illegal affairs
3.9 Receipt of communications
3.10 Relieving order
3,11: Successful negotiations
3,12 Change of trend in negotiations
Here in the given example, the 9th house
is linked with 6 & 7. So the native would not be a
honest negotiator, and the native can win a
tender and avail a needed work order during the
DBA periods of Moon, while it transits in the star
of Mars, the III sublord.

Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
III on IX:
The principles of linkage of the III house
with the IX house are as follows:
9,1: International agreements, passports,
transfer orders
9,2: Scholarships, ancestral documents
9,3: Communications and agreements
initiated by the other parties
9,4: Changes subsequent to higher education,
transport and teaching
9,5: Priests, religious sentiments, sexual
pleasures with lover
9,6: Loss of energy subsequent to changes in
body, erosion of bones etc.,
9,7: Practical training subsequent to education
9,8: Breaks in higher education or in foreign
journeys
9,9: Winning tenders, agreements,
negotiations
9,10: Profession as suited to education,
transfer orders
9,11: Polygamy, success in higher education
and agreements
9,12: Imports and Exports, foreign journeys,

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
airlines & research
III house, with 6 & 7 in its bag, or to say,
3, 6 & 7, while to act on the IX house, during the
periods of Mars when it transits in the star of
Moon, the IX sublord, would enable the native
to receive profitable communications for needed
assistance.
X on III:
X house is a house of danger to the III
house. {8th to the III}. By linking with the III, the
10th house would somehow get into troubles.
Mercury, the sublord of the 10th house is in the
star of Venus, the sublord of the 12th house and
in the sub of Rahu, the sublord of the 7th house.
Hence, whenever 10 is studied, it becomes
10,12 & 7, or 8,10 & 5 to the III, not a favourable
link to the III house at all.
The principles of linkage of the X house
with the III house are as follows:
3.1 Job satisfaction
3.2 Satisfaction with income
3.3 Frequent transfers of job
3.4 Instigated transfers
3.5 Difficulties in getting transfers
3.6 Transfer with promotion

" Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 193
3,7: Recommendations for transfer
3,8: Punishment transfer
3,9: Suspension orders
3,10: Transfer
3,11: Reinstatement or cancellation of
suspension
3,12: Transfer with change of nature in
profession
In this example, the 10th sublord is linked
with houses 12 & 7 which would enable the
client only to change the profession but not the
place of work. There would not be any chance
for the native to initiate commercial ventures.
The native would face difficulties by way of
changes in the profession, during the DBA
periods of Mercury, thelOth sublord, while it
transits in the star of Mars, the III sublord.
Ill on X:
The principles of linkage of the III house
with the X house are as follows:
10.1 Usual transfers of higher posts
10.2 Hike in pay scales
10.3 Assistance from others in getting
transferred

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 194
10,4: Seller of LVHP, machineries
10,5: Transfer due to hardships in profession
10,6: Transfer subsequent to promotions
10,7: Compulsory transfer
10,8: Punishment transfers, problems in
personal records
10,9: Transfer but could not join in the new
posting
10,10: Transfer of section or re-allocation of
duties
10,1 1 : Satisfactions through transfers or
changes in job
10,12:Trader with two different types of
professions
III house, with 6 & 7 in its bag, or to say,
3, 6 & 7, while to act on the X house, during the
periods of Mars when it transits in the star of
Mercury, the X sublord, would enable the native
to proceed for profitable communications at the
residence of the other party.
XI on IIIXI house is a favourable house to the III
{9th to the III}. In this chart, the XI sublord is
Jupiter which resides in the star and sub of

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 195
Mercury, the sublord of houses 2, 4 & 10. Hence
whenever XI house is referred, it automatically
stands as a combination of 1 1 , 2, 4 & 10 or 9,
12, 2& 8 to III. Thus it becomes an unfavourable
house to the III house matters.
The principles of linkage of the XI house
with the III house are as follows:
3.1 Satisfactory information
3.2 Discontinuity in information
3.3 Faults and repairs in communication
equipments
3.4 Increasing satisfaction through additional
information
3.5 Satisfactory agreements
3.6 Success in litigations
3.7 Pleasures out of planned meeting
3.8 Dissatisfactions of life
3.9 Successful trends in negotiations,
communications and agreements
3,10: Transfers, as expected
3,11: Expected information
3,1 2: Sale in expected terms
In this example, XI house is linked with
houses 2, 4 & 10. Hence, the native can never

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" "196
reach an agreement with others during the DBA
periods of Jupiter, while it transits in the star of
Mars, the III sublord. Further, the DBA periods of
Jupiter would disturb the harmony in romantic
life.
Ill on XI:
The principles of linkage of the III house
with the XI house are as follows:
11,1: Fulfilment of desires through self efforts
11,2: Fulfillment of desires by improving the
financial position
11,3: Man of self satisfactions
11,4: Litigations in properties
11,5: Sexual pleasures with whom the native
is in love
11,6: Success in litigations as desired
11,7: Marriage with person of native's choice
11,8: Life full of struggles, litigations in
properties
11,9: Agreements and negotiations, as desired
11,10: Transfer to the place of native's choice
11,11: Untiring efforts to acheive
11,12: Lending goods as per personal interests
house, with 6 & 7 in its bag, or to say,

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
5, 8 & 9, while to act on the XI house, during the
periods of Mars when it transits in the star of
Jupiter, the XI sublord, would enable the native
to attain success through communications.
XII on III:
XII house is neutral to the III house. In
this chart, the 12th sublord Venus is in the star of
Moon, the 9th sublord and in its own sub; Hence,
XII always carries 9 & 12 with it. It is 7 & 10 to
the III house, which means that the 12th house
has become unfavourable to the III house.
The principles of linkage of the XII house
with the III house are as follows:
3, 1 : Return to the native place
3,2: Return of goods, which were lost
3,3: Return of documents, which were issued
3,4: Return of properties, which were
mortgaged
3,5: Secret love letters
3,6: Secret legal proceedings
3,7: Secret letters or affairs of L/B partners
3,8: Secret threatenings and black-mails,
secret confusions
3,9: Secret research, foreign journeys

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 198
3,10: Return to the same job or profession
or to the same service
3,11: Relieved from the litigations of documents
3,12: Illegal resale of sold articles
Inthis example, the 12th house is 9 & 12.
When it establishes a contact with the III house,
it becomes 3, 9 & 12. This combination would
indicate frequent journeys, failures in getting due
returns on investments, difficulties in getting
repayments of the loans, researches to reveal
the secrets etc,. These could be experienced by
the native during the DBA periods of Venus, while
it transits in the star of Mars.
Ill on XII:
The principles of linkage of the III house
with the XII house are as follows:
12,1: Leaving the native place due to
subversive activities
12,2: Increase in the savings
12,3: Loss of secret articles
12,4: Sale of properties due to secret activities
12,5: Loss in secret love affairs
12,6: Amputation of an organ by way of
diseases

"Applications of Cusyal Interlinks" 199
12,7: Seizure of binami properties
12,8: Unexpected losses
12,9: Foreign journeys
12,10: Commercial business as II profession
12,11: Secret agreements
12,12: Loss of secretly preserved articles
III house, with 6 & 7 in its bag, or to say,
4, 7 & 8, while to act on the XII house, during the
DBA periods of Mars when it transits in the star
of Venus, the XII sublord, would enable the
native to suffer from failures in his investments.
Conclusion:
Thus we have come to the end of our
study of the III house and its actions and
reactions on and from the remaining houses. As
per the combinations, the results vary.
There may arise a doubt to some of the
readers as to why we should study about the
impact of the remaining houses on the III house,
while the respective sublords do not maintain a
direct linkage i.e., while they never reside in the
star or sub of the III sublord in the natal chart.
For example, in the given chart, as Saturn
and Ketu are in the star and sub of Mars
respectively, and Mars itself as the sublord of

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
the III house are the only direct indicators of
the III house. But it confines the scope of
communicating to sell something or the other, or
reaching an agreement. Hence it means that the
native is expected to wait till the BA periods of
Saturn, Ketu or Mars. That also belittles the life
of the native to receive the combined effects of 8
& 3 during the periods of Saturn and 2 & 3
during the periods of Ketu and 1 & 3 during the
periods of Mars. Keeping one's life to such
subjective and artificial limits would end as
unscientific. What would be the role of the
remaining 6 planets other than Saturn, Ketu &
Mars as per the example chart, while they
happen to transit in the star of Mars? {Rahu and
Jupiter will transit in Mars star for a period of about
four months} Isn't it a fact that they are also
expected to do some favour or cause for
damages to the III house ?
Here comes the significance of 'CUSPAL
INTERLINKS". We can derive the significations
of every planet from the natal chart itself, by
assessing their potential as how these planets
would behave during their DBA periods and during
their transit in the star of the sublord of a house.
As per the given example, the combined
effects of Cuspal Interlinks of

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 201
could be experienced by the native during
their respective DBA periods, while they transit
in the star of Mars, the sublord of the III house.
This is what the beauty and the essence of the
"Principles of Cuspal Interlinks"

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
IV HOUSE
HOUSE OF PROPERTIES
Lands, House or Dwelling Place, Vehicles,
Rare articles, Agricultural Fields, Farms, Estates,
Mines, Buildings, Ancestral properties,
Treasures, Schools and Colleges, Boats, Oil
wells, Wells, Bore wells, Tents, Ponds,
Productions, Entrance of a House, Medicinal
Plants etc are some of the significations of the
4th house that are unrelated to the Asc.
4th house, as it is 3, 1 , 11 , 9 &_5 to houses
2, 4, 6, 8 & 12 respectively, becomes favourable
to these houses. 4th house would stand
unfavourable to houses 1,5, 9 & 1 0 {4, 12, 8 & 7
to them}. It would stand neutral to houses 3, 7 &
11 {2,10 & 6}. While the sublords of the
remaining cusps reside in the star or sub of the
sublord of the 4th house, the results would
depend on the nature of favour by the 4th house
to them. As they happen to reside in the star or
sub of the sublord of the 4th house, the said
houses intend to register a mark of their reaction
on the 4th house, which are as follows.
I on IV: Graveyard, Residence, Education
to handle machineries.
II on IV: Valuable goods, Bungalow

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 203
III on IV: Godown or Barter exchange
IVon IV: Production, House, Vehicle, Primary
Education, & Household appliances.
V on IV: Casino, Banquet Halls
VI on IV: Hotels, Hospitals, Rent, Loans,
Manufacturing dresses, Readymades
Vllon IV: The Tenant, Lease-holder of our
properties, Seller.
Villon IV: Properties through will or charter.
IXon IV: Ancestral property, Church or Temple,
Trust House, Mortgage, Trust
agreements
X on IV: Industry, Constructed House,
Organisations.
XI on IV: Marriage Halls, Lodges, Banquet Halls,
Universities
Xllon IV: Binami properties. Oil Wells, Wells,
Treasures and Hide-outs.
Houses 2, 4, 6, 8 & 12 would become
favourable houses to the IV house as they are
11 & 3 are unfavourable houses to the IV house
as they are 4, 7, 8& 12th to the IV house. Houses
1 , 5 & 9 are 1 0, 2 & 6 to the IV house to remain
as neutral houses. Depending upon the
residence of the sublord of the IV house in the

"Applications of Cuspcil Interlinks" 204
star or sub of the remaining cusps, the IV house
gets modified. As the sublord of the IV house
becomes a resident or carrier of the relevant
cusps, by being in the star or the sub of the
relevant houses would intend to register its
reactions on the remaining houses, which are as
follows:
IV on 1: Status through properties
IV on 2: Income through properties
IV on 3: Loss or sale of properties
IV on 4: Doubling the properties
IV on 5: Collection of rare paintings, Musical
instruments etc
IV on 6 Purchase of properties, Construction
of 2nd storey etc
IV on 7 Multiplying social relations
IV on 8 Accident in Vehicles
IV on 9 Acquiring House on Mortgage,
Borrowed vehicle
IV on 10 Industry
IV on 11 Hurdles in constructions, Litigations in
properties
IV on 12 Investment in properties.
This is how the IV house acts on and gets
reactions from the remaining 11 houses.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
POTENTIAL of the IV HOUSE:
Now let us presume the 4th house as the
ascendant for studying the potential of the 4th
house. In the given example, Mercury, the sublord
of the 4th house is in the star of Venus, the
sublord of the 12th house and is in the sub of
Rahu, the sublord of the 7th house. 12th house
is a favourable house to the 4th {9th to the 4th}
but 7th house is an unfavourable house to the
4th; The star proposes and the sub
disposes; Hence the potential of the 4th house
is very weak in this chart.
As the readers are aware that every house
is actually^ meant for the Asc or to say for
prosperous living of the native. Here in this
example, through its potential, the 4th house is
not going to serve meaningfully for the purpose
of the Ascendant as 12th & 7th are houses of
worries to the Asc.
Jupiter, the sublord of the houses 5 & 11
is in the star and the sub of Mercury, the sublord
of the 4th house. No other planet is directly
connected to Mercury. The impact of houses 5 &
11 would remain permanent, such as the
collection of artistically valued and rare articles,
visit to temples and casinos, visit to lodges and
participation in feasts and festivals etc.,

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 206
But, the remaining 10 houses would also
act for the 4th house, through their respective
sublords, during their DBA periods and at the time
when they are also in transit of the star of
Mercury.
ASC on IV:
The sublord of the Ascendant, a naturally
neutral house to the 4th house, is Mars which is in
the star of Sun, the 6th sublord and in the sub of
Rahu, the 7th sublord. Houses 6 & 7 become 3 & 4
to the 4th house, leading to an unfavourable link.
Some of the Hindu saints have identified
their samadhis even within their life-times. A great
scholar in Tamil, Shri Ki.Aa.Pe.Viswanathan, had
purchased a farm and specified a place as
graveyard for himself at the banks of the river
Cauvery. This could be possible only when the
Asc is linked with houses 4 & 7. Here in this chart,
there is no such possibility as the Asc is linked
only with houses 6 & 7.
General principles of linkage of the Asc
with the IV house are as follows:
4.1 Landlord with Status
4.2 Landlord with good Monetary Income
4.3 Real Estates

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 207
4,4: Involvements in Agriculture
4,5: Poultry and Farms
4,6: Service in Industries
4,7: Self enterprise in Manufacturing Fields
4,8: Reproduction and Recycling Process
4,9: Teacher
4,10: Industrialist
4,11: Happy life with Income from Assets
4,12: Investments in Properties
In this example chart, since the Asc
always carries 6 & 7 with it, it may enable the
native, subsequent to hard labour and self
efforts, to acquire lands, houses, vehicles or
household appliances either through loans or
through hire-purchases etc, eventhough
potentially the native can never own a land for a
long period of time in his personal name but
during the DBA periods of Mars, while it also
happens to transit in the star of Mercury.
IV on ASC:
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the Asc are as follows:
1,1: Status through Education and Properties
1,2: Income and Status through Properties

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
1,3: Publicity and Status through Properties
1,4: Status with Studies
1,5: Status through Education in the fields
of Arts and Culture
1,6: Chemical Manufacturing
1,7: Public Relationships and Social Nature
1,8: Profession in Accident Insurance fields
1,9: Higher studies and Professor
1,10: Industrial Ownership
1,11: Status through Excellence in Education
1,12: Status through Research and Education
4th house as a naturally unfavourable
house to the Asc, and a carrier of 12 & 7 with it,
during the DBA periods Mercury, while Mercury
transits in the star of Asc sublord Mars, would
distract the inclination of the Asc from studies
and would enable the native to dispose his
properties.
II on IV:
The II house is favourable to the IV house.
Mercury, the II sublord is in the star of Venus, the
sublord of the 1 2th house and in the sub of Rahu,
the sublord of the 7th house. Houses 12 & 7 are
not the favourable houses to the 4th house and
thus making one of the favourable houses as idle
and weak.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
General principles of linkage of the II
house with the IV house are as follows:
4,1 : Properties and Status through Income
4,2: Multiplication of Money and Properties
through Income
4,3: Jewellery productions and sales
4,4: Manufactuing valuable products
4,5: Manufacturer of highly valuable and
artistically excellent articles
4,6: Industrial Finance
4,7: Banker
4,8: Safety Lockers
4,9: Trustees
4,10: Jewels and Diamonds manufacturer
4,1 1 : Investments on disputed properties
4,12: Investments through valuable articles
In this example chart, II house has 12 & 7
with it; it would induce the native to purchase
valuable articles and thus to indulge in
extravagant expenditures during the DBA
periods of Mercury, the II sublord, while it also
transits in its own star.

Applications of C us pal Interlinks
IV on II:
General principles of linkage of the IV
house on the II house are as follows:
2,1: Enjoyment by liquidating ancestral
properties
2.2 Profits in the filed of LVHP
2.3 Mortgaging the properties
2.4 Construction of a bungalow by utilizing
his savings
2.5 Income through artistically valued goods
2.6 Borrowings in LVHP
2.7 Permanent residentship of relatives
with the native
2,8: Unexpected gains in the field of LVHP
2,9: Financial troubles in the field of LVHP
2.10 Profession in the field of manufacturing
2.11 Profits in construction of bungalows
2.12 Investments in the field of LVHP
IV house as a naturally favourable house
to the II house, and because being a carrier of
12 & 7 with it, during the DBA periods of its
sublord Mercury, while Mercury transits in its own
star, would drag the native to invest in properties
and subsequently to suffer from losses.

"Applications of Cuspal Inter links" 211
in o n IV:
III house is house of negation to the IV
house. The sublord of the III house, Mars, is in
the star of Sun, the sublord of the 6th house and
in the sub of Rahu, the sublord ofthe 7th house.
Hence the III house is connected to houses 6 &
7 or to say houses 3 & 4 to the 4th. The sub
protects the favour of the star and finally dilutes
the negative nature ofthe III house on the IV
General principles of linkage of the III
house with the IV house are as follows:
4,1: Statusful broker
4,2: Profits in brokership businesses
4,3: Lessor, Building contractors
4,4: Brokers of Stock exchange
4,5: Hirer of artistically valued goods or
Handicrafts
4,6: Change of Lease Agreements into Hire
Agreements
4,7: Labour Contracts
4,8: Contracts in the field of Sanitation &
Wastages
4,9: Winning tenders
4,10: Barter Exchange

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 212
4,11: Manufacturing against orders
4,12: Broker for Industrial Investments
In this example chart, Mars, the III sublord
is carrying 6 & 7 or to say 3 & 4 to the IV house
and thus would enable the native to enter into
agreements on purchase of properties during its
DBA periods while it is also in transit of the star
of Mercury, the IV sublord.
IV on III:
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the III house are as follows:
3,1: Leaving the native place
3,2: Income and gains in the sale of
properties
3,3: Loss of Properties
3,4: Return of goods mortgaged
3,5: Writing articles and essays in the field
of Education
3,6: Change of schools or change of courses
of Education
3.7 Separations from the relatives
3.8 Forged documents of Properties
3.9 Agreements in lieu of Properties

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 213
3,10: Sale of Industrial Goods
3,1 1 : Distributor/ Dealer of industrial goods
3,12: Sale of Properties
4th house as a naturally neutral house to
the III house, and because it is a carrier of 12 &
7 with it in this example chart, during the DBA
periods of its sublord Mercury, while Mercury
transits in the star of Mars, the sublord of the III
house, would make the client to suffer due to the
cancellation of agreements by the other parties,
though they had been agreed to earlier.
IV on IV:
IVth'house is a naturally beneficial house
to itself. But here the potential of the 4th house
is weak to itself by its adverse link of 12 & 7.
General Drinciples of linkage of the IV
house to itself are as follows:
4,1: Status and Properties
4,2: Income and Properties
4,3: Living in a house for rent though he owns
a house in his name
4,4: Immovable Properties
4,5: Steady increase of Properties

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 214
4,6: Multiple Purchases
4,7: Depending on the Relatives
4,8: Properties gained as Donations
4,9: Steady showing of Excellence in
Education
4,10: Profession in the field of LVHP
4,11: Owner of Properties with Litigations
4,12: Binami Properties of Native
4th house as a naturally favourable house
to itself, but because it is a carrier of houses 12
& 7 in this example chart, during the BA periods
of its sublord Mercury, while Mercury transits in
its own star, would make the client to be
incapable of liquidating his investments made in
lands, propertieor valuables.
V on IV:
V house is a neutral house to the 4th
house. In this chart, Jupiter, the sublord of the 5
& 11th houses resides in the star & sub of
Mercury, the sublord of houses 2, 4 & 10. This
linkage, as it is 11,1 & 7 to the 4th house would
render strong & favourable scope to the 4th
house.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks’’ 215
General principles of linkage of the V
house with the IV house are as follows:
4,1: Status through production of Artistic
Goods
4,2: Income through production of Artistic
Goods
4,3: Seller of Artistic Goods
4,4: Teacher of Arts and Culture
4,5: Novel attempts in the production of
Artistic Goods
4,6: Service in the production centre of
Artistic Goods
4,7: Partnership firm in production of Artistic
Goods
4,8: Reprocessing the Artistic Goods
4,9: Professor in the fields of Arts & Culture
4,10: Profession in the industry of Arts and
Culture
4,11: Purchaser or collector of Artistic Goods
4,12: 2nd profession in the fields of Arts and
Culture
In this example, Jupiter, the sublord of the
V house is linked to houses 2, 4 & 10. Hence
during its DBA periods, Jupiter would enable the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
native to earn through production of instruments
of Arts and Music. The V sublord when linked to
houses 2, 6 & 10 and with Mercury, the karaka
planet for astrology, one would become an
astrologer. V house when linked to houses 4 &
10, one would become a teacher of
astrology. V house when linked to houses 1 &
10, one would gain respects as a statusful
astrologer. V house, when linked with houses 5
& 9, one would never become an astrologer, while
the linkage of 9 & 12 would mean the research
in the field of astrology. Here in this example
chart, the linkage with houses 2, 4 & 10 along
with the karaka planet Mercury, by the sublord of
the 5th house Jupiter, would enable the native to
be a professional astrologer and also a teacher
of astrology during DBA periods of Jupiter.
IV on V:
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the V house are as follows:
5,1 : Learning Arts and Culture
5,2: Learning the art of Singing and rendering
Speeches
5,3: Writing Skills
5,4: Producer of Artistic Goods
5,5: Dancer

“ Applications of Cusyal Interlinks"
5,6: Multiple fields of Arts and Culture
5,7: Co-ordinator of talents in the fields of
Arts and Culture
5,8: Editor in the fields of Arts and Culture
5,9: Arts Teacher
5,10: Profession as suited to his Academic
Qualifications in the fields of Arts and
Culture
5,11: Mass appeal in the fields of Arts and
Culture
5,12:' Research in the fields of Arts and Culture
4th house as a house of negation to the V
house, andbecause it is a carrier of 12 & 7 with
it, in this example chart, during the DBA periods
of its sublord Mercury, while Mercury transits in
the star of Jupiter, the sublord of the V house,
would make the client to purchase artistically
valuable goods with a profit motive subsequently
to suffer financially.
VI on IV:
VI house is a house of favour or house of
multiplicity to the IV house. Inthis example, Sun,
the sublord of the 6th house resides in the star
of Venus, the sublord of the 12th house and in
the sub of Jupiter, the sublord of houses 5 & 11.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 218
Hence the 6th house becomes a carrier of houses
Thus a favourable house becomes a neutral
house.
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the IV house are as follows:
4,1 : Allottment of Staff Quarters with Status
in service
4,2: Income, Vehicle, Household Appliances
provided in Service
4,3: Leaving the Staff Quarters
4,4: Ownership of the allotted Staff Quarters
4,5: Residing in the Guest Houses of the
Company
4,6: Vehicle and Staff Quarters allotted in
Service
4,7: Care-taker of Staff Quarters
4,8: Forming a Residential Colony with
colleagues
4,9: Allottment of houses, constructed by the
company, for sale to Staff against monthly
deductions from Salary
4,10: Allottment of house, purchased by the
company on behalf of the native

"Appfications of Cuspal Interlinks"
4,11: Litigations in the allotment of Staff
Quarters
4,12: Modifying the Staff Quarters at his
personal expenses, by the native
Here in this example chart, the linkage is
12, 5 & 1 1 to enable the native to practically try
with certain traditional medical principles during
the DBA periods of Sun. { In this example, Mars
Dasa was over at his age of 21 years } The 4th
house has negated his moderate education.
Under this situation, the favourable potential has
become null and void.
The 6th sublord when linked with houses
4 & 10, one would involve in the production of
textiles and garments. If the linkage is with 5 &
10, then the native would become a tailor. If the
linkage is with 3 & 1 2, then the native would be a
retail seller of garments. If the linkage is with 3, 9
& 12, then the native would be an exporter of
garments. But here is a link of 12, 5 & 1 1 in this
chart by the 6th house. The native may learn (5)
the art of tailoring during the DBA periods of Sun,
but there is no scope to practise as a professional.

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
IV on VI:
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the VI house are as follows:
6,1: Status through possession of many
Properties
6,2: Multiple and Ancestral Properties
6,3: Acquisition of a Property through sale of
some other Property
6,4: Purchase of a Property by raising loans
over the Property under possession
6,5: Sale of the 2nd Property after purchase
6,6: Raising loans over the recently purchased
2nd property
6,7: Developing the 2nd property, subsequent
to its purchase
6,8: Accumulation of Properties after
Properties
6,9: Purchase of the II Property with others'
money
6,10: Purchase of a Construced House or
Buildings or Industry as the 2nd Property
6,11: Litigations on the 2nd Property
6,12: Construction of a House in the plot
acquired as the 2nd Property

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 221
4th house as a naturally favourable house
to the VI house, and by being a carrier of 1 2 & 7
in this example chart, during the DBA periods of
its sublord Mercury, while Mercury transits in the
star of Sun, the sublord of the VI house, would
make the client to increase the investments by
acquiring further loans.
VII on IV:
VII house is an unfavourable house to the
IV But here in this chart, the 7th sublord Rahu
resides in its own star and in the sub of Sun, the
5th sublord. So 7th stands as 7 & 6 to become a
favourable house to the 4th house.
General Principles of linkage of the VII
house with the IV house are as follows:
4: Visit of Relatives, near and dears
4 & 1 : Living with In-Laws.
4 & 2: Dissatisfaction of Wife/Husband
4,3 & 8: Litigations on Properties caused
by Partners/Wife/Husband.
4,3 & 9: Temporary separation of Wife/
Husband
4 & 5: Harmonious family life. Soft attitude
of Wife/Husband towards relatives of

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
native
4 & 6: Income through Partner/Wife/Husband
4,6,10,12: Denial of Marriage
4,8: Enmity with Relatives
4,9: Knowledge through experience and
Problems due to Illegal Activities
4,10: Partnership Business
4,11: The joyful Joint Family
4,12: Wife or Husband would be an
employee, Frequent health problems
of the Partner
In the case of our example, it is 7 & 6 to
link with 4 to mean that the relatives would not
make frequent visits to the residence of the
native; Not a harmonious married life; No
success in partnership firms; Opponents could
not gain from the native; No prospect of income
from wife etc., The above could be experienced
during the DBA periods of Rahu, the sublord of
the 7th house when it also makes a transit in the
star of Mercury, the 4th sublord.
IV on VII:
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the VII house are as follows:

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 223
7,1: Affinity towards Relatives
7,2: Profits thiough Relatives
7,3: Relatives leaving from the Residence of
the native, Affinity with people speaking
different languages through relatives
7,4: Permanent stay of Relatives in the
Residence of the native
7,5: Visit of Relatives for a Family Get-Together
7,6: Separation or differences of opinons
with relatives
7,7: Dependency on Relatives
7,8: Troubles caused in Relationships
7,9: Affinity with people belonging to different
Religions, through Relatives
7,10: Joining tne native and his Family with
Relative
7,11: Close affinity with Relatives
7,12: Incurring losses by way of Relationships
4th house as a neutral house to the VII
house, and because it is a carrier of 12 & 7 with
it in this example chart, during the DBA periods
of its sublord Mercury, while it transits in the star
of Rahu, the sublord of the VII house, would force
the client to increase his loans.

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
VIII on IV:
VIII house is a house of favour to the IV
house. In this chart, the VIII sublord Saturn is
residing in the star of Mars, the sublord of houses
1 & 3 and in the sub of Jupiter, the sublord of
houses 5 & 11. Now, VIII becomes the significator
stand as an unfavourable house.
General principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the IV house are as follows:
1,4: Binami properties, Unexpected
Properties, Unclaimed properties
1,4 & 8: Accident to the Native while he drives
a Vehicle.
1,4,8 &11: Accident both to the Native & the
Vehicle
1.3 & 4: A learned Fool
1.4 & 10: Hard Worker
1,4 & 8: Cruel Accident
2 & 4: Unexpected Income and Property
3 &4: Secret plans, Secret losses, Damage
through Rumours.
4 & 5: Name and fame through Properties or
Possessions

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 225
4 & 6: Intensity in Sufferings due to Diseases
4&7: Problems through Relatives
4,8 &11: Abduction of Properties by Opponents.
4 & 9 : Unexpected Ancestral Properties
4 & 10 : Service in Insurance Companies,
Accident Wards etc
4 & 1 1 : Litigations- arised out of Properties
4 & 12 : Secret Production, Adulteration
In the example chart, the VIII house has
the link of 1 , 3, 5 & 1 1 permanently. While Saturn
transits in the star of Mercury, it would become
1, 3, 4, 5, 11 & 8. This combination would give
worries in his family life but would stand
favourable to his longevity. The native would
show needed courage to carry on with his
professional ventures. However there would be
problems in lands and vehicles etc. Native's
health may not remain sound; At the time of
death, this link would cause for the suddenness
of his end.
IV on VIII:
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the VIII house are as follows:
8,1: Accidents in Vehicles
8,2: Insurance Claims in Accidents

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 226
8.3 Expiry of Insurance coverage for Vehicles
8.4 Maturity of Insurance Policies
8.5 Inability to Claim Insurance money
8.6 Raising loans out of Insurance Policies
(LIC housing finance)
8.7 Insurance Policies to co-travellers
8.8 Litigations on Insurance Documents
8.9 Assistance for spare parts and
accessories through Insurance Policies
8,10: Industrial Insurance
8,11: Insured goods in transit, Insured posts etc
8,12: Insurance for Investments and Capital
4th house as a favourable house to the
Vlfl house, and because it is a carrier of 12 & 7
in this example chart, during the DBA periods of
the 4th sublord Mercury, while it transits in the
star of Saturn, the sublord of the VIII house, would
lead to unlawful seizure of native's assets,
holdings or possessions.
IX on IV:
IX house is a neutral house to the IV
house. In this chart, the 9th sublord Moon is in
Sun star and Rahu sub. Sun is the 6th sublord
and Rahu is the 7th sublord. So the 9th house
carries 6 & 7 With it to link with the 4th house.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 227
Houses 6, 7 & 9 becomes 3, 4 & 6 to the 4th
house, (t becomes a favourable link.
The significations of the 9th house to link
with the 4th house are as follows :
4: Winning Ancestral Properties, Higher
Education following strenuous efforts,
Blocks in Illegitimate Affairs, Hurdles in
long journeys, Breach of agreements,
Research.
4 & 1 : Prospects of Higher education
4&2 : Rich by birth, Winning Aj^estral
Properties and money
4 & 3: Loss of Properties and Holdings
4 & 5: Excellence in Education and Wisdom
4 & 6: Rents from Ancestral Properties or Cash
4 & 7: Marriage with a distant relative
4&8: Break in Higher Education, End of
Journey
4&9: Favourable Prospects for Higher
studies
4 & 10: Teaching as a Profession
4 & 11: Excellence in Higher Studies, Litigations
on Ancestral Properties
4 & 12: Further Investment or losses in

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
Ancestral Properties.
In this example, the 9th {6 & 7} house
would assure a scope for winning ancestral
properties; knowledge through experience;
illegal affairs leading to disharmony with wife;
success in researches, happy journeys, fulfilment
of agreements, suicide of the girl who had an
illegal affair with the native etc.
The above could be experienced by the
native during the DBA periods of Moon, while it
also transits in the star of Mercury.
IV on IX:
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the IX house are as follows:
9,1: Winning Confidence through Properties
9,2: Income through Ancestral means and
values Institution of Finance
9.3 Institution of Transport
9.4 Institution of Education
9.5 Institution of Spiritual Education
9.6 Institution of Legal Study
9.7 Institution of Social Science
9.8 Institution of Secret Arts and Magics

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks’1 229
9,9: Institution of Research
9,10: Institution of Industrial Research (R & D)
9,11: Institution cf Research in Education
9,12: New Inventions through Research
4th house as an unfavourable house to
the IX house, and by being a carrier of 12 & 7
with it in this chart, during the DBA periods of its
sublord Mercury, while it also transits in the star
of Moon, the sublord of the IX house, would lead
to discontinuation or failures in the research
efforts of the native.
X on IV:
X house is an unfavourable house to the
4th house. Mercury is also the sublord of the 10th
house and is in the star of Venus, the 12th sublord
and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Houses
10, 12 & 7 would become 7, 9 & 4 to the 4th
house; Hence the 10th house would only do
unfavours to the 4th house.
The significations of the 10th house to link
with the 4th house:
4.1 Improvement in Status due to Profession
4.2 Land lord and a Rich person
4.3 Manufactuing cum Retail sales as
Profession

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 230
4: Purchase of a constructed house or
Production Industry as the profession
4,5: Production of Artistically valued goods.
4,6: Service in Construction or Lands or
Automobile companies.
4,7: Self Enterprise.
4,8: Service in Accident Wing or a Surgeon,
Accident caused by other's vehicle
leading to injuries.
4,9: Break in Profession, Intentions and
motives of others to defeat the native in
his profession.
4,10: Engineering as a Profession or Profession
based on Academic Qualifications.
4,11: Satisfaction and Status through Lands,
Houses, Properties etc.
4,12: Adulterations as a Profession
4,8,12: Illegal profession
In this example chart, the linkage of the
10th house {12,7} with the 4th house would
denote the failures and problems while the
native involves himself in illegal and anti-social
activities, magics etc,, during the DBA periods
of Mercury, and when it also transits in its own
star.

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
IV on X:
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the X house are as follows:
10,1: Correspondent of an Educational
Institution
10,2: Financier of Industries
10,3: Journalist in the field of Economics and
Commerce
10.4 Producer or Manufacturer
10.5 Speculation or Stock Exchange
-'10,6 Industrial Labourer
10.7 Recruitment of Labourers for Industries
10.8 Reprocessing and Waste Managements
10.9 Godowns and Stores of Industries
10,10: Assembling of Spare parts
10,1 1 : Industrial Tycoon
10,12: Multiple Industries
4th house as an unfavourable house to
the X house, and because it is a carrier of 1 2 & 7
with it in this example chart, during the DBA
periods of its sublord Mercury, while it also
transits in it own star, would denote
manufacturing as the nature of second
profession.

'Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
XI on IV:
XI house is a house of unexpected
dangers to the IV house. The sublord of the 11th
house Jupiter resides in the star and sub of
Mercury the sublord of houses 2, 4 & 10. Houses
2, 4 & 10 would become houses 11,1 & 7 to the
4th house. Thus the nature of the 11th house
gets changed into a house of favour to the 4th
house.
Principles of linkage of the 11th house to
the 4th house:
4,1: Excellence in Education, Master's Degree
4,2: Bungalow as per the likes of the native
4,3: Loss of Properties subsequent to
Litigations
4: Construction of House as per the likes of
the native
4,5: Impotency of Partner leading to
disharmony
4,6: Income through Lands, Vehicles and
Education
4,7: Meetings with Opposite sex
4,8: Seizure of Vehicles and Accidents in
Buildings

"Applications of Cusyal Interlinks" 233
I, 4,8: Accidents to the native
4,9: Excellence in Higher Education
4,10: Profession as a teacher in universities
4,11: Fond of Mother, Frequent repairs in
Vehicles
4,12: Investments in Vehicles, Lands to the
satisfaction of the native
In this example chart, the linkage of the
1 1th sublord is 2, 4 & 1 0. Hence, the native would
involve in a profession as per his likes and would
buy a house or a bungalow or a vehicle or
household appliances or the instruments to his
likes and tastes, could gain through elder
brothers,' son-in-law and friends to his
expectations.
The same would happen during the DBA
periods of Jupiter, while it also transits in the star
of Mercury.
IV on XI:
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the XI house are as follows:
I I , 1 Status tnrough Properties, as desired
1 1 .2 Income through Properties, as desired
11.3 Disputed Properties

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 234
11,4: Purchase of Disputed Properties, as
desired
11,5: Construction of Lodges, Stadiums as
desired
11,6: Constructions of Hotels and Hospitals,
as desired
11,7: Construction of Marriage Halls, as desired
11,8: Construction of Operation Theatres as
desired
11,9: Construction of Colleges as desired
11,10: Encroachment of the disputed Properties
by the other parties
11,12: Losses incurred by way of disputed
Properties
4th house as a neutral house to the XI
house, and because it is a carrier of 12 & 7 with
it in this example chart, during the DBA periods
of its sublord Mercury, while it also transits in the
star of Jupiter, the 11th sublord, would denote
difficulties to the native in litigations of lands,
vehicles etc,.
XII on IV:
XII house is a house of favour to the IV
house. But in this chart, the 12th sublord is
Venus and is in the star of Moon, the 9th sublord

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 235
and in its own sub. Hence 1 2th is 9 & 1 2 or 6 & 9
to the 4th house to remain as a favourable house.
The Principles of linkage of the 12th house
with 4th house are as follows:
4,1: Secret activities, Education in Research
fields, Reputation and Respect through
Investments.
4,2: Getting back the loans, Regaining the
valuables.
4,3: Loss of memory, Losses, Malfunctioning
of Organs
4 : Secret plans, Secret rooms, Secret
production
4,5: Multiplication of Capital and Investments
4,6: Enormous multiplication of Shares and
Investments
4,7: Entry of Enemies or Secret Enemies
4,8: Difficulties and Crises in Share Capitals
4,9: Research Education, Financial Crisis
following undue Investments on
Properties, Changes in Profession etc,
Difficulties due to Illegal Activities
4,10: Second profession would be a
Manufacturing unit, Profession in R & D

Applications of Caspal Interlinks'
Departments
4,11: Construction of House after difficulties,
Problems created by Relatives, Faults
in Holdings and Valuables.
In this horoscope, the 12th sublord
Venus is a carrier of 9 & 12 or 6 & 9 to the 4th
house. Hence, the native would involve himself
in illegal activities in researches, undertake long
journeys, change the profession or face
financial crisis due to higher investments during
the DBA periods of Venus, the 12th subjord, while
it also transits in the star of Mercury, the 4th
sublord.
IV on XII:
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the XII house are as follows:
12,1: Status by way of Investments in
Properties
12,2: Gains by way of Investments in
Properties
12,3: Sale of already Invested Properties
12,4: Investment in Properties
12,5: Developing the Invested Properties
12,6: Income through Invested Properties
12,7: Dejections and disappointments through

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
Investments in Properties
12,8: Getting cheated in Investments of
Properties
12,9: Donating the Invested Properties
12,10: Investing on Industrial Properties
12,11: Troubles in Investments of Properties
12,12: Reinvestments in Properties
4th house as a favourable house to the
XII house, and because it is a carrier of 12 & 7
with it in this example chart, during the DBA
periods of its sublord Mercury, while it also
transits in the star of Venus, the sublord of the
12th house, would multiply the mental tortures
of the native in his efforts to liquidate the
investments on properties and vehicles.
Setting apart their direct linkages, the
planets would be forced to have a link with the
4th house during their transit in the star of
Mercury, the sublord of the 4th house. They would
react as per their position of favour to the
significations of the 4th house, that are unrelated
to the Asc:

'Applications of Cuspal Interfinfa"

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
V HOUSE
HOUSE OF ARTS & CULTURE
The Potency, Children, Legal Heirs,
Hobbies, Intelligence, Celebrations, Sports and
Games, Fine Arts, Dance, Drama, Drawings and
Paintings, Cinema, Music, Festivals and
occassions, Races and Gamblings, Lottery,
Gains without Labour, The royal Courts, Immense
Wealth, Shares, Barter Exchange are some of
the significations of the V house that are related
to the Asc.
The Asc related and unrelated significations of the V house that maintain a link with the
remaining houses have been listed below:
I: Versatile in knowledge and thoughts,
Sports, Hobbies and Habits,
Entertainments
II: Commission, Speculation, Gamblings,
Arts and Culture, Income through Children,
Songs
III: Litreature and writings, Spiritual works,
Mantras
IV: Artistically Valuable goods, Inclination to
learn Arts, Fond of relationships,
Respecting relatives

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 240
V: Spiritual Interests, Sports and Games,
Reproductive capacity or Potency,
Supervising capacity, Arbitrator, Interest in
the field of Arts and Culture
VI: Cure from diseases, Clearing debts,
Recruitment, Reunion, Diet, Festivals and
Occassions
VII: Love making, Harmonious Married life,
Sociable towards Public, Second Child
VIII: Unexpected reflexes of mind, Sudden
Wisdom & knowledge, Unexpected
Romance, Sudden interests in Arts.
IX: Pilgrimage, Love with unknown persons,
Illegal affairs, Priests, Teaching moral
values, Preaching holy thoughts,
Retirements
X: Difficulties in Profession, Damage to Name
and Fame, Adjustability with others
especially in Profession
XI: Good Friendships, Mutual Agreements,
Contacts with Embassies
XII: Longevity of the Child, Secret Affairs, Loss
of articles which were preserved secretly etc,.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 241
V house would be a favourable house to
houses 1, 3, 5, 7 & 9 and would stand against
houses 2, 6,10 & 1 1 and would remain neutral to
houses 4, 8 & 12. These effects could be
possible when the sublord of the concerned
cusps remain in +he star or the sub of the sublord
of the V cusp.
Ascon V: Interest in Arts & Music, Romance and
Happiness
II onV: Singer, Money that is outstanding,
Purchase of Artistic goods
III on V: Lottery, Race, Stories and Articles in
Journals
IV on V: Excellence in Education, Vedas and
Arts, Moral Values
V on V: Sincere Love, Resistance capacity,
Conservative mind
VI on V: Relief from illness, Clearing debts,
Break in service
VllonV: Understanding with partner, Love
Marriage
Villon V: Spoiling Reputation both in Business
and in Romance
IX on V: Spiritual Beliefs and Education, Illegal
Affairs

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 242
X on V: Break in profession, Hurdles, Danger
to Reputations, Child with illhealth,
Break in love affairs
XI on V: Harmonious love affairs, Friendship,
Supervising capacity in Profession,
Success in Agreements
Xllon V: Loss of Secret money or articles,
Losses through Romance, Child with
lesser life.
V house would be favoured by houses 1,
3, 5, 7 & 9 and would be challenged by houses
neutral to the V house. This could happen when
the sublord of the V cusp remain in the star or
the sub of the concerned cusps.
V onAsc: Wisdom by birth, Interest in Arts and
Culture
V on II: Income through Arts and Music
Von III: Capacity to write stories, Favours
to child birth
Von IV: Producer of Artistically valued
Paintings, Sculptures, Teacher in
Artistic fields
Von V: Sincere love, Resistance capacity,

" Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 243
Conservative mind
Von VI: Dangers to Potency, Diseases in
Blood cells
Von VII: Love Marriage, Birth of Twins, Social
towards others
Von VI 1 1 : Spoiling Reputation, Breaks in
Profession, Dejections in love affairs
Von IX: Multiple affairs, Cure from diseases by
God's Grace, Success in worships,
Research-, Trustee, Service to God,
Tours to perform Arts
Von X: Professional Success in Arts and
Culture
Von XI: Harmonious Married life, Name and
fame through Arts &Culture, Mental
satisfaction
VonXIl: Worries and expenditure through
Affairs, Foreign Tours to express
Artisitic Skills, Birth of dead child.
POTENTIAL of the V HOUSE:
In this chart, the sublord of the V house
Jupiter is in the star & sub of Mercury, which is
the sublord of houses 2, 4 & 10.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
Houses 2, 4 & 10 would respectively
become houses 10, 12 & 6 to the V house. Hence
the potential of the V house is very weak in this
chart. V house would render Income through
professional success as a teacher in the fields
of Arts and Culture during the DBA periods of
Jupiter, the sublord of the V house.
Jupiter as the karaka planet for 2, 4 & 10
would provide the native with
i) Collection of Gold and Valuables etc.,
Improvements in Financial Status.
ii) Forming an Educational Institution
iii) Status and Respect
ASC on V:
Ascendant is a favourable house to the V
house. Asc sublord Mars is in the star of Sun,
the 6th sublord and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th
sublord. Houses 6 & 7 are 2 & 3 to the 5th. Hence
Asc is a highly favourable house to the 5th house
matters.
Principles:
General principles of linkage of the Asc
with the 5th house are as follows:

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 245
5: Interest in Sports, Music and arts, Drama
and Cinema, Intelligence etc.
5,2: Income through Commissions and from
the field of Arts
5,3: Name and fame in the field of Arts and
Music
5,4: Impotency, Master in Arts, Producers of
Artistically Valued goods.
5.6 Diseases in Blood Cells
5.7 Love affairs, Happy Married life
5.8 Damage to Reputations and Respect
5.9 Illegal Affairs, Addicted to bad habits like
Smoking, Drug abuse, Alchohol etc.,
Loss of interest in professions
5,10: Frequent changes or problems in
Profession, Music & Arts as career.
5,11: Harmonious and Care-free life, Sociable
5,12: Sudden losses, Problems by children,
Secret love & subsequent troubles.
Interest in artistic fields, Improvements in
social relations and harmonious romantic life
would be assured by Mars, the sublord of Asc,
during its DBA periods while it also transits in the
star of Jupiter, the sublord of the V house,

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
V on ASC:
General principles of linkage of the V
house with the Asc are as follows:
1,1: Status as a Prodigy
1,2: Singer, as a Prodigy
1,3: Writer, as a Prodigy
1,4: Born Intelligence par excellence
1,5: Excellence in Fine Arts
1,6: Successful person as an Artist
1,7: Specialist in Folk Arts
1,8: Inability to come to limelight despite
being a Genius in the fields of Arts and
Culture
1,9: Excellence in Spiritual and Religious Arts
1,10: Status as a Professional Artist in various
fields
1,11: Life as an Artist as desired
1,12: Dedication to the fields of Arts and
Culture
V house, as a naturally favourable house
to the Asc, with 2, 4 & 10 in its bag, would
enhance his professional life by giving
materialistic gains to the Asc, during the DBA
periods of Jupiter, while it also transits in the star

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
of Mars, the sublord of Asc.
II on V:
II house is a neutral house to the V house.
Mercury is the sublord of the II house and it
transits in the star of Venus, the 12th sublord
and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Hence 2
remain neutral to the significations of the V house.
General principles of linkage of the II
house with the V house are as follows:
5: Oratorical skills, Money that is
outstanding, Respectful Children,
Artistically valued products
5,1: Enjoying pleasures from personal savings
5,3: Versatile Speech, Gains from Lottery
or Race
5,4: Cosmetic goods, Jewels and purchase
of Vehicles
5,6: Income through Commission, Retirement
money, Cnit Funds
5,7: Money getting locked-up with others
5,8: Damage to reputations in the matters of
family & finance

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 248
5,9: Difficulties in getting the Retirement money
5,10:- Lesser work load in Profession
5,11: Money transactions through Good Friends
5,12: Losing money by getting cheated,
Clearing debts
5,7,12: Loss or Theft of money
3,5,9: Missing DD/Cheque
In this chart 2 is 2, 12 & 7. Hence the
native can never recover money invested in
gamblings and speculations and would incur
losses during the DBA periods of Mercury, the II
sublord and when it is in transit in the star of
Jupiter, the 5th sublord.
V on II:
General principles of linkage of the V
house with the II house are as follows:
2.1 Status as a Successful Gambler
2.2 Income through Lucky Wheels
2.3 Income from Playing Cards, Lotteries
2.4 Income through Bettings
2.5 Income through Speculation on Stocks
2.6 Income from Horse Races
2.7 Income through Bettings on Contest of

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 249
Animals and Birds
2,8: Income from Match-fixings and Criminal
means
2,9: Gains in Competitions
2,10: Professional Gambler
2,1 1 : Immense flow of money in Gamblings
2,12: Secret activities while Gambling
V house, though an unfavourable house
to the II house, with 2, 4 & 10 in its bag, would
enhance the professional life and would bring
materialistic gains to the native, during the DBA
periods of Jupiter, while if also transits in the star
or the sub of Mercury, the sublord of the II house.
Ill on V:
III house is a favourable house to the V
house. In this chart, the III sublord Mars is in the
star of Sun, the 6th sublord and in the sub of
Rahu, the sublord of the 7th house. Hence the
III house would remain as 3, 6 & 7 or 11 , 2 & 3 to
the V house and would become highly favourable
to the significations of the V house.
General principles of linkage of the III
house with the V house are as follows:

"Applications of Cusyal Interlinks" 250
5: Stories and Articles, Lottery and Race
5,1: Courage and Intelligence
5,2: Income through Speculation
5,4: Separation of children, Investments on
them
5,6: Success and Gains through Agreements
and Competitions
5,7: Adultery or Love even before teenage
5,8: Dejections in Agreements
5,9: Illegal affairs with Neighbour, Pilgrimage
and Tours, Well Educated
5,10: Memo, Charge-sheet, Adverse remarks in
Confidential Reports etc in Professional
life
5,8,10: Demotions in Profession
5,11: Pleasures and Satisfactions through
Agreements, Friendships.
5,12: Seizure of Belongings, Loss of Valuables
In this chart, 3 is 3,6&7; This combination
would render name, reputation and satisfaction
for the native through writing articles and books,
during the DBA periods of Mars, while it also
transits in the star of Jupiter, the V sublord.

Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
V on III:
General principles of linkage of the
house with the V house are as follows:
3.1 Status as a popular Commission Agent
3.2 Income through Commissions
3.3 Commissions as a Broker
3.4 Commission-based Trader
3.5 Popular Dealer
3.6 Service in Commission Agencies
3.7 Marriage Broker
3.8 Forgery and Cheatings
3.9 Pimp
3.10 Professional Agent
3,11: Agency for arranging Feasts and
Occassions
3,12: Commission based Secret Business
(Black Markets)
V house, as a naturally favourable house
to the III house, with 2, 4 & 10 in its bag, would
make the negotiations fail and would breach the
agreements made during the DBA periods of
Jupiter, while it also transits in the star of Mars,
the III sublord.

'Applications of C us pa l Interlinks
IV on V:
IV house is a house of negation to the V
house. In this chart, the sublord of the IV house
Mercury is in the star of Venus, the 12th sublord
and in the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Hence
the IV house stands as 4,12 & 7 or as 12, 8 & 3
to the V house and thus remains as an
unfavourable house.
General principles of linkage of the IV
house with the V house are as follows:
5: Interest in Holy Books, Intelligence in
gaining knowledge
5, 1 : Prodigy, Well Educated
5,2: Income from Lands, Vehicles and Houses
5,3: Publishing books, Separation from children
5,6: Viral fever, Diseases in blood cells or in
productive organs
5,7: Love affairs with a person belonging to the
same family or who is living in the, same
Apartments
5,8: Damage to Reputation by persons
belonging to the same family or by persons
living in the same Apartments
5,9: Higher studies, Illegal affairs with persons

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks “ 253
of the same family or with persons
residing in the same Apartments
5,10: Commissions from Manufacturings
5,12: Losses through persons of the same
family or the residents in the same
Apartments or street
In this chart, IV, because it is 12, 8 & 3 to
the V house, would give birth to a dead child
and would give unexpected troubles to the
significations of the V house, during the DBA
periods of Mercury, during its transit in the star
of Jupiter, the V sublord.
V on IV:
General principles of linkage of the V
house with the IV house are as follows:
4.1 Love failure by being Egoistic
4.2 Love failure due to Financial Reasons
4.3 Love failure due to problems in
Communications
4.4 Lack of needed interest in Romance
4.5 Happy Reunion after Love Failure
4.6 Love failure by rejecting Marriage
Proposals

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks'1 254
4,7: Love failure subsequent to Marriage
4,8: Love failure due to Shameful
Circumstances
4,9: Failure in Love Affair by coming to know
that the person is already married
4,1 0: Love failure subsequent to
Dissatisfactions
4,1 1 : Love failure after having Sexual Pleasures
4,12: Love failure due to Undisclosed Reasons
V house, as a neutral house .to the IV
house, with 2, 4 & 10 in its bag, would provide
favourable scope to the purchase of lands,
houses and vehicles, during the DBA periods of
Jupiter, while it also transits in the star of
Mercury, the IV sublord.
V on V:
V house, as a naturally favourable house
to itself, but with 2, 4 & 10 in its bag, turns
unfavourable to itself. Hence it would give
problems to the health of children, failures in love
affairs, dejections in romance etc, during the DBA
periods of Jupiter, while it also transits in its own
star.

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 255
VI on V:
VI house is a neutral house to the V house.
In this chart, Sun the 6th sublord resides in the
star of Venus, the 12th sublord and in the sub of
Jupiter, the sublord of houses 5 & 1 1 . Hence the
the 5th house to remain as a neutral house.
General principles of linkage of the VI
house with the V house are as follows:
5: Clearing Debts, Cure from Diseases,
Retirement from Service
5,1: Blood cell disorders
5,2: Reliable servants, Money for the period of
Medical Leave, Tasty Foods, Educating the
Children in traditional Arts
5,3: Suspension orders, Adverse remarks in
PRs'or CRs.
5,4: Cure from diseases to suffer from some
other disease
5,7: Love affairs with the Servants
5,8: Damage to reputations by servants,
Problems in service
5,9: Illegal affairs with servants or subordinates.
Break in sevice, Borrowings with Higher

'Applications of C us pa l Interlinks'
rate of interest
5,10: Problems in service created by Superiors,
Working for a moderate salary
5,11: Out of court settlements in litigations,
Friends to assume accountability to clear
the debts of the native
5,12: Clearing debts, Change of Profession due
to problems in the First Profession
In this chart the 6th house is 6, 1 2, 5 & 1 1
or to say 2, 8, 1 & 7 to the 5th house. This
combination would improve the professional
status of the native as supervisor and would help
to get cured from illness. It would also enable
the native to clear his debts and to reach an
amicable settlement in litigations during the DBA
periods of Sun while it is in transit in the star of
Jupiter, the 5th sublord.
V on VI:
General principles of linkage of the V
house with the VI house are as follows:
6,1: Inactiveness due to disorders in blood
cells
6,2: Eye-diseases caused by Virus
6,3: Diseases in sensory organs caused by

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 257
Virus
6,4: Failures in productive organs caused by
Virus
6,5: Recovered from disorders of blood cells
6,6: Prolonged sufferings due to disorders
in blood cells
6,7: Infections subsequent to disorders in
blood cells
6,8: Painful diseases with high intensity
caused by disorders of blood cells
6,9: Malignant growth caused by disorders
of blood cells
6,10: Chronic diseases caused by disorders
of blood cells
6,11: Decrease in resistance power caused by
disorders in blood cells (AIDS)
6,12: Failures in functioning of the body caused
by disorders in blood cells
V house, as an unfavourable house to the
VI house, with 2, 4 & 10 in its bag, remains
neutral to the significations of the VI house and
would render permanent diseases in neuro
system and problems due to sudden increase in
cholestrol, during the DBA periods of Jupiter,
while it also transits in the star of Sun, the 6th
sublord.

Annlications of C
VII on V:
VII house is highly favourable to the V
house. In this chart, the VII sublord Rahu is in
the star of Sun, the 6th sublord but in its own
sub; It means VII house is 6 & 7 or 2 & 3 to the
5th house to remain as a favourable house.
General principles of linkage of the VII
house with the V house are as follows:
5,1 : Happy and Harmonious married life
5,2: Gains through partner, Longevity of
Husband/Wife
5,3: Selfish, Fond of frequent journeys, Illegal
• affairs of H/W
5,4: Disharmony in married life, Marriage
among relatives
5,6: Reunion with partner, Secret activities of
H/W. Affectionate and Possesive H/W
5,8: Damages to reputation and respect by
H/W or 2nd Child
5,9: Copulation with lover, Mutiple love affairs
5,10: Loving someone who does not care about
the native, Satisfaction to the opposite
sex alone.
5,11: Harmonious married life, Sociable towards

others in business life
5,12: Problems caused by opposite sex,
Seizure of properties
In this chart, since the 7th house is 6 & 7
and 2 & 3 to the V house, would enable the
native for a harmonious married life but would
deny the scope of success in partnership deeds
during the DBA periods of Rahu, the 7th sublord
while it also transits in the star of Jupiter, the V
sublord.
Von VII:
General principles of linkage of the V
house with the VII house are as follows:
7.1 Love marriage in a Cordial Atmosphere
7.2 Love marriage subsequent to problems
7.3 Love marriage after eloping from the
native place
7.4 Love marriage at the native place
7.5 Harmonious and Happy love marriage
7.6 Separation after love marriage
7.7 Love marriage with social recognition
7.8 Love marriage subsequent to tensions
and threatenings
7,9: Love marriage at a far off place from the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 260
native place
7,10: Love marriage after seeking asylum at
Police stations
7,11: Love marriage with the assistance of
friends
7,12: Love marriage held secretly or by
absconding from the native place
V house, as a naturally favourable house
to the VII house, with 2, 4 & 10 in its bag, would
give dejections and dissatisfactions in married
life but success in professional life and in
partnerships, during the DBA periods of Jupiter,
while it also transits in the star of Rahu, the 7th
sublord.
VIII on V:
VIII house is an unfavourable house to the
V house. In this chart, the VIII sublord Saturn is
in the star of Mars, the sublord of houses 1 & 3
and in the sub of Jupiter, the sublord of houses 5
& 11. Hence VIII becomes to be read as 8, 1,3,
5&1 1 or4, 9, 11,1 & 7 to the 5th house. Now an
unfavourable house turns into a favourable house
to the 5th house.
General Principles of linkage of the VIII
house with the V house are as follows:

Applications of Cuspal Interlinks"
5.1 Unexpected love affairs
5.2 Unexpected profits or commission
5.3 Sudden wisdom, Sudden expression of
experience, Thoughts about the past
5,4: Unexpected Academic knowledge
5,6: Child Birth due to sudden medical aid,
Sudden interests in Arts and Culture
5,7: Unexpected love marriage
5,9: Unexpected and illegal love affairs
5,10: Unexpected Suspension/Dismissal
5,11: Unexpected Mutual Agreements
5,12: Unexpected losses, Clearing debts all
of a sudden
In this chart, since the 8th house is 8, 1,3, 5
&11 or as 4, 9, 11,1 & 7 to the V house, the native
would not face dangers to his name and fame,
respect and reputation and need not worry about
unexpected problems and losses during the DBA
periods of Saturn, the 8th sublord while it also
transits in the star or sub of Jupiter, the V sublord.
V on VIII:
General principles of linkage of the V
house with the VIII house are as follows:

"Applications of Cusval Interlinks" 262
8,1: Tension and mental worries in love affairs
8,2: Wordy quarrels in love affairs
8,3: Rumors and misunderstandings in love
affairs
8,4: Violent tiffs in love affairs
8,5: Disrespect in love affairs
8,6: Litigations on love affairs
8,7: Growing enmity in love affairs
8,8: Suicide attempts in love affairs
8,9: Dishonesty in love affairs
8,10: Damages to the respect and status in
love affairs
8,11: Coming out of circumstances that may
spoil the reputation of the native in love
affairs
8,12: Absconding subsequent to damages to
reputation in love affairs
V house, as a neutral house to the VIII
house, with 2, 4 & 10 in its bag, would provide
unexpected gains and would enable him to claim
insurance money etc, during the DBA periods of
Jupiter, while it also transits in the star of Saturn,
the 8th sublord.

Applications of Cuspal Interlinks
IX on V:
IX house is a favourable house to the 5th
house. Moon is the sublord of the 9th house and
is in the star of Sun, the 6th sublord and in the
sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Hence 9th house
becomes 9, 6 & 7 or 5, 2 & 3 to the 5th house to
remain as a favourable house to the V house.
General principles of linkage of the IX
house with the V house are as follows:
5,1: Excellence in knowledge and thoughts,
Grace of god
5.2 Profit and gains through Traditional Arts
5.3 'Knowledge in mutiple subjects
5.4 Institution or Knowledge in Arts and
Culture
5,6: Scholarships to studies of Arts and
Culture, Transplantation
5,7: 2nd marriage or affairs with strangers
5,8: Damage to reputations and respect by
unknown persons or 2nd marriage
5,10: Profession in the field of Arts and Culture,
in which the native is academically
qualified
5,11: Cordial agreements or negotiations with

Applications of Cusycil Interlinks
unknown persons
5,12: Research in foreign arts and culture
In this chart, the 9th house, because it is
5, 2 & 3 to the 5th house, would enable the
native to gain knowledge and wisdom, to express
his natural abilities, to have faith in religion and
spiritualism, to proceed on pleasure trips and to
keep illegal affairs during the DBA periods of
Moon, the 9th sublord while Moon is in transit in
the star of Jupiter, the 5th sublord.
V on IX:
General principles of linkage of the V
house with the IX house are as follows:
9.1 Status as a Spiritual person
9.2 Income through Spiritual means
9.3 Popular Spiritual personality
9.4 Teacher in Spiritual Studies
9.5 Trustee of Spiritual Institutions
9.6 Servant in the schools of Spiritual
Studies
9.7 Public service as a Spiritual person
9.8 Disrespect caused in Spiritual studies
9.9 Researcher in Spiritual fields, Pilgrimage
9,10: Priest in Spiritual fields

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 265
9,1 1 : Supernatural powers in Spiritual fields
9,12: Research studies about Holy Places
V house, as a naturally favourable house
to the IX house, with 2, 4 & 10 in its bag, would
bring the researches to an end, give troubles
during long journeys and spoil the reputation of
the native in his illegal affairs, during the DBA
periods of Jupiter, while it also transits in the star
of Moon, the IX sublord.
X on V:
X house is a neutral house to the V house.
In this chart, the sublord of the X house Mercury
is in the star of Venus, the 12th sublord and in
the sub of Rahu, the 7th sublord. Hence the X
house stands as 10,1 2 & 7 or as 6, 8 & 3 to the V
house and thus becomes as an unfavourable
house.
General principles of linkage of the X
house with the V house are as follows:
5,1: Problems in Professional life due to
Immoral Acts
5,2: Strike or problems to raise wages or
salary
5,3: Problems due to change of job/place

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 266
5,4: Jealousy and competitions with
colleagues
5,6: Increase in work loads, Problems in
Promotion
5,7: Problems caused by Superiors
5,8: Damage to Reputation in Professional Life
5,10: Break in Service
5,11: Capacity as Supervisor
5,12: Change of Profession as the first
Profession is not profit-worthy
5,9,12:Change of profession by winding up
the 1st
In this chart, X, through its link of 6, 8 & 3
to the V house, would give unexpected troubles
such as spoiling the reputation and respect of
the native in his professional field and in artistic
life, during the DBA periods of Mercury, during
its transit in the star of Jupiter, the V sublord.
VonX:
General principles of linkage of the V
house with the X house are as follows:
10,1: Status and Respect as a Professional
Artist

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 267
10,2: Income as a Professional Artist
10,3: Popularity as a Professional Artist
10,4: Teacher of arts or Producer of Artistically
Valued goods
10,5: Poor in the Profession of Arts and
Culture.
10,6: Service as a Professional Artist
10,7: Self ventures in the fields of Arts and
Culture.
10,8: Hard labour as a Professional Artist
10,9: Professional failures as an Artist
10,10: Reputation as a Professional Artist.
10,11: Entertaining Professional Artist.
10,12: Multiple Professions in the fields of Arts
and Culture
V house, as a neutral house to the X
house, with 2, 4 & 10 in its bag, would enhance
the professional life as teacher in the field of arts
and bring materialistic gains, status and respect,
during the DBA periods of Jupiter, while it also
transits in the star of Mercury, the X sublord.
XI on V:
XI house is an unfavourable house to the
5th house. Jupiter is the sublord of the 1 1th house

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 268
and is in the star and the sub of Mercury, the
sublord of houses 2, 4 & 1 0. Now, the 11th house
becomes 7,10, 12, & 6 to the V house.
General principles of linkage of the XI
house with the V house are as follows:
5,1: Harmonious married life, Love affairs with
friend
5,2: Higher Commissions through arts and
culture
5,3: Very good friends, Mutual understandings
5,4: Continuing Education with the assistance
of friends, Hiring Land or Vehicles
5,6: Cure from diseases, Success in Sports,
Games
5,7: Marrying a friend or Marriage with the help
of friends
5,8: Damage to reputations and respect by
friends
5,9: Illegal affairs with friends, Deep thoughts
and Wisdom
5,10: Hurdles in Profession due to friends
5,12: Falling prey at the hands of opposite sex,
introduced by friends to lose money and
properties

"Applications of C us pal Interlinks" 269
XI house, since it is 1 0, 1 2, 6 & 7 to the V
house would spoil the harmonious life of the
native and would bring failures in love affairs,
dissatisfactions in life during the DBA periods of
Jupiter, while it also transits in its own star, as
sublord of the V house.
V on XI:
General principles of linkage of the V
house with the XI house are as follows:
11,1: Happy Person
11,2: Income through happy means
11,3: Satisfied Person
11,4: Satisfaction in Collection of Artistic Goods
11,5: Satisfaction in the fields of Arts and
Culture.
11,6: Satisfaction through success in the fields
of Arts and Culture.
11,7: Satisfaction through social recognition
as an Artist
11,8: Unexpected satisfaction and pleasant
surprises in the fields of Arts and Culture.
1 1 ,9: Satisfaction in research activities in the
fields of Arts and Culture
11,10: Satisfaction by winning reputation in the

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 270
fields of Arts and Culture
11,11: Immense satisfaction in the fields of Arts
And Culture
11,12: Satisfaction through inventions in the
fields of Arts and Culture
V house, as an unfavourable house to the
XI house, with 2, 4 & 10 in its bag, would bring
dissatisfactions in spiritual and personal life but
would enhance the professional life, during the
DBA periods of Jupiter, while it also transits in it
own star as it happens to be the sublord of the
XI house also.
XII on V:
XII house is a house of danger to the V
house. Venus, the sublord of the 12th house is
in the star of Moon, the 9th sublord and in its
own sub to denote the combined significations
of 9 & 12 or 5 & 8 to the 5th house to form an
unfavourable combination to the V house.
General principles of linkage of the XII
house with the V house are as follows:
5,1 : Secret and deep thoughts, Masturbation
5,2: Secret gains by way of Commission,
Share capital
Secret Articles locked at the hands of

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 271
others, Surveillance by Partner
5,4: Articles and Valuables through
Investments
5,6: Cure from diseases through Diet and
Medicines
5,7: Secret Love Marriage
5,8: Damage to Reputations and Respect by
Secret Activities
5,9: Break in 2nd Profession, Secrecy in
Illegal Affairs
5,10: Loss in First Profession due to excessive
investments in the 2nd.
5,11: Secret Agreements and Secret
Friendships
The combination of 9 & 1 2 or 5 & 8 to the
5th house by the 12th house in this chart, would
enable the native to continue his researches in
the field of arts and would lead to involvements
in secret activities during the DBA periods of
Venus, while it also transits in the star of Jupiter,
the 5th sublord.
Von XII:
General principles of linkage of the V
house with the XII house are as follows:

"Applications of Cusyal Interlinks" 272
12,1: Statusful Investor in the fields of Arts &
Culture
12,2: Income as an Investor in the fields of A&C
12,3: Popular Investor in the fields of A & C
12,4: Investor and Producer in the fields of A&C
12,5: Investor and Performer in the fields of A&C
12,6: Investing and Rendering services in the
fields of Arts and Culture
12,7: Incurring losses in investments in the
fields of Arts and Culture
12,8: Getting disappointed by way of
investments in the fields of Arts and
Culture
12,9: Investing for performances abroad in the
fields of Arts and Culture
12,10:Managing the prior investments in the
fields of Arts and Culture
12,11: Investments in the fields of A&C as
desired
12,12:Re-investments in the fields of A & C
V house, as a neutral house to the XII
house, with 2, 4 & 1 0 in its bag, would enable the
native to make higher investments, to gain
through investments, and to gain success in 2nd
profession, during the DBA periods of Jupiter,

"Applications of Cuspal Interlinks" 273
while it also transits in the star of Venus, the
sublord of XII house.
PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS:
To the significations of the V house
matters, the planets would stand as follows:
VEN 8,5
Even though the planets Sun and Saturn
remain as the permanent and the routine
significators to the V house as they happen to
reside in the sub of Jupiter, the 5th sublord, the
remaining planets would also act accordingly in
relation with their combined significations on the
V house during their respective DBA periods
while they also happen to transit in the star of
Jupiter, the sublord of the V house.
