READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: jyotish_kp_new_dimensions_of_kp_astro_prabhakar.json
Dataset number: 235 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 187,736 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Jyotish_KP_new dimensions of KP astro_Prabhakar
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Jyotish_KP_new dimensions of KP astro_Prabhakar
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Surya Siddhanta XML
  • total_pages: 233
  • total_words: 33107
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.957
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
New Dimensions
of
K.P. Astrology
Dr. Arastu Prabhakar

New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology is an extension
of the research by great savant of astrology late
professor Krishnamurti. The importance of traditional
astrology can neither be mitigated nor ignored
because all systems of prognostication of future have
got generated from it. K.P. too is no exception. The
book is unique blending of K.P. as well as traditional
astrology. The proved principles of traditional
astrology have been beautifully incorporated with
K.P. to make it more meaningful and trustworthy.
After making tedious research over a decade of time
various confusions which persisted even in the books
of K.P. have been sorted out with logical
explanations. In the present time the utility of horary
astrology as compared to natal astrology is much
more. Horary astrology has given rise to mobile
astrology or telephone astrology.

Dr. Arasatu Prabhakar the author of Marriage and
Prostitution, is an eminent astrologer of India. His various books
on astrology like The Third Eye of Vedas, Horary Astrology
(Hindi) (Nishkam Peeth Prakashan); A Novel Approach to
predictions, have already made rapid strides. He delivers lectures
on K.P. Astrology he was awarded doctorate by Vikram Shila
University, Bhagalpur, Bihar for his research work on astrology.

PREFACE
After overwhelming response of Times Prana Jyotish
(Hindi) and Horary Astrology - a Novel Approach to
Predictions ( Nishkam Peeth Prakashan , R-12A, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi), The Third eye of Vedas (Diamond
Publication, New Delhi), the necessity of a book in the wake
of research conducted over the influence of planets on human
life, covering all aspects of day-to-day life, was greatly felt.
There are many problems that emerge in day-to-day life and
cannot be solved with the help of natal astrology. Such questions
can effectively be dealt with only horary astrology. The present
book is the outcome of such thoughts. K.P. astrology is getting
momentum day by day due to its practical utility and for making
scintillating predictions . New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
is an extension of the research by great savant of astrology late
professor Krishnamurti. The importance of traditional astrology
can neither be mitigated nor ignored because all systems of
prognostication of future have got generated from it. K.P. too
is no exception. The book is unique blending of K.P. as well
as traditional astrology. The proved principles of traditional
astrology have been beautifully incorporated with K.P. to make
it more meaningful and trustworthy. After making tedious
research over a decade of time various confusions which
persisted even in the books of K.P. have been sorted out
with logical explanations. In the present time the utility of
horary astrology as compared to natal astrology is much more.
Horary astrology has given rise to mobile astrology or telephone
astrology. The queries need not present himself or herself before
the astrologer but simply can ask any question any time from
any part of world on mobile or telephone. Within 10 minutes
he is given clear cut answer either in yes or no. Thus horary
.astrology has saved not only the time of people but also their
energy and money. There is a some sort of confusion over
selection of ruling planets. This confusion is not only present

in the software of astrology but also in the book of K.P.
After solving more than two thousand questions of horary
astrology I have reached the conclusion that selection of
ruling planets is almost incorrect and erroneous. Proper
explanations have been given in the book over selection of
ruling planets. Another important feature of this book is that
practical case study examples have been classified housewise.
Now it is very simple and convenient for the readers to select
to which query which house or cusp is to be considered. A
few questions for which no particular house is judged have
also been included in this book so that readers may become
familiar with such type of queries.
I would like to bring to the attention of readers that any book
of the world is only a source of information. The intellect and
wisdom convert it into knowledge. Thus the ultimate source
of knowledge is intellect and wisdom of the readers. I would
also like to make it clear that the contents of whole book
are the outcome of research and deep concentration only
on horary astrology. Each sentence and all the examples
included in the book have been found to be practically correct
without exceptions.
The theory part of this book is absolutely based on proved .
cases; therefore each word and sentence is important for the
readers. Specific comments have also been given in a few
cases in which confusion may arise in the mind of readers.
I hope readers will give warm response to the book. I also
request the readers to bring to my knowledge any fallacy or
missing part which they think ought to be included in the book.
I am thankful to all my clients whose continuous interaction
helped me to deal with questions of different nature and varieties.
I owe my sincere thanks to the editor and publisher of this
book, Shri Narendra Verma of Diamond Publication for bringing
out this book. Last but not the least I pay my, respects to Shri
Daya Shankar (I.R.S.), an eminent Vedic as well as K.P.
Astrologer. .
I bow my head before almighty Lord Ganesha for his grace
which ignited in me a the passion for astrology.
Dr. Arastu Prabhaker
t
14, Saraswati Nagar,
Balkeshwar Road

Foreword
It is a moment of pleasure and delight that eminent writer and
astrologer Dr. Arastu Prabhakar has started making public his
long researches over K.P. astrology in the form ofbooks. His fifth
book on astrology, The Third Eye of Vedas, was received with
overwhelming response across the country.
The name of late Professor Krishnamurti is well known in
modem astrology. He did sincere and serious research in the field
of astrology and given it a new dimension. For some time the
work of Krishnamurti was neither recognised nor respected by
traditional astrologers due to one or another reason. It was only in
1 996 when Dr. Arastu Prabhakar, and Shri Daya Shankar (IRS)
recognised the importance and face value of the work of Late
K.P. Their efforts yielded results and astrologers as a whole came
to know about the amazing system of prognostication. Dr. Arastu
has gone a step ahead and blended the traditional astrology with
that of K.P. to make it a compendium of vast knowledge. He has
also tried to bridge the gaps which persisted in the work of K.P.
to make it lucid and easily comprehensible. The present book is
an almost complete book on horary astrology.
Dr. Arastu Prabhakar a well-known writer of English has
excelled in the field of astrology too. His recent-released book on
various social and cultural issues, Marriage and Prostitution,
has rocked the nation. It is very difficult to deduce whether his
literary capabilities override his astrological knowledge or his
astrological skills have precedence over literary appetite. His
lectures on K.P astrology throughout the country have produced
many followers who have astonished the clientele by making
scihtdlatingpredictions.
The present book is an extension of K.P. astrology with
practically proved examples. I am grateful to Shri Narendra Varma
of Diamond Pocket Books for publishing the work of Dr. Arastu

Prabhakar. I offermy blessings to Dr. Arastu Prabhakar and expect
warm response for this book from all lovers of astrology.
Mahakavi Padmavibhusan
Dr. Gopal Dass Neeraj
Chairman
Uttar Pradesh Bhasha Sansthan
and
Chancellor
Manglaytan University
Aligarh U.P.

INDEX
Part -I (Theory)
1. Brief History of Horary Astrology 17
2. Nomenclatures and Explanations 19
3. Importance of Horary Astrology 22
4. Ancient Text books of Horary Astrology 24
5. Significations of Planets & Signs 40
6. Houses 50
7. Sub-lord 57
8. Ruling Planets & Signficators 60
9. Cusp (Bhava) Determination 66
10. Subjects of Horary Astrology 71
1 1. Cuspal and Traditional Chart 78
Part - II (Case Studies)
First House
1. How will be the tenure in the office? 82
2. Party will give ticket or not 85
3. Court decision * 1 88
4. Court decisions - 2 91
5. Decision delivered by lower court 94
would be stayed or not?
w
Second House
8. Improvement of financial position 103
9. Reinstatement in service 106

Third House
10. Sex of the Child of the Fourth Son 110
11. How Long One Will Stay at a Place 113
Fourth House
12. Will I Get Through P.G Exam of M.B. B. S.? 1 16
. 13. Success in P.G Examination of M.B.B.S, 1 19
14. Success in Competitive Examination- 1 122
15. Purchase of Land- 1 • 125
16. Purchase of Land-2 128
Fifth House
17. Admission of Son in Medical College 131
18. Determination of Sex of Child 134
19. Will My Love Affair Materialize? - 1 137
20. Will My Love Affair Materialize?- 2 140
21 . Will My Love Affair Materialize?- 3 142
Sixth House
22. Entangled Money 145
23. Borrowing from Bank 149
24. Borrowing fromRelative 152
25. Litigation 155
Seventh House
26. When Will Marriage Take Place? 158
27. Second Marriage 161
28. Integrity of Partner 165
29. Well-being of Wife 168
Eighth House
30. Appointment of Wife 171
Ninth House
31. Foreign Journey 174

PART— I
Theory

Brief History of Horary /
Astrology
It is very difficult to answer when horary astrology came into
existence. However it could be assumed that with the dawn of
human existence astrology too got evolved with the evolution of
mankind. Vedas have mentioned about astrology. Therefore origin
of. Vedas as well as astrology could be inferred some three
thousands years before Christ.
Horary astrology used to be called Hora Shastra as per ancient
classical literatures. It means horary astrology was studied as a
separate branch or distinct subject from general astrology. The
word Horary is derived from the word Hora meaning Hour. In
ancient times astrologers used to make predictions on the basis of
words uttered by the querent. Later predictions were made on
the basis of gestures, Nadi breaths, articles in the hand etc. In the
time of Prithuyasas, the son of Varahamihira, this system of
prediction was developed, refined, rectified and advanced
systematically. This branch of astrology flourished in ninth, tenth
and eleventh A. D. Many traditional authors have written books
on this subject. Prasnachintamani, Prasnajnanam,
Prasnamarga, Prasna Bhusana, Prasnatantra,
Satpanchasika, Prasna-Bhairava, Bhuvan Deepika Prasna
Churnamani etc.
Astrologers used to deliver forecast on the basis of words
uttered by the querent or his sitting gesture, direction etc. were
the guiding principles to reach the conclusion regarding the query.
Then they resorted to different methods of prediction i.e.^querent
used to mentionone number outof 108. Ascendantwas erected
on the basis of the number as mentioned by the querent and the

results were read. What is the mystery of taking numbers up to
1 08? The whole zodiac is divided into 27 constellations or
Nakshatras. Each constellation is divided into four padas.
Therefore, 27 constellations have 27 x 4 = 1 08 padas. In this
way the number up to 1 08 consists of the whole zodiac. This
makes amply clear that constellations were used in making
predictions which was recently developed and advanced by Late
K.S . Krishnamurti.
Westemersbelieved that Seth was the founder of astrology and
existed in 3769 B.C. It is said about Seholan that he divided the
whole zodiac into 1 2 parts. He was the first to announce that the
sun rotates and his rotation is responsible for day and night. He
also divided the elliptic and the divided part was called Mazzaroth.
Chaldean in 2600 B.C. studied and advanced this science and
was able to maintain a relationship between planets and their impact
on life. According to Dr. Thompson, the Sumerians studied the
zodiac and the universe. Astrology flourished well in Babylon,
Egypt and Greek.
In the field of horary astrology William Lily is a well-known
name both in India as well as in the West. He lived in 1 602-8 1
A.D. Alan Leo, Edwin Castle, John Wilson, Charles Hathfied
etc., worked untiringly developed this science. There is some
difference of opinion between Indians and Westerners as far as
reading of nativity is concerned. Indians take seriously the position
of planets in particular house and the aspect among the planets is
secondary in importance to them, whereas westerners decide on
the basis of aspects formed among the planets. Indians adopt
Niryana basis while westerners advocate Sayana basis.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Nomenclatures and
Explanations
1. Zodiac - According to traditional astrology the zodiac
commences from a constant point. This constant point is 1 80°
away from Chitra (spica) Nakshatra. But according to western
astrology the zodiac commences from Aries sign 0 degree and
retreats back by 50.23 seconds per year.
2. Sayana and Niryana system : According to western
astrology the sun is pivot to calculate or delineate the results. Moon
is the central point for all calculations in Indian astrology. According
to western astrology the S un moves on Aries si gn to b et ween 2 1
March to 20 April while the Sun moves on Pisces sign between
this period as per Hindu astrology.
Example - The position of sun as per Niryana system on 2 1
March 2002 at5.30am(l.S.T.)is
In order to get Sayana position of the Sun, add Ayanamsa
of this year to Nirayana position of the Sun.
Conversion Formula is :
i Sayana position of the planet - Ayanamsa of that year=
Niryana position
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

ii. Niryana position of the planet + Ayanamsa of the year =
Sayana position
3. What is Ayanamsal In western astrology or Sayana system
for the calculations of constellations and planets an imaginary
constantpointis conceived. This constantpoint never changes.
Therefore the position of constellations and planets also does not
change. The distance between this constant point and vernal
equinox (the beginning point of Aries sign) is called Ayanamsa.
The tropical and sidereal points coincide in 285 A.D. On 22
March 285 A.D, the tropical and sidereal points were the same
As per late K.S. Krishnamurti, the tropical and sidereal points
were the same in 29 1 A.D. Therefore, there is a d ifference of six
minutes between the Ayanamsa of N.C. Lahari and that of
Krishnamurti. Horoscope prepared on the basis ofTCP. must strictly
ioWovj Ayanamsa as propounded by late Krishnamurti.
4. What is Day : The period from sunrise to next sunrise is
termed as day in traditional astrology while in civil time the day
changes after 1 2.00 midnight.
Example : A baby is bom at 3.00 midnight on 3 March 2002.
The Sun rises at 6.45 am on 3 March 2002 and at 6.46 am on 4
March 2002 . As per trad itional astrology the date of birth of this
baby is 3 March while as per civil time it is 4 March. In horary
astrology always take civil time because day is one of the important
ruling planets.
5. House or Bhava and Cusp : Accordingto Indian astrology
the zodiac is divided into twelve parts. Each part is called house
or Bhava. The longitude of zodiac is 360°. Therefore each part is
of thirty degree in longitude. The word cusp though signifies a
house yet it has different meaning from general sense of a house
or Bhava. Cusp is actually the beginning point of a house. The
beginning point of a house is considered to be very influential as
well as powerful. This is generally a western concept and quite
scientific in nature. In Placidus system ofhouse division each Bhava
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

or house varies in longitude. A particular Bhava may be of 30
degree or more or less from 30 degree but the total of 1 2 cusps
or houses will always be 360 degrees in longitude.
6. Transit or Gochara : The entrance of the planet into the
sign is called transit or Gochara. The transit effect of the planets
is studied in respect to the position of moon at the time of birth.
Now-a-days many astrologers read transit results in respect to
ascendant.
7. Which House Signify Father : Few astrologers read results
pertaining to father from tenth house. The logic behind is that since
fourth house denotes mother seventh to fourth house is tenth house.
However, many astrologers assign ninth house to father. We take
ninth house as the seat of father. In horary questions pertaining to
father always take ninth house for judgment.
8. Constellation : There are 27 constellations. Though one
more constellation, i.e. Abhijeet, find place among the constellations
but it is not used. Each constellation measures 1 3° - 20' or 800
minutes in longitude. These 27 constellations are divided among
nine planets. Each planet consists of 2 % stars or 9 Padas. These
27 constellations are further divided into 249 parts and each part
is called sub-lord.
9. Sub Lord : The 27 constellations were divided into 249
parts. Each part is called sub lord. It was the valuable contribution
of Late K.S. Krishnamurti to the astro-world. How this sub lord
is worked out and what it signifies has been explained elsewhere.
10. Ruling Planets : It is also an innovation ofK.P. In order to
reach the timing of any event ruling planets are most helpful. With
the help of ruling planets one can pinpoint the event with correct
date and time.
11. Significators : It is also a new concept. Significators signify
the matter in question. In fact the significators hypothesis rests on
the use of constellations lord in predictive astrology.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Importance of
Horary Astrology
The utility of any science, whether it is astrology or
any other subject, lies in the factwhatthe society in general gets
benefit of it. If any subject ceases to yield beneficresults to society
it becomes obsolete in due course of time. Time is an important
factor in astrology. In fact astrology cannot be imagined without
time. Therefore, in some sacred texts time is declared to be God.
Horary astrology has greater utility than natal astrology in today’s
fast changing world.
1 . Almost in all the horoscopes, time is not recorded correctly.
This error lies in the fact that even two watches in the same room
do not show identical time. When a baby is bom either in hospital
or in a nursing home the watch in the labour room is un-identical ,
to the watches of the parents waiting outside. The difference
between watches may range from four minutes to eight minutes.
Minute difference of three to four minutes changes sub lord
of cusp which ultimately changes the reading of entire
nativity.
2. The principles governing natal astrology cannot be verified
easily, whereas predictions made in horary astrology may be
verified within hours, days or months because query is always
related to coming days or months. Therefore, horary astrology is
the best method for carrying out research in the field of astrology.
3 . Horary astrology works on certain proved principles. The
significations of planets and houses can be easily ascertained. There
are many significations of planets and houses but the particular
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

signification of a particular planet or house is only known with the
help of horary astrology.
4. Pinpoint prediction devoid of double-meaning sense could
be possible only in horary astrology. In horary astrology the answer
is given either in Yes or No. Whereas horary astrology gives the
exact date and time for the fructification of any event, it is never
possible in natal astrology.
5. Day-to-day events like arrival of a friend, light going or
coming back, rumour false or true, reservation of berth in train
possible or not, love affairs would materialize or not, etc., can be
answered only by the horary astrology.
6. Horary astrology has greater utility when question pertaining
to winning or losing of three or four persons who are in election
fray comes up. It deals effectively with such questions.
7. Horary astrology is also helpful in deciding bride and
bridegroom among the list. It not only clearly and effectively decides
but also gives precise judgment about the character and nature of
bride and bridegroom.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Ancient Textbooks of Horary
Astrology
The principles enunciated in traditional textbooks on horary
astrology can not be branded as the whole thing in general. It
should be admitted candidly that progress made in recent times in
astrology is the outcome of serious work on traditional books.
Therefore the importance of traditional astrology can neither be
minimized nor overlooked.
The principles found in old books are cosmopolitan in nature
and deep study of these principles reveals unfailing predictions.
In todays fast-moving world it is not possible to gjve much time
and energy to study these principles and majority of astrologers
need easily memorable, research-proven and least time- consuming
formulae which could be applied even while moving on a busy
road.
For the benefit of the readers, translations of a few old books
on horary astrology have been made:
Prasna Gyana :
1 . Bhattotpala is the author of this book and it commences with
bowing to all the planets. ( Sloka - 1)
2. Horary astrology never fails, boldly declared Bhattotpala.
Ten conditions of planets are to be kept in mind before answering
any horary question. ( Sloka - 2)
The ten conditions are as follows :
i. Deepta : If the concerned planet is found to be either in
exaltation sign or in Mooltrikona sign, the planet is said to be in
Deepta stage. This condition shows good results.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

ii. Swastha : When the planet is found to be in own sign, the
condition is called Swastha and shows good results.
in. Pramudita : Planet in friendly sign. Result is moderate.
iv. Shanta : The planet if placed in the Va rgas ofanybenefic
planet is called Shanta. Maharishi Parasara propounded Vargas
kundali viz. Navamsa, Dasmansa, Dwadasamsa etc. If planet
is found to be in benefic sign in these Vargas it is called Shanta.
Such planet offers positive and favorable results.
v. Shakta : The planet if not eclipsed is called Shakta and the
result of such planet is good.
vi. Prapidita : The planet defeated in war by another planet.
The result is bad.
vii. Deena : The planet if posited in inimical sign is called in
Deena condition. Result is bad.
viii. Khal : When planet is placed in the sign of a malefic planet.
Result unfavorable.
ix. Vikala : When planet is eclipsed. Result is bad.
x. Bheeti : When planet is debilitated or in the sign of inimical
planet. Result is bad.
3. The face of querent should always be towards east. The
seat of the astrologer be adjusted in such a manner that the querent
is facing either east or Northeast. {Sloka - 3)
4. The querent must offer flowers, fruits, clothes etc to the
astrologers. The place of astrologer is surrounded by calm and
pleasant environment. The querent should be attended to either in
the morning or during midday. Preference is given to morning time.
Avoid answering in the evening or during sunset. {Sloka - 4)
5 . Ifbenefic planets viz. Venus, Mercury or Jupiter be posited
or aspect the house concerned with query, the result is favourable.
{Sloka - 8)
6. Positive result may be declared if 1, 4, 7, 8, 10 and 12
Houses are devoid of placement of malefic planet and 1 , 4, 7, 1 0
houses are occupied eitherby lord of ascendant or friend of lord
of ascendant. {Sloka -11)
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

7. Benefic planets (Mercuiy, J upiter, Venus) if placed either in
fifth house or ninth house or malefic planets (Sun, Mars and Saturn)
are placed in 3, 6 or 1 1 houses, the result obtained in such condition
is good. ( Sloka - 12)
8. If malefic planet is posited in horary ascendant then the result
is diseases and dispute. If malefic planet is placed in fourth house,
the result is disagreement among therelatives. (Sloka - 13)
9. If seventh house ofhoraiy chart is occupied by malefic planet,
there are obstacles and impediments in the journey with difficulties.
All undertakings show failure if tenth house is occupied by a malefic
planet. If malefic planets are conjoined with benefic planets in the
above said conditions then malefic planets create obstacles while
benefic planets remove obstacles and give auspicious results.
{Sloka - 14)
1 0. If horary ascendant falls in fixed sign viz., Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio or Aquarius the querent will not be defeated. He suffers
from diseases; stays at one place but begets the desired position.
( Sloka - 15)
1 1 ; If horary ascendant happens to be either Aries, Cancer,
Libra or Capricorn one will be defeated, free from diseases, make
journey but will not have any position or improvement in status.
{Sloka - 16)
1 2. If benefic planets are posited in 1 , 4, 5, 7, 9, or 10 houses
and malefic ones are posited in 3, 6, 1 1 then success and return of
gone person is indicated. {Sloka - 17)
13. If Jupiter or Venus is placed in either second or third house
the gone person will return soon. If such benefic planets are placed
in fourth house, it indicates quick return. {Sloka - 19)
k
1 4. If Mercuiy and Venus are placed second or twelfth to either
ascendant or moon sign the native will return soon. {Sloka - 20)
1 5 . The enemy wi 11 come wi th forces i f ascendant and Navamsa
fall in movable sign (opposition, litigation or enmity can also be
taken as result of such conditions). If moon is placed in movable
sign, ascendant and Navamsa fall in immovable sign and then
enemy does not come. {Sloka - 21)
26 New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

1 6. The enemy can not dare to attack in spite ofhaving adequate
might if Mercury, Jupiter and Venus are placed in sixth house and
Moon occupies common sign and ascendant happens to be in
immovable sign. (Sloka - 22)
1 7. The enemy proceeds but goes back if fifth and sixth houses
are occupied by maleficplanets (This general condition may be
taken as litigation will start on but soon come to an end.) the
enemy can reach to the home but will retrace back if fourth house
is occupied.by malefic planets (End of litigation). (Sloka - 23)
1 8. The querent will be free from disease if Jupiter aspects
ascendant and Moon & Venus are posited therein or Jupiter
occupies 1 , 4, 7, 1 Oth house. ( Sloka - 28)
1 9. The querent will be married if moon is either in 3 , 6, 7 , 1 0
and 1 1 th and aspected by Jupiter. If moon is aspect ed by malefic
planet it indicates delay in marriage. ( Sloka - 29)
20. The querent will be married or one will be married ifbenefic
planets are placed in 1 , 4, 5, 7, 9 or 1 0 houses. The characteristics
of future partner i.e. status, character, outer appearance etc.,
will be good, if seventh house is occupied by benefic planet.
( Sloka - 31)
2 1 . Child is bom if benefics are placed in fifth and eleventh
houses. Male child is bom if the Sun, Moon Jupiter and ascendant
fall in 1,3,5,7,9,11 signs. (Sloka -32)
22. Female child is bom if said planets and ascendant falls in 2,
4, 6, 8, 1 0, 1 2 signs. Tf a few planets and ascendant falls in male
sign and a few in female signs then sex of to-be-bom child should
be determined according to the strength of planets falling in a
particular sign. Male child is predicted, if Saturn fells in either 1,3,
23. Male child is predicted if Jupiter and Venus are placed in
male signs. If Jupiter, Mars and Moon are placed in even signs
then female child is predicted. (Sloka - 34)
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

i. If ascendant falls in Cancer, Capricorn or Pisces sign and
both Venus and Moon are posited therein.
ii. Good rainfall is predicted if Venus and Moon are placed
with Ketu and aspected by benefic planets. If the above
configuration of planets is aspected by malefic planets then scanty
rainfall is to be predicted.
iii. If query is during rainy season and ifVenus and Saturn are
either placed seventh to the sun or moon or placed second, third,
fourth or eighth house from ascendant, the rain will occur- should
be the prediction.
iv. If watery sign falls in ascendant and Moon or benefic planet
is placed in ascendant or placed in 2, 4, 7, or 10th house from
ascendant it indicates the possibility of rain. ( Sloka - 43, 44,
25. Theft :
i. The thief will be short stature if ascendant happens to be
Aries, Taurus, Aquarius or Pisces. The height will be average if
ascendant happens to be Gemini, Cancer, Sagittarius or Capricorn.
Tall height is predicted if ascendant happens to be Leo, Virgo,
Libra or Scorpio. ( Sloka - 47)
ii. What is Concealed in Palm : The concealed material is
made of metal if Sun and Moon are placed in angular houses from
horary ascendant. The material may be part of a plant like leaf,
branch or root, if Mercury and Saturn are placed either in angular
houses or ascendant. The material may be of any living thing if
Jupiter or Moon or Venus is placed in any of the angular house of
horary ascendant. {Sloka - 49)
iii. Colour : Sun indicates red colour, Moon - white colour,
Mars - red colour, Mercury - green colour, Jupiter - yellow colour,
Saturn- black colour.
iv. Shape : The planets indicate following shapes :
1 . Sun - Cuboid
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

2. Moon - Hollow shape
3. Mars - Round shape
4. Mercury - High and long shape
5. Jupiter - Spherical shape
6. Venus - Good height
7. Saturn - Wrinkled and long shape (Sloka - 50, 51)
v. The query is about mineral if ascendant happens to be either
Leo, Aries or Scorpio and if Sun and Mars are placed therein or
aspect ascendant. The question is related with either root or wood
if ascendant happens to be Gemini, Virgo, Capricorn or Aquarius
and Mercury or Saturn are placed either in ascendant or aspect it.
The question maybe about any living person if ascendant happens
to be Taurus, Libra, Cancer, Leo, S agittarius or Pisces and Venus,
Mars, and Jupiter are placed in ascendant or aspect it.
(Sloka-Sl, 53)
vi. The theft is committed by some relative if ascendant or
Navamsa Ascendant or Vargottam Ascendant happens to be
Taurus, Leo, Scorpio or Aquarius. If ascendanthappens to be in
movable sign, stranger commits the theft. The stolen article is at
the threshold of the door if ascendant falls in first decanate. The
stolen article is inside the house if ascendant falls in second
decanate. The stolen article is in the backyard of the house in third
decanate. The stolen article is recovered if following conditions
are present -
1 . Moon is placed in ascendant.
2. If benefics are placed in ascendant.
3 . If ascendant happens to be Gemini, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
Scorpio or Aquarius and ascendant is aspected by benefic
planets.
4. Ifbenefic planets are placed in 2, 4, 7, 3, 6, 1 0,1 1 houses.
Uttarkalamratam : A few slokas of Uttarkalamratam which
are related to horary astrology have been explained here for the
benefit of readers:
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

1 . Querent must offer one fruit as donation to astrologer before
asking any question. If querent is asked to mention a number
between 1 to 108, then he must give anyone number between 1
to 1 08 . On the basis of the number as mentioned by the querent,
calculation must be done to foretell future whether it is favourable
or unfavourable. Astrologer must pray his or her family deity and
thenofferpredictionabout past and future. (Sloka -2)
2. The query is related with secret relationship with women
other than his wife if ascendant falls in Virgo sign. The query is
related with business if ascendant happens to be Libra. The
Scorpio rising indicates query related with fear from enemies.
Sagittarius sign indicate lost money. Capricorn sign reflects own
unscrupulous actions. Aquarius sign indicates prestige, status and
home. Aries sign indicates query to be related with some person.
Taurus rising indicates quadruped. Gemini rising indicates
pregnancy. Cancer sign indicates court and court cases. Leo sign
indicates government and government related activities. Astrologer
must judge the strength o f Ascendant and Navamsa Ascendant.
The prediction must be given after weighing the strength of
Ascendant or Navamsa ascendant.
3 . The result of the query will be experienced soon if the lord of
the house related with the query is exalted. If lord of the house
occupies own sign the result is experienced after some time. The
result will be experienced after some time if lord of the concerned
house is placed in a friendly sign. If lord of the house does not
occupy either exalted sign, own sign or friendly sign then the result
will be experienced after some years. The result of the question
asked will miserably fall if the lord of the house is associated with
or aspected by malefic planets. The question is honoured with
success if lord of ascendant is placed in the house concerned with
query or lord of ascendant is aspected by benefic planets.
(Sloka - 10)
4. The result of the query is obtained very soon if the lord of the
house concerned with query and lord of ascendant are placed in
auspicious houses or aspect each other. (Sloka - 19)
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Shatpanchasika : (Chapter - 1)
1. Prithuyasas prays lord sun and writes a book named
Shatpanchasika for the benefit of astrologers. ( Sloka - 1)
2 . The rising sign at the time of query indicates condition, position
and transfer. Whether efforts will be crowned with success or
miserably fail is indicated by fourth house. The seventh house
indicates arrival of aperson if Ascendant or Navamsa ascendant
falls in sheersodya sign. One will meet failures if ascendant is
occupied by malefic planet or Navamsa falls in Pristhodya sign.
One begets success after failures if malefic as well as benefic planets
are associated with Lagan or Navamsa Lagan. The person will
return to his home if any planet enters into fourth house.
( Sloka - 2)
3. The results obtained are auspicious if lord of the house
concerned with query aspects its own house or benefic planets
are placed therein. The contrary results are obtained if malefic
planets either aspect concerned house or posited therein. This
principle works for both natal as well as for horary astrology.
(Sloka - 3)
4. Efforts will be crowned with success if
i Benefic planets are placed in Ascendant
if Navamsa ascendant falls in a benefic sign
iii. Ascendant or Navamsa ascendant falls in Sheershyodya
sign.
Ascendant or Navamsa ascendant if occupied by malefic planet
indicates failure or sameresults are obtained if ascendant happens
to be in pristhodya sign. But if both malefic as well as benefic
planets occupy Ascendant or Navamsa ascendant then success
is assured after some failures. (Sloka - 4)
5. The lost articles are recovered if ascendant is occupied by
moon and aspected by Jupiter or Venus. Auspicious results shall
be further begotten if benefic planets in adequate strength are
placed in eleventh house. (Sloka - 5)
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Chapter - Second
1. No information regarding journey or return to home is
received if horary ascendant falls in either Taurus, Leo, Scorpio
or Aquarius sign. These signs indicate neither death nor damage.
(Sloka - 1)
2. The result will be just opposite what has been told in Sloka
1 . Mixed results are obtained if ascendant falls in mutual sign.
Efforts of the querent are crowned with success if ascendant or
Moon is aspected by benefic planets. The aspect of malefic planets
indicates failures. (Sloka -2)
3 . The enemy will go back without battle if malefic planets are
placedin fifth and sixth houses. The enemy is defeated if fourth
house is occupied by benefic planets. (Sloka - 3)
4. The arrival of enemy is doubtful if ascendant happens to be
in movable sign and moon in immovable sign. But if ascendant
fells in immovable sign and moon in movable sign, it is the indication
of arrival of enemy. (Sloka - 4)
5 . The enemy comes half way and go back i f moon occupies
movable sign and ascendant falls in mutual sign. The opposition of
above condition ensures battle in which both the parties suffer
losses. (Sloka - 8)
6. The enemy speedily moves forward if ascendant falls in
movable sign and Sun or Saturn or Mercury or Venus is posited in
ascendant. The enemy has not moved if above said planets are in
retrograde motion. (Sloka - 9)
7. The arrival of enemy is indicated if Sun and Moon are placed
in fourth house. The enemy returns quickly if Mercury or Jupiter
or Venus is placed in fourth house. (Sloka- 11)
8. The planet in strength be determined and also ascertain its
placement in a particular Bhava . The person gone to far off places
will return in such months as denoted from house in which planet
in strength is placed counted from Lagna. (Sloka - 14)
9. If planet in strength is placed in movable Navamsa the
calculation as applied in Sloka 14 will be taken as it is. The time
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

will be just double cf what is mentioned in Sloka 1 4 if planet in
strength is placed in fixed Navamsa. The time will be triple if
planet in strength is placed in mutual sign. (, Sloka - 15)
1 0. The person gone to far off places will return if the lord of
seventh house is retrograde or about to retrograde. (Sloka- 16)
Chapter -Third
1 . Both the parties will come to an agreement if benefic planet
is placed in either ascendant or eleventh house or twelfth house.
The battle will take place if malefic planet is placed in mutual
sign. Both the parties will come to an agreement and the battle is
converted into treaty if ascendant or fourth or seventh or tenth
house is occupied by and aspected by benefic planets. The battle
will continue if angular houses are occupied by and aspected by
malefic planets. (Sloka - 3,4)
2. The enemy will go back quickly if both occupy by either
Jupiter or Venus or second or third house. The same rule also
applies for the person who has gone to far off places will return
sooa (Sloka - 5)
Chapter - Fourth
1 . The native attains his first ambition if malefic planets are noi
placed in 1 , 4, 7, 8 and tenth house and benefic planets are placed
in 1 , 4, 5, 7, 9 and 1 0th houses. The opposite condition indicates
adverse results. (.SYofta - 1)
2. The native will get success ifbenefic planets gre placed either
in third or fifth or sixth or eleventh or twelfth hoi!ise. The results
t
are desirable if ascendant happens to be Gemini, Virgo or Aquarius
and benefic planets are posited therein. (Sloka - 2)
3. The aim of the querent is achieved and status also improves
ifbenefic planets are placed in fourth and tenth houses. The native
earns recognition in society and also gets money ifbenefic planets
are placed either in first, or second or fifth house. The good results
are not mitigated even if malefic planets are placed either in eleventh
house or twelfth house. No gains if Moon is placed in Lagna. But
Moon in tenth house gives good results. (Sloka - 3)

4. Gains through opposite sex are indicated if Moon is placed
either in second, third, sixth, seventh, tenth or eleventh house and
aspected by Jupiter. Malefic planets either in 1 , 3, 5, 8 or 9 house
cause losses and failures in business. Success is assured when
their houses are occupied by benefic planets. ( Sloka - 3)
5. The patient recovers quickly if benefic planets are placed
either in first, fifth, seventh or eighth house and aspected by benefic
planets and moon be placed in Uppachaya Bhava. ( Sloka - 5)
Chapter - Fifth
1 . The person will return his home if all the planets are placed in
second, third and fifth houses. The lost person and article both
are recovered ifbenefic planets are placed in the above said houses.
The person returns quickly if Jupiter and Venus are placed in above
houses. (Sloka- 1)
2. The person gone to far off places returns quickly if Jupiter is
placed in one of the angles. The person returns quicklyif Venus
and Mercury are placed in fifth or ninth house. (Sloka- 2)
3 . The person returns safely if moon is posited in eighth house
and malefic planets do not occupy angular houses. The person
returns with gains ifbenefic planets are placed in angular houses.
(Sloka - 3)
4. The native suffers a lot and is likely to be imprisoned if
ascendant happens to be in pristhodya sign aspected by malefic
planets. The person moves to foreign countries from his native
place if malefic planet is placed in third house without any benefic
aspect. The person is assumed to be dead if malefic planets are
placed in sixth house. Thieves kidnap the person if malefic planets
occupy angular houses. (Sloka - 4)
Chapter- Sixth
1 . The querent him self has stolen the article ifhorary ascendant
falls in fixed or Navamsa ascendant falls in fixed sign or Ascendant
happens to be Vargothama. (Sloka- 1)
2. The lost article is at the main door of the house if ascendant
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

is within ten degrees. If ascendant is between 1 0 to 20 degrees
the article is in the middle of the house. The articles are in the
backyard of the house if ascendant is found between 20 to 30
degrees. ( Sloka - 2)
3. The lost article is recovered if Moon in strength is placed in
ascendant or ascendant happens to be in sheersodya sign or any
benefic planet is placed in ascendant or benefic planet aspects the
ascendant. If eleventh house is occupied by benefic planet then
the lost article is recovered. ( Sloka - 3)
4. The planets in 1, 4, 7, 10 houses indicate about the lost
article to be kept in. Direction of the lost article is ascertained
through ascendant i f angular houses are vacant. How far away is
the lost article is determined through Navamsa ascendant. The
nature ofthe lost article is determined through Navamsa Lagna.
i. The rising decanate at the time of query gives information
about thieves.
ii. Lagna indicates the time of lost article, direction and place
where lost article have been kept. The lord of ascendant indicates
age, caste and other characteristics. ( Sloka - 4)
Chapter - Seventh
1 . The birth of a male child is to be predicted if Saturn is placed
in 3 , 5, 7, 9, 1 house in horary chart. If Saturn is not placed in one
of such houses then birth of a female child is to be predicted. The
married life will behappy if Saturn is placed in uneven sign in an
horary chart. (Sloka - 1)
2. The marriage will take place if Moon is posited in 3, 5, 6, 7,
or 1 1 house and aspected by Jupiter and Mercury. The marriage
will also taken place ifbenefic planets are placed in angular houses.
(Sloka - 2)
3 . The rain will take place in rainy season if Venus is placed
seventh to moon and Saturn is placed seventh to the S un or Venus
is placed in fourth house or Saturn in eighth house. (Sloka - 3)
4. Benefic planets along with watery sign if falls in 1 , 2, 3 , 4,
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

7,or 10th house then rain takes place. There will also be rain if
Moon sign happens to be watery sign. ( Sloka - 4)
5. The birth of a male child is to be understood if male sign falls
in ascendantand ascendantis aspectedbymale planets. Female
sign in ascendant and aspect of female planets over ascendant
indicate birth of a female child. The woman is pregnant if mercury
is placed in ascendant. ( Sloka - 5)
6. The question is related with girl if Moon and Mercury are
placed in ascendant or aspect ascendant The question is related
with old lady if Saturn is placed in ascendant or aspect it. The
woman has recently delivered if Jupiter and Sun are placed in
ascendant or aspect it. The woman will have good health if Mars
and Venus are placed in ascendant or aspect it. The same rule will
also apply to man. ( Sloka - 6)
7. The question is related with kith and kin of the querent if
planet in strength is placed in ascendant. The question is related
with younger brother ifplanet instrength is placed in third house.
The planet in strength in fifth house indicates query related with
children. The question is related with either mother or sister if
planet in strength is placed in fourth house. Planet in strength in
sixth house indicates query related with enemy. {Sloka - 7)
8. The question is related with wife if planet in strength is placed
in seventh house. The question is related with some outstanding
personality if planet in strength is placed in ninth house. The
placement of a planet in tenth house indicates query related to
either Guru or preceptor. The question is related with querent
himself if lord of Navamsa Lagan is in strength. The question is
related with friend if lord of Navamsa Lagan is a friend of lord of
horary Lagan. If they are enemy then question is related with
enemy or opponent. {Sloka - 8)
9. The person makes relationship with the wife of others if Sun,
Mars and Venus are placed in seventh house in horary chart The
man cohabits his wife only if Jupiter is placed in seventh house.
The person makes relationship with prostitutes if Moon and
Mercury are placed in ninth house. The person is related with low
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

caste ladyifSatum is placed in seventh house. The nature ofMoon
decides the age of woman. ( Sloka - 10)
1 0. The person will fall sick in foreign country if Saturn or any
other malefic planet is placed in ninth house. The man will die in
foreign land if Saturn is placed in eighth house. {Sloka -11)
1 1 . The father of the querent who has gone abroad will further
move to another country if eighth house is occupied by the Sun
and other benefic planet and aspected by benefic planets. (Sloka
Sinendramala : Few slokas of Sinendramala have been
translated which have been found to be useful to the readers .
1 . The querent must go to astrologer with devotion and sincerity.
Even Vedas may not be helpful if there is no devotion and sincerity.
The querent must not go with empty hands to physician, astrologer
and one who recites Mantras (hymns).
2. Significations of signs (According to Sinendramala)
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

3. Signification of planets (According to Sinendramala)
Planets Significations
A, Moon and shadow planets - Reptiles
Mercury - Birds
Other planets - Human and other animals
Saturn - Limp and other physically
disabled
Sun, Mars, and Saturn - Forest
Moon - Venus - Water
Mercury- Jupiter - Village
Shadow planets - Bushes
Sun and Jupiter Place of prayer
Mars
Saturn
Shadow Planets
B. Saturn and Rahu
Sun
Mercury
Jupiter
Venus
Mars
Moon
C. Sun and Jupiter
Moon and Venus
Saturn and Rahu
Mars
- Earth
- Kitchen or the
place where prayer and other
religious functions are
solemnised
- Hole in tree
- 1 year
- 6 month
- 2 month
- 1 month
- 1 5 days
- 1 day
- 1 Yi hour or 90 Minutes
- Pregnant animal
- Lactiferous animal
- Sterilized animal
- Animal devoid of
lactation capacity
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Comments : The principles propounded in traditional texts
cannot be outrightly rejected. The aim behind the translations of
these texts is to make readers familiar with the knowledge of
different principles so that they could understand the basic nature
of planets and signs.
Only those shlokas have been translated which have been found
to be useful to readers. Readers may take long time to verify the
practicality of the principles. But these principles can provide
adequate knowledge about the nature and behaviour of the planets
as well as signs and maybe applied in solving the day-to-day
problems of horary astrology. Above principles can also be used
in K. P. astrology. It will not only enhance the quality of horary
astrology but also make itrefined and rectified.
I too have found a few principles to be absolutely correct. For
example Uttarkalamratam Sloka 10 states that result of the
question is obtained shortly if the lord of the house concerned
with query is exalted. Simftmly Shatpanchasika chapter 1 Sloka
5 states that lost article is recovered if moon in ascendant is
aspected by Jupiter and Venus. Both examples have been found
to be correct in many cases.
The foundation of astrology lies in the permutation and
combination of lights. If astrologers give logic in the explanation of
any combination of planets then the mystery of planets can be
revealed. In foregoing examples Sloka 5 of Shatpanchasika
chapter 1 states that lost articles will be recovered if ascendant
with moon is aspected by Jupiter and Venus. The logic behind is
that moon and ascendant both are aspected by two most benefic
planets viz. Jupiter and Venus. Both the Lagans i.e.. Moon and
Lagna are under the influence of most benefic planets.
Thus the impact of lights emanating from various planets js studied
in astrology. Whenever a planet comes at a particular degree in
space many important events take place. Research should be made
on such particular degrees attained by planets during their motion
in zodiac.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Significations of Planets and
Signs
The Sun : Sun is the significatorof soul, represents father of
the native and a source of divine knowledge. Sun is known as
Kroor Graha- means intensity to results. Following significations
are ascertained from the Sun particularily in horary astrology.
1 . Father, relationship with father, longevity of father
2 . Popularity and degree of popularity
3. Service
4. High post in service
5. Ministership
7. Governor
8. Eldest son
9. Eyesight
10. Intercaste marriage
11. Constitution
12. President
Moon : Moon is a very important planet in horary astrology.
Moon is the significator of mind. Therefore it reveals the immediate
condition of mind. Non-corelation between query and the position
of Moon in horary chart indicates insincere attempt to test the
knowledge of the astrologer. The natural and sincere desire to
know the result of horary question absolutely gives pinpointed
correct results. The Moon assumes greater significance in horary
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

astrology; therefore its study from various angles is necessary.
These are the following significations of Moon:
(i) Mind, (ii) Mother, (iii) Water, (iv) Ups and down (v)
Imagination, (vi) Dream, (vii) Daughter, (viii) Gains through women,
(ix) Change and changeability, (x) Happy family life, (xi) Sea
voyages (xii) Brain (xiii) Young girl (xiv) Rains, (x vi) Flood, (xvii)
Milk etc.
Mars : Mars is predominantly significator of energy. Other
significations of mars are as follows -
(i) Brothers, (ii) Properties, (iii) Disputes and Quarrels, (iv)
Legal matters, (v) Police, (vi) Army, (vii) Surgery, (viii) Operation,
(ix) Blood, (x) Cut, (xi) Boldness, (xii) Engine, (xiii) Railway, (xiv)
Aero plane, (xv) Factory, (xvi) Iron (steel), (xvii) Engineer
(mechanical), (xviii) Will power.
Jupiter : (i) Money, (ii) Son, (iii) Children, (iv) Divine
knowledge, (v) Banker, (vi) Teacher, (vii) Professor, (viii) Vedas,
(ix) Perceptor, (x) Illegal relationship, (xi) Sanskrit, (xii) Judge
(Mars + Saturn + Jupiter), (xiii) Doctor (Mars + Jupiter+ Sun),
(xiv) Love marriage, (xv) Flatulence, (xvi) Cancer, (xvii) Windy
trouble, (xviii) Food.
Venus : (i) Wife, (ii) Vehicle, (iii) Sex, (iv) Beauty, (v) Beautiful
clothes, (vi) Perfume, (vii) Tailor, (viii) Readymade garments shop,
(ix) Cow, Buffalo, (x) Beautician, (xi) Relationship with woman
other than wife, (xii) Emotion, (xiii) Wo rldly happiness, (xiv) Luxury
or luxurious life style.
Mercury : (i) Child, (ii) Intellect, (iii) Astrology, (iv) Practical
knowledge, (v) Secret treasure, (vi) Divorce, (vii) Love marriage,
(viii) Illegitimate relationship, (ix) Easily get influenced, (x)
Hesitation, (xi) Speech, (xii) Education.
Saturn : (i) Torture, (ii) Sufferings, (iii) Philosophy, (iv) Hath
yoga, (v) Theft, (vi) Bad company, (vii) Selfishness, (viii) Mean
mentality, (ix) Poverty, (x) Dejection, (xi) Impediments, (xii) Delay,
(xiii) Reserved nature, (xiv) Loneliness, (xv) Conspiracy, (xvi) Spy,
(xvii) Secret love affairs, (Venus and Saturn), (xviii) Skin, (xix) '
Debris, (xx) Servant, (xxi) Public.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Rahu and Ketu : Indian astrology does not assign any particular
signification to Rahu and Ketu. Rahu generally denotes thief, jail
and jailor. Ketu shows liberation or final emancipation. Rahu and
Ketu have got special attention and importance in horary astrology.
Therefore, appropriate discussion on Rahu and Ketu have been
included for the benefit of the readers at appropriateplace.
Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto : Westerners have done a lot of
research on these planets. Though late Krishnamurti had advocated
the distinct effect of these planets yet he himself did not take into
account their impact on human beings. I too personally have not
verified their impact on human behaviour and nature. Therefore
nothing is written here about these planets.
Signs : Krishnamurti Paddhati has not given much importance
to the signs. However this unique link of astrology as a whole can
neither be underestimated nor overlooked in any way because it
is primary determinant to the strength of any planet. Secondly in
various questions of horary astrology viz. theft, marriage etc
direction of materialization of event is indicated by the signs.
Aries : Sign lord - Mars
Behaviour - Hot
Direction
Element
Gender
Body Parts
Place inhabited
East
Fiery
Male
Head and Face
Dry Place, Thorny land,
sandy, Stables, Hilly
area.
Exalted planet - Sun
Stature - Tall
Nature - Movable, Sterile,
Quadruped
Physical structure - Long neck, Round face with
little fat, Broad temple,
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Symbol
Taurus- Sign lord
Behaviour
Direction
Element
Body parts
Gender
. Exalted planet
Stature
Nature
Place inhabited
Physical structure
Symbol
Gemini : Sign lord
Behaviour
Direction
Element
Gender
Exalted planet
Stature
Nature
Pointed chin, Scar or mole
over face.
A
- Venus
- Hot
- South
- Earthy
- Throat, Ear, and Neck
- Female
- Moon
- Short
- Fixed, Fruitful, Quadruped
Tailor, Shop of fancy items,
Flowers shop, Shed of
buffaloes
- Broad shoulders. Thick
neck, Short height. Deep
eyebrows, Beautiful eyes,
Broad fore head, Dense
hairs.
B
- Mercury
- Mediocre
- West
■ - Airy
- Male
- None
- Generally short,
Exceptionally tall
- Common, Sterile Biped
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Cancer :
Leo :
Place inhabited -
Physical structure -
Body parts -
Symbol C
Lord -
Behaviour -
Direction -
Element -
Gender -
Exalted planet -
Stature -
Nature -
Place -
Physical structure
Body parts -
Symbol D
Lord -
Behaviour -
Direction -
Hill area. Suitcase,
Diningroom
Long hose, Long fingers,
Small face, Long
forehead, Bright eyes.
Lean body, Height
normal, Physical
constitution weak
Aims, Shoulders
Moon
Soft, sweet
North
Watery
Female
Jupiter
Tall, medium
Movable, Fruitful
River, Lake, Sea, Well,
Canal, Fountain, Fish
pond, Marsh, Dairy
farm, Wash basin
Broad forehead, Broad
chest, Long upper part
of the body, Heavy face,
Fat over face in advanced
age.
Stomach
Sun
Hot
East
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Virgo -
Element
- Fire
Gender
- Male
Exalted planet - Nil
Stature - Tall
Nature
Place
Body part
Symbol
Lord
Behaviour
Direction
Element
Gender
Exalted planet
Stature
Nature
Place .
Physical structure
- Fixed, Sterile Biped
- High hills, Forest,
Palace, Fort,
Government building,
. Cinema and Drama
college, Gold mines,
Kitchen, Chimney,
Furnace, Play ground,
Stock exchange
- Heart
- Mercury
- Soft
- South
- Earth
- Female
- Mercury
- Tall
- Common, Sterile
- Garden, Irrigated or
unirrigated land, Library
Bookshelf, Storeroom,
Fruit and vegetable
basket. Restaurant and
com crop.
- Tall, Baldness, Long
nose and broad
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Body parts
Symbol
Libra : Lord
Behaviour
Direction
Element
Gender
Exalted planet
Nature
Place
Physical structure
Body parts
Symbol
Scorpio : Lord
Behaviour
Direction
Element
Gender
Exalted planet
shoulders, Calm voice,
Impressive walking style.
- Loin and Uterus
F
- Venus
- Soft
- West
- Air
- Male
- Saturn
- Medium
- Inner room, Good
ventilated room, Shop of
luxurious items, Silk,
Rayon, Tailor, Readymade garments shop,
Flowers shop.
- Generally hairs of head
split in two parts and
beautifully lurk on
forehead, Tall nose,
Medium height
- Liver and Loin.
G
- Mars
- Hot, Furious
- North
- Water
- Female
- None
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Stature
Nature
Place inhabited
Body parts
Physical structure
Symbol
Sagittarius: Lord
Behaviour
Direction
Element
Gender
Exalted planet
Stature
Nature
Stature
Place inhabited
- Medium
- Fixed, sterile
- Well inhabited by snakes
and scorpions, Sewage,
Washbasin, Slaughter
house, Meat market,
Operation room,
Chemical laboratory,
Cremation ground,
Rusted iron rod.
- Rectum, Sexual organs
- Protruding forehead, and
black hair deep
eyebrows, Round face.
Forehead covered by
hairs.
H
- Jupiter
- Soft
- East
- Fire
- Male
- Nil
- Tall
- Common, Fruitful
- Generally short
- Hill, Upper room. Stable
for healthy horses,
Church, Temple, School,
College, Court, Shrubs,
Arsenal.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Body parts - Thighs, Buttocks
Physical structure -- Long height, Long face,
Pointed nose, Bright
colour, Bright eyes
Symbol
Capricorn : Lord
Behaviour
Direction
Element
Gender
Exalted planet
Nature
Place inhabited
Body parts
Physical structure
Symbol
Aquarius: Lord
Behaviour
Direction
Element
Exalted planet
- Saturn
- Hot
- South
- Earth
- Female
- Mars
- Movable, fruitful, biped
- Shelf for keeping
valuable articles, Lonely
place. Hospital, Mental
asylum, J ail, Graveyard,
Stables, Temples,
Caves, Dense forest,
Morgue, Tool box,
Shed of animals.
- Knees .
- No se broad from rear
end. Fat over face, Thick
lips, Black thin hair
- Saturn
- Soft
- West
- Air
- Nil
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Pisces :
Stature
Nature
Place
Body part -
Physical structure -
Symbol K
Lord -
Behaviour -
Stature -
Direction -
Element -
Gender -
Exalted planet -
Nature -
Place -
Body part
Physical structure
Tall
Fixed, Indifferent
Bumpy road, Fountains,
Lake, Caves, Terrace,
Window, Tunnel, Radiostation, Place where
transistors, tape
recorder, television etc.,
are kept, Stairs, Ladder
Knees
Long height, Blackish
complexion, Oval face,
Charming personality
Jupiter
Soft
Short
North
Water
Female
Venus
Common, Fruitful, Biped
Pond of sweet water,
Sea, Fishpond,
Harbour, Mental asylum.
Lonely place, Jail,
Hermitage
Palm
Short hand. Short palm.
Knocked shoulders,
Pale complex, Short
height
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Houses
Introduction : As per Hindu traditional astrology the entire
zodiac is divided into twelve equal parts. Each equal part is called
house or Bhava. Each Bhava or house measures 30° in longitude.
Thus 30x12 = 360°. Hence the entire zodiac is 360° in longitude.
Krishnamurti Paddhati has used the word * cusp ’ for a particular
Bhava akin to the concept advocated by western astrologers.
Cusp is actually the beginning point of a house. K.P. advocates
the birth chart or horary chart to be cast on Placidus system.
Placidus system encompasses unequal house division in sharp
contrast to equal division as propounded by ancient Indian
astrology. In Placidus system a cusp or house varies from the
other house in longitudes i.e. a particular Bhava maybe ofthirty
degrees or less than thirtydegrees or more than thirty degrees.
Each house denotes a number of significations. Here a number
of significations of each house is given for the benefit ofthe readers.
These significations without an iota of doubt can be used both in
horary as well as in natal astrology.
First house or Ascendant :
(i) External appearance, (ii) Character, (iii) Health, (iv) Concept
towards life, (v) Peculiar nature, (vi) Success and failure in life,
(vii) Popularity and fame, (viii) Particular place or state or country,
(ix) Merits and demerits (x) Head and face.
Specific information :
(i) The first house denotes the ascendant of the querent.
(ii) Profit or advantage to younger brother as being eleventh to
third house.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

(iii) Death or sufferings to maternal uncle being eight to sixth
house.
(iv) Neighbour to elder brother being third to eleventh house.
(v) Loss to native himself or herself being twelfth to second
house (bank position) .
Specific effect of planets in Ascendant :
(i) The placement of Rahu in ascendant in horary chart always
shows failure. But if Rahu in ascendant is aspected by Jupiter then
desire is fulfilled after some delay and impediments.
(ii) Saturn, Ketu and Rahu make one lazy and show abortion
of wife if either of them is placed in ascendant.
(iii) The aspect of Jupiter over ascendant gives auspicious
results. The placement of Jupiter in ascendant is not good.
Second house - Financial status, (ii) Family, (iii) Speech, (iv)
Jewellary, (v) Bond, Securities, Debentures, Shares, (vi) Eyesight
(left), (vii) Memory, (viii) Imagination, (ix) Nails, tongue, throat
teeth, (x) National treasure, (xi) Banking and revenue, (xii) Second
marriage, (xiii) Death.
Specific information - (i) In horary astrology second house
denotes all money matters, loss and gain.
(ii) Speculation and matters related to business.
(iii) Loss or incarcerationto younger co-boms (being 1 2th to
third house)
(iv) Purchase ofhouse, land, vehicle by elder brother (fourth to
eleventh)
(v) Journey by maternal uncle (ninth to sixth)
(vi) Sufferings of father (sixth to ninth)
Specific effect of planets in second house :
(i) Rahu in second house gives very good service.
(ii) Rahu - Mars together gives throat problems.
(iii) Ketu or Saturn or both may make one to stammer.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

(i v) Child will stammer if Rahu is the sublord of second cusp
and simultaneously ascendant happens to be either Taurus or
Scorpio.
Third house : (i) Younger co-boms, (ii) Nature, (iii) Right ear,
(iv) Valour, Courage, (v) Mind and Tendency of mind, (vi)
Neighbour, (vii) Colleague, (viii) Short journeys, (ix) Information,
(x) Letters, (xi) Radio, (xii) Means of information, (xiii) News,
(xiv) Publication, (xv) False news or information.
Specific Information (i) Rahu in third house makes one either
younger or eldest in the family.
(ii) Ketu in third house gives dual personality.
(iii) The lord of ascendant in third house makes one man of
deeds.
(iv) Jupiter in third house takes one to dizzing heights.
Fourth house : (i) Education, (ii) Properties, (iii) Land, (iv)
Vehicles, (v) Family and happiness, (vi) Mother, (vii) Secret
activities, (viii) Ancestral properties, (ix) Digging of well, (x)
Properties either to take or give on rent.
Specific information : (i) Mines, (ii) Agriculture, (iii)
Termination of any undertaking, (iv) Public places, (v) Financial
position of younger brother, (vi) Loss to children, (vii) Sufferings
or hurdles to father (eighth to ninth), (viii) Sufferings, disease of
elder brother (sixth to eleventh)
Specific effect of planets in fourth house : Venus in fourth
house gives a number of vehicles.
(ii) Mercury in fourth house gives break in education.
(iii) Rahu in fourth house makes one an aimless wanderer.
(iv) Saturn in fourth house makes one bereft of family happiness.
(v) Mars in own sign or in the sign of exaltation in fourth house
gives landed properties.
Fifth house : (i) First child, (ii) Vedic knowledge, (iii) Wisdom,
(iv) Pleasure, (v) Society and social activities, (vi) Creativity, (vii)
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Recreation, (viii) Cinema, (ix) Dance, opera, (x) Speculation, (xi)
Gambling, (xii) Horse racing, (xiii) Rape, (xiv) Kidnapping
Specific information : (i) Friendship, (ii) Pre-and post-marital
relations, (iv) Ambassador, (v) Minister, (vi) Success in politics,
(vii) Gains through wife (eleventh to seventh)
Specific effects of planets in fifth house :
(i) Jupiter and Venus are considered to be very auspicious if
placed in fifth house.
(ii) The association of fifth house with 11th either through lord
of ascendant, benefic planets or through star lord or sub lord of
first cusp is very auspicious andportends success.
(iii) The native suffers on account o f children if Jupiter is placed
in fifth house.
(iv) Fifth house gives magnetic personality ifbenefics are placed
therein.
Sixth house : (i) Debt, (ii) Disease, (iii) Enemy or enmity, (iv)
Service, (v) Maternal uncle, (vi) Irregular dirty habits, (vii) suffering,
(viii) Brutal actions, (ix) Receive donations, (x) Loans.
Specific information : (i) Purchase of properties or vehicles
by younger co-boms (fourth to third), (ii) Journey of mother (third
to fourth), (iii) Financial status of first child (second to fifth), (iv)
Loss to partner (twelfth to seventh), (v) Profession of father (tenth
to ninth), (vi) Overdraft facilities.
Specific effects of planets in sixth house : (i) If the lord of
seventh house is placed in sixth house or the lord of sixth house is
placed in seventh house shows discord in married life.
(ii) The married life is also on rock if the sub lord of seventh
cusp is placed in sixth house.
(iii) The placement of Jupiter or Mercury in sixth house gives
service either in teaching line or in bank.
Seventh house : (i) Husband or wife, (ii) love, (iii) Married
life, (iv) Partner, (v) Agreement, (vi) Transaction or deals in any
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

manner, (vii) Fine, (viii) Danger to longevity, (ix) Thief, Description
of thief, (x) Pickpocket.
Specific information : (i) Question related with thief and theft,
(ii) Foreign relations, (iii) War, (iv) International trade, (v) General
opinion of masses about national policies, (vi) Second son or
daughter of the querent, (vii) Properties of mother (fourth to fourth),
(viii) Adopted child.
Specific effects of planets: (i) The sign falling in seventh house
or planet placed in seventh house gives information about thief
and stolen article.
(ii) Jupiter in seventh house causes delay in marriage
(iii) If the sub lord of seventh cusp happens to be mercury and
placed in any of the dual signs it portends divorce and more than
one marriage.
Eighth house : (i) Life, (ii) Headache, (iii) Insult, (iv) Sorrow,
(v) Disputed activities, (vi) Death, (vii) Hurdles, (ix) Impurity, (x)
Secret knowledge, (xi) Dowry, (xii) Bonus, (xiii) Life insurance,
(xiv)Will
Specific information : (i) Banking position of wife (second to
seventh), (ii) Bribe, (iii) Occultism, (iv) Suicide, (v) Accidents,
(vi) Famine, (vii) Natural calamities, (viii) Export- import, (ix)
Foreign debt, (x) Rate of interest, (xi) Deficient budget, (xii)
Investment by father (twelfth to ninth), (xiii) Mother’s gain through
speculation gambling sharebond (fifth to fourth), (xiv) Good service
(eleventh to tenth), (xv) Final liberation to father (Twelfth to ninth),
(xvi) Drought.
Specific effect of planets in eighth house : (i) Sat - Rahu
together in eighth house gives frequent accidents.
(ii) Jupiter or mercury in eighth house tends to turn the mind to
occult knowledge.
(iii) Unafflicted benefics or two benefics in eighth house gives
very good service.
Ninth house : (i) Fate, (ii) Father, (iii) Long journeys, (iv)
Warship, (v) Religion, (vi) Grand son, (vii) Rituals, (viii) Meditation,
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

(ix) Temple, Mosque, Church, (x) Religious journeys.
Specific information : (i) Higher education, higher knowledge,
higher thoughts, (ii) Research, (iii) Ph.D., (iv) Dreams, (v)
Strangers, (vi) Religious literatures viz. astrology, Vedas ,
Upanishad etc, (vii) Sea voyages, (viii) Judge, (ix) Religious
master, (x) Commerce, (xi) Short journey of wife (third to seventh),
(xii) Short journey to partner (third to seventh), (xiii) Wife of
younger brother (seventh to third) third son or child.
Specific effect of planets in ninth house :
(i) Grand success is assured if the sub lord uf ninth cusp is
placed in eleventh house.
(ii) Saturn in ninth house tends towards renunciation
(iii) Native visits foreign countries if lord of ascendant is placed
in ninth house.
Tenth house : (i) Profession, (ii) Deeds, (iii) Success, (iv)
Status, (v) Conduct, (vi) Control, (vii) Merits, (viii) Honour, (ix)
Promotion.
Specific information : (i) Final rites of father, (ii) Death of
father (second to ninth), (iii) Employer, (iv) Senior officer, (v)
Government, (vi) Command, (vii) Agriculture, Doctor, Medicine,
(viii) Authority, (ix) Pilgrimages, (x) Judge, (xi) Decision, (xii) Party
president, (xiii) Prime minister, (xiv) President, (xv) Political
situation, (xvi) Financial position of father (second to ninth), (xvii)
Sufferings to younger brother (eighth to third), (xviii) Sufferings to
children (sixth to fifth), (xix) Negation of desire (twelfth to eleventh)
Specific effect of planets in tenth house : (i) The sun in
tenth house gives government patronage to the native.
(ii) Rahu in tenth house strains relationship with father but
provides grand success to the native.
(iii) Saturn in tenth house takes native to dizzy heights but also
brings ultimate falldown.
Eleventh house : (i) Profit, (ii) Multiplicity, (iii) Income, (iv)
Desire and fulfilments of desires, (v) Sycophant, (vi) Fans, (vii)
Advisor, (viii) Close acquaintant, (ix) Elder brother.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Specific information : (i) Relation with lover, (ii) Social and
financial status, (iii) Children (fifth to seventh and seventh to fifth),
(iv) Financial status of employer (second to tenth), (v) Left ear
(vi) Loss of interest on capital, (vii) Suffering to mother (eighth to
fourth), (viii) Fate of younger co-boms (ninth to third), (ix) Daughter
in law (seventh to fifth), (x) Minister.
Specific effect of planets in eleventh house :
(i) Eleventh house is considered to be very important in horary
astrology! The’ fulfilment of desires of the querent is always judged
from this house.
(ii) Rahu in eleventh house makes one either elder or younger
in the family.
(iii) Political success is judged if eleventh house is having
association with fifth house.
(iv) All the planets are auspiciousif positedtherein, however
Saturn delays but not denies.
Twelfth house : (i) Expenditure, (ii) Loss, (iii) Change of place,
(iv) Transfer, (v) Termination, (vi) Hospital, (vii) Jail, (viii) Jailor,
(ix) Liberation, (x) Sorrow, (xi) Left eye, (xii) Bed comforts.
Specific information : (i) Purchase, (ii) Investment, (iii)
Donation, (iv) Doubt, (v) Sacrifice, (vi) Restrictions or limitations,
(vii) Secret mental activities, (viii) Conspiracy, (ix) Fraud,
Speculation, (x) Murder, (xi) Suicide, (xii) Chronic disease, (xiii)
Foreign visit, (xiv) Sufferings, (xv) Lunatic asylum, (xvi) Secret
enemy of nation, (xviii) Spy.
Specific effect of planets in twelfth house : (i) The native is
likely to visit foreign countries if Rahu is placed in twelfth house.
(ii) Moon in twelfth house gives very good servic&-
(iii) In horary question pertaining to legal matters, ifRahu is
placed in twelfth house, indicates either termination or sentence.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Sub-lord
The zodiac is divided into 27 constellations or stars. Each
constellation is 13° - 20' or 800 minutes in longitude. Each
constellation is divided into 4 quarters or pads. Each sign or Rasi
consists of 214 constellations i.e. 9 pads.
Each signorRari = 30° or 30x60 - 1 800 min.
Each quarter of constellations = 3°- 20 or (3 x 60) + 20
= 200 minutes
Each sign consists of 9 quarters of constellation i.e.
Each constellation has four quarters. Therefore 27 constellations
will have 27 x 4 = 1 08 quarters.
These 1 08 quarters have further been divided into 249 parts.
Each subdivided part is called sub-lord.
For example Aries sign consists of 4 quarters of Ashwini star, 4
quarters of Bhami star and one quarterof Krittika star.
Ashwani star is ruled by Ketu and have been allotted 7 years
out of 1 20 years of Vimshottari dasha pattern. Ashwini star is
1 3° - 20 or 800 min. in longitude. Now 800 min of Ashwini star
are further divided in respect to 7 years o f Ketu. The result obtained
is called sub or sub-lord of Ketu.
How to work out sub-lord :
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Ashwini is the first constellationof Aries sign ruled by Ketu.
Therefore the first sub will be of Ketu followed by Venus, Sun
etc. It could be understood as, in Jupiter Mahadasha and Ketu
Antardasa the first Pratyantara dasa will be of Ketu, second
belongs to Venus and so on. Sub-lord can also be assumed to be
Pratyantara lord.
Example 1 - Aries sign consists of four quarters of Ashwini star
6° - 40' to 10° - O' - lllrd quarter
In sub-lord calculations the first quarter of Ashwini which
extends from 0° - O' to 3° - 20' has been divided. The first quarter
that is ruled by Ketu as per traditional astrology is now divided
into 3 parts that are successively ruled by Ketu, Venus and Sun.
O'-Venus
When any planet or cusp falls in between these longitude in
Aries sign will have sub-lord as per extension it has got as per
above calculation.
Example - 2
Aries sign - Bhami star (1 3° - 20' to 26° - 40’)
58 New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

After adding the value of other sub-lords the extension of other
sub-lords is determined. It means if any planet moves or cusp falls
between I6°- 13' - 20" to 1 7° - 20' - 0" in Aries signit will have
moon as its sub -lord.
Comments - The concept of sub- lord is the outcome of research
carried over decades by late Krishnamurti. It is positive outcome
and has universal applications. The principles enumerated in
traditional astrology have their own utility without an iota of doubt.
But such principles cannot be applied to know the event of dayto-day activities and miserably fail to answer the questions likeTight gone, when will it comeback?’ !Son gone to school, when
he will return?’ ‘When and which time result of examination will
be declared?’ There are many more questions pertaining to dayto-day life which can be answered positively with the help of sub
lord theory. It is an innovativediscoveryof astrology which has
given scientific approach to astrology.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Ruling Planets and
Significators
The discovery of ml ingplanets is another milestone of astrology.
To pinpoint the timing of events with great accuracy is another
great service of astrology by late Krishnamurti. ‘ Ruling planets ’
means the planets which rule the moment at the time of judgement
of any question. Ruling planets are worked out from ascendant
and the posi tion of Moon at the time of judgement. Ascendant is
the bassic foundation of planetary influence and Moon is the
significator of mind. Mind receives influence of planets more quickly
and moreover one has to interact with worldly matters with the
application of mind. Secondly the position ofMoon either in horary
chart or natal chart is considered to be ascendant and called Moon
Lagna. Desires, will etc are the functions of mind. Therefore,
planets influencing mind and ascendant are taken ruling planets to
co-relate query asked and its ultimate future.
In K.P. there are five major ruling planets :
(i) Ascendant lord
(ii) Ascendant star lord or constellation lord .
(jii) Moon sign lord
(iv) Moon constellation lord or star lord
(v) Lord of day
Lord of day means judgment day. Each day is ruled by a planet.
Monday is ruled by moon, Tuesday is ruled by Mars and so on.
For the benefit of the readers a table showing day and its ruler is
given below:
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Apart from the abovesaid fiverulingplanets Rahu Ketu too
are considered ruling planets with the following conditions:
(i) If Rahu and Ketu are either associated or conjoined with
one or more of the ruling planets.
(ii) If Rahu or Ketu has occupied the s ign the ruler of which
in one of the ruling planets.
(in) If day lord appears once among the ruling planets,
then Rahu and Ketu though conjoined with day lord or occupy
the sign of day lord are not reckoned as ruling planets.
The followers of K P in later stage also considered sub-lords,
of ascendant and the Moon as ruling planets. We have not
considered sub-lord of either ascendant or the moon as ruMnj^
planets. Sometimes we have considered Hora lord as ruling planet
replacing day lord. For the benefit of the readers Hora fable is"
given below:
Time Day
Sun Mon The Wed Thur
6- 7 A.M. Sun Moon Mars Merc Jup
7- 8 A.M. Ven Sat Sun Moon Mars
8- 9 A.M. Merc Jup Ven Sat Sun
9- 10 A.M. Moon Mars Merc Jup Ven
10- 1 1A.M. Sat Stif f Moon Mars Merc
FVi Sat
Ven Sat.
Merc Jup
Moon Mars
Sat Sun
Jup Ven
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

The Hora lord rules the moment at the time of judgment of
query. For example, a question is asked on Wednesday at 4
P.M. On Wednesday the Hora between 4 to 5 P.M. is ruled by
Jupiter. So Jupiter may be taken as Hora lord in place of day
lord Mercury among the ruling planets. The actual Hora is
determined with the rising of the sun and extends for one hour as
the word Hora itself signifies. The first Hora is always of the day
lord followed by planets in increasing velocities. For example the
first/fora of Monday is ruled by moon followed by Saturn, Jupiter
etc. As the cycle of seven planets ends again new cycle start with
first Hora lord i.e. the Hora lord that ruled the moment at the time
of rising of the sun. In the above table a standard time i.e. 6 to 7
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

A.M. has been taken as the rising time of the sun to any locality of
India.
COMMENTS ON RULING PLANETS :
Ruling planets are very important to decide the future of any
event or also speak well whether the desire of the querent will be
fulfilled or not. If desire is to be materialized then timing of the
event?
Following tips regarding ruling planets would be of immense
use to the astrologers :
1 . Ruling planets are always linked with the success or failure
of the query.
2. If ruling planets are associated with the houses concerned
with query and simultaneously the instant Antardasa is related
with ruling planets the desire of the querent is fulfilled.
3 . If ruling planets are concerned with the houses related with
query but the instant. Antardasa is not linked with ruling planets
it shows delay or failures of the query.
4. If Rahu or Ketu or both becomes rulingplanets, then Rahu
and Ketu are considered seriously because Rahu and Ketu are
always stronger than the planets.
5 . Ruling planets are the only key to select beneficial signi ficators
that contribute to materialization of the desire.
6. The delay is portend if any of the ruling planets are in
retrogression.
7. The ruling planets, in order of their strength to bestow results,
are as follows:
l) Ascendant lord
ii) Ascendant star lord
in) Moon star lord
iv) Moon sign lord
v) Day lord or Hora lord
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Specific comments over selection of ruling planets :
There is some sort of confusion over selection of the ruling
planets. A few sections of astrologers take ascendant lord and
star lord of rising sign at the time of Judgment of query even if the
question is solved with the help of horary number between 1 and
to 249. Here we would like to clarify and emphasise that this way
of selection of ruling planets is completely fallacious and may lead
to confusing predictions. The sign lord and star lord of ascendant
of rising sign are taken only when the query is solved without
horary number and simply the judgement time is taken. If one is
proceeding with the help of horary number then one should take
sign lord and star lord of the horary number. After solving more
than one thousand horary questions, it has been found that
sign lord and star lord of ascendant of horary number without
exceptions always help to reach right conclusion. So one
should not fell victim to illogical method of selecting ruling planets.
The ruling planet taken in Part 2 of this book comprises sign lord
and star lord of ascendant or 1st cusp of horary number. Readers
must not get confused.
SIGNIFICATORS
The term ‘Significators’ implies those planets that contribute
towards fructification of the results of a particular house or houses.
Accordingto K.P. Significators are determined as follows:
i) The planet or planets posited in a house. Such planet or planets
are called occupants,
ii) The planets posited in the constellation of the occupant.
iii) The planets posited in the constellation of the lord of the
house.
iv) The lord of the house.
v) The planets which are conjoined with above said
Significators.
vi) The planets those are aspected by Significators.
nil
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

vii) If Rahu or Ketu or both are conjoined with the above
Significators.
The above Significators have been listed below as per their
strength to offer the results:
i) The most powerful Significators are Rahu and Ketu if they
are conjoined with other Significators.
ii) Next in strength is the planet that is posited in the constellation
of the occupant.
iii) Next in strength is occupant.
r
iv) The planet posited in the star or constellation of the lord
of the house.
v) The least effective is the lord of the house.
vi) The planets other than Rahu and Ketu that are conj oined
with significators.
vii) The planets which are aspected by significators.
The above list shows strength in decreasing order i.e. (i) is more
powerful and (vii) is least powerful.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Cu$p ( Bhava ) Determination
There are two methods for the determination of cusp:
i) The first method comprises taking ascendantat the time of
judgement.
ii) The second method takes ascendant of the number from the
range of 1 to 249 as mentioned by the querent.
FIRST METHOD: (Taking rising sign at the time of
judgement)
EXAMPLE: A question is asked on 17-01-03 at 10 A.M.
Place of judgement is Agra.
SOLUTION : If the question is solved on 1 7-0 1 -03 at 1 0 A.M.
then ascendant is woiked out. If the question is not immediately
solved then later time and date be taken to work out the ascendant.
In order to answer any horary question the best method is K.P.
However due to shortage of time such questions may be solved
as per traditional method. If question is attended as per
traditional method it is advisable that sub-lord of planets
must be given serious consideration. How to work out the
cusp is same as mentioned in the second method with little
difference. In this method the degree and minutes of rising sign is
taken whereas in the second method the lagan is taken of the
number as mentioned by the querent.
SECOND METHOD:
Example: A querent gave No 1 37 in between 1 to 249. The
question was judged on 17-01-03 at 10.00 A.M.
HOW TO WORK OUT CUSP:
No. 1 37 means Libra sign 1 8°-6’-40 ■’ (See horaryno table) to
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

In order to solve any horary question with the help of numbers,
the commencing number is taken. As horary No. 137 extends
from6S 18°-6’-40"to6S 19°-13'-20" so commencing part i.e.
6S 1 8°-6'-40" will be taken. The number 1 3 7 shows Libra Lagna
1 8°-6'-40" of Niryana.
Therefore the first cusp ( Bhava ) is 6S 1 8°-6-40".
The other cusps are worked out as follows:
1 . The longitudes of first cusp are converted into Sayana
longitude by adding Ayanamsa of the year 2003 . The reason is
that the best book available in the market to work out cusps is
Raphael’s table of houses for Northern latitudes. The position
givenin thisbook is Sayana position.
2. The Ayanamsa of the year (K.P.) 23°-47'-40"
3. Add this Ayanamsa to longitudes of first cusp {Bhava).
Or
Or
Or
7S 11 ° - 54' (seconds can be omitted.)
It means: Now the Sayana position of 1st cusp {Bhava) is 7S
4. The latitude of Agra is 27° -11". Open the page of Raphael
book where latitude 27° - 1 1 ' is given.
5. At the latitude of 27° - 1 1' the page shows Scorpio 11 °-
48'. But we require ascendant Scorpio ll°-54'. The difference
is 6 minutes. In order to get the value of 6 minutes, the following
calculations are made:
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

i) There are two values given on the page where longitude
Difference: 1 2°-3 9’
i.e. what the value is given for second, third and other cusps
add 7 to these values .
6. ThevalueofsecondcuspinRaphaeltableis8S ll°-0'.
Add T to this value. Thus the second cusp will be 8S 1 1 °-7\
1 1 . Now the cusps in Sayana position are as follows:
Second Cusp = 8S ll°-7
Third Cusp = 9S 12°-7'
Twelfth Cusp = 6S 1 T=T
Eleventh Cusp = 5S 17°-7*
Tenth Cusp = 4S 15°-7'
1 2. Now deduct Ayanamsa to get Niryana position
Sayana Position Niryana Position
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

1 3 . Now add 1 80° to each cusp to get other cusps i.e. fourth,
fifth etc.
(Seventh Cusp)
(Eighth Cusp)
(Ninth Cusp)
(Sixth Cusp)
(Fifth Cusp)
(Fourth Cusp)
Comments :
1 . In order to solve horary question with the help of number in
the range of 1 to 249, the commencing position is taken as evident
in the foregoing example in which the commencing position of
Number 1 37 was taken.
2. The longitudes of cusp shows sign lord, star lord and sublord of the particular cusp. For example the position of third cusp
as shown above is 8S 1 8°-l 9'-20". See this longitude in horary
table in Sagittarius sign. This number falls between 1 8°-6'-40" to
20 - 6'-40" in Sagittarius which means Jupiter sign lord, Venus
star lord and Rahu sub-lord of the third cusp.
3. Time is an important factor in horary astrology. According
to K.P. the longitudes of the number mentioned by querent does
not change with the change of time. The longitude of the number
remains the same though the planetary position changes with the
change of time of judgement. Suppose a question of Number
137 was to be judged on 1 7-03-06 but due to some reason this
question could not be attended on 17-03-06. Now this question
is judged on 1 8-03-06. In this situation the longitude of cusps
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

will be same but the planetary position of 1 8-03-06 at the time of
judgement will be taken. The ruling planets will also change with
this new time.
4. Cusp determination takes much time. Therefore it is advisable
to esteemed readers that they must prepare Cuspal table for all
the numbers for the place where astrologer permanently resides.
Ayanamsa increases 50" every year. This value is negligible as
far as change of longitudes of cusp year after year is concerned.
5. The astrologers can also purchase Cuspal table book that is
in Niryana position and can save valuable time of astrologers.
Nishkaam Peeth Prakashan has brought out a table of houses
( Nirayana position) for the latitude of Delhi.
6. It is also to be kept in mind that the place is also important in
working out cusps. If question is judged at Agra as shown in
example then latitude 21° - 1 1 ' will be judged. If the same question
is judged at Delhi then Raphael’s book will be consulted for latitude
of Delhi i.e. 28°-39'. In that case Cuspal position of various cusps
may change and sub-lord will also change though sign lord and
star lord will be same.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

SUBJECTS OF HORARY
ASTROLOGY
1. Retrograde planets and their impacts: There are various
theories prevalent in astrological world regarding retrograde planets
and their ultimate impacts. According to one school of thought
retrograde planets give the result of previous house. Another school
of thoughts says that retrograde planets are more powerful to give
the result becauseduring retrogression the planet comes near to
the orbit of the earth and therefore its impact is greater at the time
of retrogression. Whatever arguments may be but it is beyond
doubt that retrograde planets have their distinct impacts. The
study of retrograde planets is much more important in horary astrology than natal astrology. Retrograde planet has direct relation
with the query. Retrograde planets have following effects:
1 . Retrograde planet always shows negation in horary astro logy2. Retrograde planet shows failure of the question asked.
3 . If a retrograde planet is posited in the star of a retrograde
planet the result is failure of the query.
4. The result will be positive with some delay if retrograde planet
is posited in the constellation of planet in direct motion. The positive result will be obtained when the planet in retrograde motion
will attain direct motion and reach the position from where retrogression was started.
. 5. The result after initial delay will be positive if a planet in
direct motion is placed in the constellation of planet in direct motion but in the sub of retrograde planet.
rT\
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

6. The result will be absolute negative if sign lord, star lord and
sub-lord are in retrogression.
7. The result will tend to be favourable after some delay and
impediments, if retrograde planet in posited in the constellation of
the planet in direct motion but in the sub of retrograde planet.
8. The result will be delay or failure of the query if any retrograde planet or planets find place among ruling planets. Even day
lord or Horn lord, the weakest ruling planet among ruling planets,
is found to be retrograde, shows at least delay in the fulfilments of
desire of the querent.
9. Apart fro.n horary astrology it has been found in natal astrology that retrograde planet weakens the results of the house where
they are posited. Morethan one planet in retrogression if found
to be present in natal chart portend a struggling life to the native.
The lord or star lord or sub-lord of seventh cusp i f found to be in
retrogression in natal horoscope indicates delay in marriage.
2. Rahu and Ketu in the mirror of horary astrology:
/ As the nature and behaviour of retrograde planet is always a
riddle and complex matter to understand, similarly the nature and
behaviour of Rahu and Ketu have always been a mystery to astrologers. A section of astrologers consider these two shadow
planets to offer results like other planets and like other planets
their strength, exaltation, debilitation, aspect etc must be taken
into account while delineating results. Another section of astrologers treats Rahu and Ketu as mere shadow planets and does not
take into account their aspect, strength based on debilitation or
exaltation etc. Our object is not to fall in any controversy regarding various views of astrologers on the nature of Rahu and Ketu.
But we want to bring to the knowledge of readers the modus
operandi of Rahu and Ketu which has been found to be correct
after a longresearch carried over more than a decade.
According to Hindu mythological stories a ferocious battle ensued between gods and demons during churning of ocean. Both
the parties agreed over the pact that whatever begotten through
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

churning of ocean would be equally distributed between both the
parties i .e. gods and demons. As a result of churning of ocean a
pot of nectar was obtained. Since gods were of the opinion that
demons would create large-scale destruction if they got nectar,
gods planned to trick the demons. Lord Vishnu in disguise of a
beautiful woman appeared and suggested that gods and demons
sit separately in queue so that everybody could get a drop of
nectar. Rahu, the demon, doubted the plan and sat in the row
among the gods in disguise of gods. As soon as Rahu got the
nectar and drank it he was detected by Sun and Moon. Sun informed lord Vishnu who in turn immediately beheaded Rahu but
by that time nectar had reached the throat of Rahu, so he was half
immortal and could not be killed. Neither the parts of the body
could unite together. The head part was called Rahu while the
part below head was called Ketu.
Analysis of the Story: Mythological stories, if properly understood and analyzed, reveals hidden facts regarding behavi our
and nature of planets. The above story reveals following facts:
1 . Rahu was the only demon that could detect the plan of godstherefore an intelligent planet.
2. Rahu has nectar in his throat - therefore, also gives auspicious results.
3 . Rahu was detected by Sun and Moon - therefore an enemy
to Sun and Moon.
4. If Rahu is conjoined or associated with Sun and Moon the
native suffers on account of his father and mother. He or she is
obstinate, egoist, a perfectionist liar and dramatic in behaviour.
5. Ketu is an abortive and confusing planet because nectar
could not reach the stomach of Rahu. Ketu represents this part.
Modus operandi of Rahu and Ketu:
1 . Rahu and Ketu give the results of those planets with which
they are conj oined.
2. The result of the sign they have occupied.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

3. The result of the lordoftheconstellationin which they are
posited.
4. The result of the planets by which they are aspected.
Importance of Rahu and Ketu in horary astrology:
1 . If Rahu is placed in ascendant the ascendant is completely
spoiled. The desire of the querent is not fulfilled.
2. The results are intensified and offered by Rahu and Ketu if
they happen to be either ruling planets or occupy the sign of ruling
planets.
3. If Rahu along with Sun or Moon is placed in ascendant and
Sun or Moon being ascendant lord even then ascendant is considered to be spoiled.
4. Rahu or Ketu in ascendant and aspected by Jupiter portends fulfilments of desire after some delay and problems.
3. What will be the result of query:
After a long research if has been found by us that following tips
are quite useful for the readers in order to judge the result of the
query.
The result will be positive:
i) If the sub-lord of first cusp in direct motion is posited in
eleventh house the desire of the native in fulfilled. There will be
some delay or impediments if sub-lord of first cusp is placed in
eleventh house in the sign of debilitation.
ii) If lord of ascendant is placed in eleventh house the desire of
the querent is fulfilled. If lord of ascendant is debilitated but placed
in eleventh house even then desire is fulfilled. If lord of ascendant
is retrograde planet but posited in eleventh house, the desire is
fulfilled after delay, dejection and such problems.
iii) If sub-lord of first cusp or lord of ascendant is placed in fifth
house then desire is fulfilled. Saturn being sub lord of first cusp or •
lord of ascendant in fifth house fulfils desire after delay and mental
torture.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

iv) Fulfilment of desire is promised if the sub-lord of concerned
house is having connection with either fifth house or eleventh house.
Suppose in Leo ascendant if Mars, the ruler of fourth house, or
cusp or sub-lord of fourth cusp is having connection with fifth or
eleventh house then query related with purchase of a property is
fulfilled.
v) If Jupiter aspects ascendant or the cusp concerned with the
query then desire is fulfilled.
vi) If the sub-lord of first cusp becomes one of the ruling planets
The result will be negative:
i) If ascendant lord of the horary chart is in debilitation and not
placed in eleventh house.
ii) If lord of the ascendant of the horary chart is retrograde.
iii) If the sub-lord of first cusp is retrograde and also not placed
either in fifth or eleventh house.
iv) If lord of the ascendant or sub-lord of first cusp is placed
either in eighth house or twelfth house.
v) If the sub-lord of the concerned cusp or lord of the concerned house is retrograde or placed in eighth house.
vi) If Rahu or Ketu is placed in ascendant.
vii) If the sub-lord of eleventh cusp or lord of the eleventh cusp
in either retrograde orplaced in the sign of debilitation.
viii) If Saturn is placed in the ascendant or aspects ascendant.
ix) If ascendant lord or more than one planets among the ruling
planets are retrograde.
x) If ascendant is not aspcted by Jupiter or other benefic planets like Venus, Mercury and Moon.
4. Importance of Omens in Horary Astrology:
Horary astrology is the best method to know the will of God.
Each and every particle of this universe vibrates due to the cosmic
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

will. This vast universe is the outcome of divine dance of matter
and spirit; therefore nature itself wants to convey its message to
mortals (Jeeva) through various omens. Some people listen to
nature while others take them as ordinary events and ignore the
voice of nature.
Omens have great utility in prediction in horary astrology and
many queries can be answered simply on the basis of keen observations of omens presented by nature at the tim e of query. 1 share
a few experiences regarding utility of omens :
One day a friend of mine came to my residence to know the
time and date of his promotion. He mentioned one number that I
did not recall because this incident was five years old. But I remember the number mentioned by him showed Libra ascendant
and the lord of sixth house (service) Jupiter was exalted in tenth
house. As I was about to make the prediction lights of my residence went off. I thought for a while and said that he had to wait
for promotion for some time. While we were discussing the promotion episode the light cameback. I told him that the promotion
list that was to be issued within three days would not find his
name. The next list would give him promotion. Exactly the same
happened. Here the omen was light that helped me to reach right
conclusion about the query. This prediction was made in the presence of other officers, who took the incident as a miracle.
One more incident will reveal the utility of omens. One day a
few persons were going to attend some important job. As soon
as they came out of their office and sat in the car a boy aged
around seven years crying loudly camebefore the car and also sat
in front of the car. I noticed the event and advised the gentlemen
to come back to office because the task for which they were
going would not be accomplished. They did not heed the advice
and went and came back without any gain but suffered some kind
ofhumiliation there.
There are many more events that can depict the importance of
' omens or voice of nature. Any astrologer who is accustomed to
listen to the voice of nature can make prediction even while movNew Dimensions of K.P Astrology

ingon road. Every moment such omens are taking place around
us. Sometimes we recognize them and beautifully blend in the
prognostications of future. Horary astrologers must have keen
observation about such omens while attending horary query. A
few cognizable omens like entry of child into room, behaviour of
child, direction occupied by querent who enters the room at the
time of query, light gone off or come, falling down of water, telephone call and discussion made o ver telephone etc must also be
taken into account. Besides that omens can be presented into
any form, sound, shape etc by the nature and how these are to be
apprehended depends on the intelligence of the astrologers. We
intend to advise readers that many books provide information
regarding utility and description of a particular omen but j udgement of astrologer on any omen is much more useful than any
bookish knowledge.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Cuspal and Traditional Chart
Indian astrology has divided the zodiac equally into twelve parts.
Each part measures 30° in longitude, hence twelve parts count
360° of zodiac. On the basis of this division sign or Rasi too has
been considered to be of 30° in longitude. The chart prepared to
read the results as per K.P. is called Cuspal chart and it is based
on Placidus system of Arch division. How to work out cusp
has been dealt with elaborately in previous chapters. The reading
of nativities on the basis of Cuspal chart is western concept.
Western astrologer goes more by astronomical principles than
perception. They take into account degree-to-degree motion of
the planets and the particular relation they form with other planets
and cusps which is known as the phenomenon of aspects. This
concept of aspect is also different from the Indian. As per Indian
astrology each part of the zodiac is always 30° in longitude -
neither more nor less while in Placidus system each house varies
in longitudes. One house maybe of 30° or more than 30° or less
than 30°. But the total of zodiac is always 360°. Cusp means the
beginning of the house. Due to variation of longitudes in each
house in Cuspal chart a planet seems to be placed in a different
house when compared with that of the chart prepared as per Indian
systems. This discrepancy creates confusion in the mind of
astrologers and often put them in dilemma pertaining to the different
placement of planets in Cuspal chart and Indian chart. It has been
found by us that horary question must be solved through Placidus
system i.e. Cuspal chart.
Indian astrology recognizes the importance of sign (Rasi) and
on the basis of it the strength of the planet is judged. In K.P. such
importance has not been given to the sign and astrologers following
PFi
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

it do not mind the planet which is placed in second house being
placed either in ascendant or twelfth house in Cuspal chart. They
are much more concerned with the longitudes of cusps and planets.
Now the question is whether the importance of sign be recognized
or not: Which method should be adopted to answer horary query?
It is our humble suggestion the astrologer must always open his
mind to welcome new ideas and new concepts. The importance
of sign cannot be ignored and the relation between sign and planets
viz. a cusp be studied properly. Sign ( Rasi ) shows the area of
influence and also the strength, nature and behaviour of a planet in
a particular area. Apart from that in many questions it is only
through the help of sign that the queries are solved. Questions like
theft, description of thief, direction where one will move etc are
answered on the basis of the sign falling in a particular Bhava.
Now the question is how to get rid of the discrepancies pertaining
to placement of planets in Cuspal chart and Indian traditional chart.
We are solving such a major discrepancy, which is explained with
thehelp of examples: -
Suppose a querent gives number 27 for any question. This
question was solved on a particular date and time. Horary number
27 means Taurus ascendant at 7°-0'-0". Now at this particular
date let us say Venus is in Taurus sign at 4°-30'. Indian traditional
method of casting horoscope shows Venus in ascendant while
p
Cuspal position shows Venus to be in twelfth house because 1st
cusp begins from 7°-0'-0" and the longitude ofVenus is 4°-30’.
Therefore, Venus will shift back to twelfth house. Astrologers must
not read the influence of sign, planet and cusp separately but
approach to integrated relationship among them. Now this
approach of integrated relationship be applied to understand the
effect as well as influence ofVenus over twelfth and first cusp.
Venus is at 4°-30' and is in direct motion and is 2°-30' away from
ascendant. It means Venus is advancing towards ascendant.
Therefore the astrologer must predict that Venus in twelfth house
shows temporary negations of query but the desire will be
materialized in due courses of time because Venus being a fastmoving planet is ready to leave twelfth house and advancing toward
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

ascendant. Had this Venus been in retrograde motion then it would
have been retracing back from ascendant and would be staying in
twelfth house, which shows failure of query. Suppose querent
would have given number 36 instead of 27. It means Taurus
ascendant at 20°-26'-40". Venus in Taurus sign at 4°-30' is 1 6°
away from ascendant. It means Venus will give the effect of twelfth
cusp rather than ascendant. In order to get the result of next
Bhava the planet must not be away from cusp more than 10°. If
the planet is at less than 1 0° from the cusp of next BHava it is
assumed to give the result of the same. Late Krishnamurti had
included two or three houses to answer any question that showed
that every house was concerned with another house and developed
the integrated system of prediction. This integrated approach
proved to be more fruitful than the unitary system of
prediction followed by Indian astrologers.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

PART — II
Case Studies

New Dimensions of K.R Astrology
Oo
to
How will be the tenure in the office?
?< Example No. - 1
Planetary Position . Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 1 : One officer who was transferred to another place
wanted to know how his tenure would be at the new place?
Judgement : Horary No - 105
When such type of questions are posed before the astrologer
then a particular house is not judged but the strength of the whole
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

chart is to be judged. In this question the o fficer wanted to know
whether his tenure would be peaceful or some dispute would arise.
In that particular question the strength of ascendant and instant
Vimshottari Mahadasha are to be judged.
The sub-lord of first cusp Rahu is placed in ninth house in the
star of the sun that is placed in twelfth house. Since sun, the lord
of first cusp being placed in twelfth house is not conducive because twelfth is the negation of 1st cusp. The lord and star lord of
eighth cusp mercury is placed in ascendant; that is again negative
sign. It is also interesting to note that mercury is lord of second
cusp placed in ascendant. Ascendant if twelfth to second cusp
shows negation to second cusp. Therefore it can be safely said
that this officer will not stay longer and will not have peaceful
tenure.
At the time of judgement the Mahadasha running was that of
Saturn and Antardasa was of the Sun. Saturn was placed in the
star of Rahu and i n the sub of Venus. Rahu was placed in ninth
house while sub-lord Venus was placed in twelfth house. The subloid of Sun was Jupiter that was placed in twelfth house. Thus this
Dasa and Antardasa might bring his shifting from present place
because Decanate and Antardasanath are strongly related with
twelfth house. Twelfth house not only shows mental tensions but
also indicates unexpected journeys.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

w Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Party will give ticket or not
Example No. 2
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 2 : A young man desirous of contesting election on
the ticket of a national level party posed the query whether he will
get the ticket or not.
He mentioned No. 5 1 .
Horary No = 5 1
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Analysis :
1 . In order to ensure political success Vth cusp and Xlth cusp
must have relation with each other and simultaneously must have
connection with Jupiter and Mars. Jupiter and Mars together show
courage as well as authority.
2. This gentleman will get the ticket or not will be decided by
the strength of ascendant.
Ruling Planets^
Ascendant lord = Mercury (R)
Ascendant star 1 ord = Rahu
Moon sign lord = Mercury (R)
Moon star lord = Rahu
Day lord = Venus
Ticket will be given to him or not -
1 . Ascendant is occupied by Saturn. Therefore ascendant is
quite weak. Ascendant lord mercury is retrograde and lord of
1 1 th house is also retrograde.
Therefore there is no possibility of getting him ticket.
2. The lord of Vth house Venus is debilitated.
3. As has been described in previous chapter if one or more
than one ruling planet is retrograde then desire is not fulfilled. Therefore, this young man will not be able to get the ticket.
Comment: He was denied ticket.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of KP. Astrology
Court Decision - 1
Example No. - 3
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 3 : Aperson wanted to know the judgement of the
court, which was to be delivered on 28-08-2000.
Horary No - 161
A case in the court was dragging in for a long time and the judgement was to be delivered on 28-08-2000. This person wanted to
know whether the decision would be in his favour or not.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

I declared that decision would not be delivered on 28-08-2000
because of the following reasons :
1 . Ascendant is not aspected by any planet. The sub-lord of
first cusp is placed in the sub of Rahu, which is very slow planet
and also placed in eighth house, a house of hindrance.
2. It has been found by us in a number of cases if at the time of
query Saturn and Moon are conjoined the matter is inordinately
delayed. In this query Saturn and Moon are conjoined showing
delay.
3 . The sub-lord of eleventh cusp is Ketu which is a confusing
and abortive planet But Ketu is aspected by Jupiter; therefore if
will not give result against the interest of querent but will delay the
matter and also maintain status quo of the case.
Comment : The decision could not be delivered on 28-082000 and due to aspect of Jupiter over Ketu later on the case
was sent back to district administration with the comment to
settle the case within two months.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Court decision - 2
Example No. -4
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspai)
Example 4 : AnI.A.S. officer’s case was running in the court
and decision was to be delivered soon. She in anxious state of
mind asked what would be the likely decision of court.
Horary No - 49
The court case was pertaining to her transfer to another state
as a result of the division of the state. She did not want to go to the
newly created state and wanted to stay in the original cadre.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Analysis :
1 . The ascendant is aspected by Jupiter. The ascendant, lord
Mercury too is aspected by Jupiter in ninth house showing fulfilment
of her desire.
2. The sub-lord of first cusp Saturn is one ofthe ruling planets
again showing fulfilment ofher desire.
3 . However it is to be noted here that at the time of judgement
of query the Jupiter was retrograde showing delay. Moon and
Saturn were together again showing delay.!
I 'r
On the basis ofthe above analysis if may be concluded that
there maybe problems but she will stay in her original state.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K .
to
Decision delivered by lower court would be stayed or not?
Example No. 5
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 5 : A gentleman from Delhi asked the question over
telephone if the judgement delivered by lower court would be
stayed or not.
Horary No - 157
A court of Delhi sentenced this gentleman for two years. I had
already predicted the gentleman before the judgement that he
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

would be sentenced. The prediction came very true and he was
sentenced and three months time was given to file an appeal against
the order. This question now was asked in that reference.
Analysis :
Ascendant lord
Ascendant star lord -
Moon sign lord
Moon star lord
t'l
r
Ruling Planets
Mars (R)
Saturn
Mercury
Jupiter
Day lord - Saturn
*i
1 . Lord of ascendant Mars is retrograde and placed in ascendant showing agiiatingmind. The sub-lord of 1st cusp Jupiter is
pi aced in 7 th house aspects ascendant.
Though ascendant is weak due to placement of retrograde Mars
yet not completely damaged due to aspect of Jupiter over ascendant.
2. The sub-lord of 1 1th cusp is Rahu, which is in the sub of
mercury, the lord of 1 1 th house placed in 7th house. Therefore
ascendant is aspected by two benefic planets and shows that decision given by the lower court would be cancelled.
3 . It is also important to note here that in case of imprisonment
either Rahu or Saturn must be strong significator of 1 2th house. In
this query neither Rahu nor Saturn is the significator of 1 2th house.
Therefore further sentence or imprisonment is out of question.
4. At the time of query Jupiter Mahadasha and Venus Antardasa
is running up to 27 May 2002. Venus being in the star of Mercury
is stronger, then Mercury will bring relief to the querent. However
the fine imposed on the querent by the lower court will not be
reckoned due to aspect of Saturn over 1 2th house.
New Dimensions of K.P, Astrology

New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Health - 1
Example No. 6
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 6: A gentleman wanted to know about his health. He
gave number - 46
Horary No. 46,
DOJ. = 08-03-02, TOJ =19-05, POJ= Shivpuri
This gentleman was suffering from headache for the last three
or four days and wanted to know the cause of it. Such questions
must be studied from ascendant because health good - or bad -
depends on the strength of the ascendant and the relationship of
ascendant with that of other houses.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

The following rules should be taken into account :
( 1 ) If the sub-lord of ascendant is also the significator of sixth
house the native never keeps good health.
(2) If the sub-lord of sixth house is also the significator of
ascendant.
(3) If the sub-lord or lord of fifth cusp is placed in eighth house
the native is likely to be apatient of migraine, brain tumour, etc.
In the above question the sub-lord of first cusp is not having any
connection with sixth cusp. The sub-lord of fifth cusp, Jupiter, is
not placed in eighth house but having rulership over eighth house.
Therefore eighth house is having connection with fifth as well as
with ascendant. Therefore he is a patient ofheadache, which erupts
occasionally. But this is not a dangerous case or neither showing
any complex problem because neither fifth lord nor sub-lord of
fifth cusp is posited in eighth house. This kind ofheadache is the
result of mental exertion due to the fact that sub-lord of first cusp
moon is also significator of third cusp (mental exertion) aspecting
ascendant. This mental exertion may also be due to some secret
activities of mind (connection of eighth to ascendant), which cannot
be expressed, and native is again and again thinking over that.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

100 New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Health - 2
Example No. - 7
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 7 : One man aged around fifty years posed a query
regarding his health problems. He mentioned number 9.
The question was judged on 09-09-03 at 4:13 PM. atMorena
This man was always suffering either due to fever, diarrhoea or
blood pressure. He is also weak in constitution.
In order tp judge the question related with health ascendant is
properly scrutinized along with six, twelfth and eighth houses.
1 . The lord of first cusp i.e. Mars and sub-lord of first cusp i.e.
Mercury both are retrograde. Rahu is placed in ascendant. In this
way ascendant is fairly weak. Though aspect of Jupiter over
ascendant will keep the native alive but he will always be ailing
with various ailments.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

2. The placement of either Rahu or Saturn in ascendant makes
one to suffer from blood pressure. In this query Rahu is placed in
ascendant showing high blood pressure.
3 . The sub-lord of sixth cusp, i.e. Jupiter, denotes windy element
Sub-lord of eighth cusp Mars denotes watery element and twelfth
cusp sub-lord Rahu denotes fiery element Thus querent is suffering
due to disequilibria of wind, water and fire elements.
4. Since ascendant is completely spoiled there is no possibility of
recovery. It is important to note that Rahu will note let him recover
and Jupiter, due to aspect over ascendant, will not allow him to
die.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

w Dimensions of K.P, Astrology 103
Improvement of financial position
Example No. 8
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Ni ray ana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 8 : A lady asked Ihe query when her financial position
will improve.
Horary No - 25
For improvement in financial position either the sub-lord of second cusp or star lord in which sub-lord of second cusp is posited
must have connection with eleventh cusp.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

If the sub-lord of second cusp is also the significator of ascendant then it shows negation of the query.
Analysis :
(i) The sub-lord of second cusp Saturn is also the sub-lord if
1st cusp. Therefore it shows negation of the query.
(ii) Saturn is also the lord of eleventh cusp which shows slowly
the financial position will improve.
(iii) The ascendant lord Venus is placed which eleventh house
in the sign of Saturn. Therefore the banking position will improve
but with very slow pace due to influence of Saturn.
At the time of judgement Mars Mahadasha was operating. Mars
is placed in second house in the star of Rahu in the sub of Saturn.
In this way Mars has got connection with second, sixth and eleventh. Thus Mars Mahadasha is more promising for loan, overdraft facilities etc. Through such facilities her financial position may
improve.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

106 New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Reinstatement in service
Example No. 9
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspai)
Example 9 : One officer who was suspended wanted to know
when he wouldbe reinstated in Job. He mentioned number 1 1 .
Suspension is a temporary setback to continuous flow of money
earned in the form of salary. In order to maintain its cycle the
second house is given importance because second house denotes
liquid assets and financial position with depreciated or improved
banking position. Since matter is related with job sixth house (service) and eleventh house (fulfilment of desire) apart from second
house are cons idered.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Ascendant lord
Ascendant star lord
Ruling Planets
Mars (R)
Venus
Moon sign lord - Mars (R)
t
Moon star lord - Jupiter
Day lord - Saturn
It is always important to see the strength of ascendant
irrespective of the nature of the query. Secondly for the quick
fulfilment of desire ascendant must have connection with eleventh
house.
Analysis : (i) The ascendant lord Mars is retrograde and also
posited in own star - showing failure of the question.
(ii) Saturn is posited in ascendant.
(iii) Thus ascendant is fairly weak.
(iv) The sub-lord of second cusp Jupiter is in the sign of Mars,
the lord of sixth house, and in the star of Ketu, which is placed in
tenth house. Thus Jupiter becomes the significator because Jupiter
is having connection with sixth house through sign not through star
or sub.
(v) Ascendant is not having connection with eleventh house.
(vi) The positive feature is that sub-lord of eleventh cusp,
Mercury, is placed in second showing maintenance of flow of
money and increased bank position.
( vii) From the above analysis it is evident that after delay and
mental torture the querent will be reinstated with following
conditions.
(i) The salary of the suspension period will not be paid because
the star lord of second cusp moon is debilitated.
(ii) The sub-lord of sixth cusp is placed in twelfth house shows
transfer after reinstatement
(iii) The suspension will be revoked during Jupiter Mahadasha,
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Moon Antardasa and Venus Pratyantara which runs from 2209-99 to 22-12-99. Venus is one of the ruling planets and also
lord of second and is placed in third house. Venus is in the star of
Jupiter, which is placed in twelfth house. Thus Venus is having
connection with third, second and twelfth houses respectively.
Note :
The querent was reinstated on 1 0- 1 1 -99 and transferred to
Rewa (M.R)
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

110 New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Sex of the Child of the Fourth Son
Example No. 10
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 10 : An old man wanted to know about the sex of
the to-be-bom child of his fourth son. He mentioned No - 235
Horary No. 235
The father of a son who is fourth in number asked this question
and the old man is a grand-father of to-be-bom child. If question
is related with first son or daughter then Vth house is considered.
For second, third children, 7th and 9th houses are considered
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

respectively. When the query is related with fourth son so 1 1th
house is considered as the ascendant of IVth son. The query is
related with the first child of fourth son - hence 3rd house is Vth
(first child) to 1 1 th house (fourth son)
Analysis : 1 The sub-lord of 3rd cusp is Rahu and lord of 3rd
house is Venus. Venus and Rahu both are female planets i.e. first
child will be a female child.
2. The lord of 1 1th house is Saturn, which'is also a female
planet.
3 . The sub-lord ofV th cusp (7th to 1 1 th denoting wife of fourth
son) is Rahu and the lord is moon. They both are female planets.
Therefore the unborn child is likely to be female.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.R Astrology 113
How Long One Will Stay at a Place
Example No. 1 1
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 11: An officer who was transferred to Morena
wanted to know how long he will stay in Morena. He mentioned
Ruling . Planets
Ascendant lord - Moon
Ascendant star lord - Saturn
" Moon sign lord - Moon
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Moon star lord - Mercury
Day lord - Mars (R)
The question is not related with transfer. Transfer or shifting
from a particular plad? tdkes place when significator of 3rd, 10th
and 1 2th home operates.'
Analysis of the query :
1 . No - 74 as mentioned by querent denotes cancer ascendant,
which is a movable sign. Moon, the planet of journeys, is placed
in ascendant. Therefore this officer will not stay for a longer time
at his present place.
2. The sub-lord of 3rd cusp is Ketu, which is placed in IVth
house in the star of Jupiter and in the sub of moon. Both Moon
and Jupiter are placed in ascendant fourth house denoting present
place. The sub-lord of 10th cusp is Jupiter, which is placed in
ascendant. Therefore both Ketu and Mercury are not having
connections witn 12th house. Therefore he is not likely to be
transferred in near future.
3. At- the time of query Mercury Mahadasha and Mars
Antardasa is running up to 1 5-12-03. Since Mars is retrograde
he will not be transferred up to 1 5- 1 2-03 .
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

116 New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Will I Get Through P.G Exam of M.B.B.S?
Example No. 12
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 12: Will I get through P.G examination of M.B.B.S?
Horary No. 242
A girl could not be selected in her first attempt for postgraduation degree after M.B.B.S. Second time she appeared in
the competition and asked the question.
Analysis : (i) The dasa of fourth, ninth and eleventh house must
operate to ensure success in examination.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

(ii) Significatois :
(a) Fourth house : Mercury, Sun, Ketu. Mercury is strong
significator being in its own star.
(b) Ninth house : Ketu, Mars, Rahu
(c) Eleventh house : Saturn
Thus the Significators of above houses are: Mercury, Sun, Ketu,
Mars, Rahu and Saturn.
Asd lord
Asd star lord
Moon sign lord
Moon star lord
Day lord
Ruling Planets
Jupiter
Mercury
Saturn
Jupiter
Mars
Mahadasha : Jupiter Mahadasha, Jupiter Antardasa and
Mercury Pratyantara operate from 9-04-02 to 21-09-02. Jupiter
is Lagan lord and very strong ruling planet because Jupiter is
repeated twice among ruling planets. Mercury is the lord of fourth
house and very strong Significators of fourth and ninth (star lord
of ninth cusp) also eleventh house (in the sub of Saturn lord of
eleventh). Thus this Dasa brought success to querent. Her result
was declared on 15-04-02. At the time Mercury Pratyantara
was operating.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology 119
Success in P.G Examination of M.B.B.S.
Example No. 13
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 13: One young lady doctor asked the question
whether she would be selected in M.D. examination?
Horary No - 64
1- The sub-lord of 1st cusp, Mars placed in eleventh house,
shows incomplete fulfilment of desire because the lord and star
lord of 1st cusp i.e. Moon and Jupiter both areplaced in twelfth
house. However sub-lord of 1st cusp is having connection with
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

eleventh house; therefore her desire would be fulfilled partially i.e.
she may be selected for diploma course rather than degree.
Mahadasha : At the time of judgement Rahu Mahadasha and
Mercury Antardasa were running up to 1 2-06-02. Mercury, the
lord of fourth house and one of the ruling planets, is retrograde.
Therefore Mercury will not bring success to her. However Mercury
is in the star of Moon, which is placed in twelfth house that she
may go out of India for completion of her post-graduation in
medicine. This too will happen when Mercury attains direct motion.
Comments : It is imperative to mention here that to judge queries
of various natures different houses are studied. But in horary
astrology major thrust is always given to ascendant and 1 1 th house.
A particular question may be tackled in various ways. It is not
necessary every time to know the result of a particular question
Significators of concerned houses maybe worked out Significators
are worked out only when query seems to be affirmative by judging
the strength of ascendant and 1 1 th house. If query seems to be
negative then one should not proceed further. Even at the time of
judgement of query, ruling planets indicate affirmation or negation
of the query. The main object behind working out Significators it
to reach out timing of events if query seems to be positive. In
various examples given in the book Significators have not been
worked out due to above reasons.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

122 New Dimensions of K.R Astrology
Success in Competitive Examination - 1
Example No. 14
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 14 : A student appeared in competitive examination
and exams were conducted on 17-10-2001,3-12-01 and 9-120 1 . Will the student get through in this exam? The grand-father of
this boy asked this question.
Horary No - 78
The boy is the son of the eldest’s son of the querent Therefore
fifth cusp will denote the ascendant of eldest grand son and fifth to
fifth is ninth cusp. Hence ninth cusp will denote grandson.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology 123

1 . In order to get through any examination - whether it is competitive examination or college examination- the Dasa and
Antardasa of 4, 9, and 1 1 must operate.
2. The fourth house from ninth (grand son) is twelfth. 9th house
from 9th is fifth and eleventh house from ninth is seventh. So houses
12, 5 and 9 will be judged for the success of grandson.
Significators :
(i) Twelfth house : Mercury (lord of twelfth), Venus (in the star
of Mercury), Rahu (sign occupied of Mercury and aspected by
Venus): Thus the significator of twelfth cusp are Mercury, Venus
and Rahu.
(ii) Fifth house : Ketu, Mercury, Rahu, Sun, Moon, Mars.
Note : How to find out significator has been described in
chapter eight.
Seventh house : Mars, Rahu, and Saturn
Thus the significator are Mercury, Ketu, Venus, Sun, Moon,
Mars, Rahu, and Saturn. All the planets are significators. The best
method to sort out beneficial significators is to match them with
rulingplanets at the moment of judgement.
Ruling Planets
Asd lord - Moon
Asd star lord - Mercury
Moon sign lord - Saturn
Moon star lord - Sun
Day lord — Moon
Mahadasha operating : Sun Mahadasha and Jupiter
Antardasa runs up to 27-04-02. Since Jupiter is not the ruling
planet the boy will not get success in examination. The boy will be
selected in Sun Mahadasha and Saturn Antardasa because Saturn is not only significators but also lord of seventh house i.e.
eleventh to ninth house. Sun is placed in fifth house, which is 9th
to 9th house. The Dasa of Saturn in Sun Mahadasha will operate
from 27-04-02 to 7-05-03. In this Dasa and Antardasa too the
Pratyantara of Mercury will bring success to the boy.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Purchase of Land - 1
Example No. 15
Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Guspal)
Example 15 : A businessman wanted to purchase a land and
he asked if the land would be gainful to him or not?
Horary No - 161
1 . For purchasing of land 4th, 2nd, 11 th and 1 2th houses are to
be judged. The sub-lord of fourth cusp is Rahu, which is placed in
6th house showing dispute in this land. It is important to note that
whenever there is a connection between fourth and sixth house
dispute arises.
i 1 i
New Dimensions of K.R Astrology

2. The lord of 1st cusp, Mars, is placed in 12th house and
ascendant is aspected by Saturn this shows weakening of
ascendant. Saturn also aspects 4th house again showing some
kind of disputes.
3. Either the lord or sub-lord of 4th cusp is not having any
connection with 1 1 th house i.e. this property will not fetch any
gain to the buyer.
4. To whom we deal is shown by 7th house. The placement of
Saturn in 7 th house clearly indicates the doubtful integrity of the
seller. On the basis of the above analysis we advised the querent
not to purchase this land.
Comment : Later on we came to know that this land was already
sold to two persons who had filed cases in the court pertaining to
the dispute.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

128,1 ,f New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Purchase of Land -2
Example No, 16
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 16 : A woman wanted to purchase a land. When
would the land be purchased?
Horary No - 1 27
Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Venus
Ascendant star lord - Mars
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

house. Mars, the significator of land, also aspects 1 1 th house.
The star lord of 4th cusp. Sun, is also placed in 4th house being
the lord of 1 1 th house - i.e. purchasing of the land is sure.
Mahadasha : At the time of query Venus Mahadasha and
Venus Antardasa was running up to 19-8-2003. Mars
Pratyantara in Venus. But ofVenus Mahadasha would run from
23-05-01 to 2-08-01 . During this time the land would be purchased. Actually for purchasing of this land advance money of
Rs. 1 lakh was given to the seller on 3 1-05 -01.
t
New Dimensidns of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Admission of Son in Medical college
. Example No. 17
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 17 : A lady from Lucknow asked the question, over
telephone, whether her son would be able to get admission in
medical college.
Horary No - 57
The question is about the only son of this woman. So 5th house
will be taken as the ascendantof the son.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Analysis : The lord and sub-lord of 5th cusp is Venus, which is
placed in 3rd house. Venus is posited in his own star and in the
sub or Mercury, which is retrograde. Mercury too is placed in
3rd house. 3rd lord, Sun, is also placed in 3rd house.
2. Third house happens to be 1 1 th to 5th house. In this way
1 1 th house is well fortified due to placement of three benefics.
This ensures admission of son in medical college but he would
have to wait because Mercury is retrograde but placed in 1 1 th
house. As soon as mercury attains direct motion the son will get
the admission.
Ascendant lord
Ascendant star lord
Moon sign lord
Moon star lord
Day lord
Ruling Planets
Mercury (R)
Jupiter
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn
3. As far as the desire of mother is concerned it is fulfilled
because ascendant is aspected by benefic planet like Moon.
Secondly the sub-lord of 1 st cusp Saturn is posited in the star of
Rahu, which is placed in the 1 1th house showing fulfilment of desire.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

134 I New Dimensions of K.R Astrology
Determination of Sex of Child
Example No. 18
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 18 : A man wanted to know the sex of the to-bebom child as his wife was in the family way.
HoraryNo-124
Analysis : The to-be-bom child will be female because of
following reasons.
(i) Horary ascendant itself foils in female sign.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

(ii) The sub-lord of 5th cusp (1st child) Mercury is placed in 5th
house. Therefore ascendant and 5 th cusps both are influenced by
female planet.
Comments : The wife of the querent gave birth to a female
child on (4-5-00
Certain rules related with the queries of the to-be-bom child
and others:
(i) In horary query the first child is denoted by fifth house. The
second child is denoted by 7th house. The third child is denoted
by 9th house, the fourth child is denoted by 11th house and so on.
E.g. A couplehas three children. The eldest child will be shown
by 5th house, the second child is shown by 7th house and the
youngest child is shown by 9th house. The same rule will be
applicable to the horoscope of either husband or wife.
2. In order to make verdict over the to-be-bom child the fifth
house of the querent mother or father will denote first child. As it
is clear from the above query, for the sex determination of the tobe-bom second child 7th cusp will be considered.
(iii) Adeep study of signs, planets and stars is must while making
such type of predictions.
(iv) Whatever maybe the nature of query the influence over
ascendant must be properly considered.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

w Dimensions of K.P. Astrology 137
Will My Love Affair Materialize? — 1
Example No. - 19
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 19 : A young man in love with a beautiful woman
wants to know ifhis love affair would materialize or not:
HoraryNo-165
DOJ - 27-2-03, TOJ = 7 pm, POJ = Agra
Rule: In order to judge such type of queries following rules
should be kept in mind:
(i) If the sub-lord of 5th cusp or lord of 7th cusp is having
relation with 7th and 11th houses then love affair is materialized;
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

otherwise not.
(ii) If the lord of 7th house is placed in 5th house then there are
many love affairs.
(iii) If the lord of 7th house is placed in 1 1 th house in its own
sign, friendly sign or exaltation sign, then success is ensured in
love affair.
(iv) If the sub-lord of 7th cusp is Mercury and placed in dual
sign, it denotes many love affairs.
(v) If the sub-lord of 7th cusp or lord of 7th house is placed in
2nd house many love affairs possible.
Analysis of the query' : (i) The sub-lord ofV th cusp is Jupiter,
which is placed in 8th house in the star of Saturn which is placed
in 7th house. In that question the connection of 5th and 7th is
formed to show akind of infatuation or attraction but will not turn
into any bond of permanent ties because 11th house is not in the
picture.
(ii) The sub-lord and lord of 5th cusp, Jupiter, is retrogradere. love affair will not materialize and Jupiter having connection
with Saturn will cause ultimate separation.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

140 New Dimensions of K.R Astrolo \
Will My Love Affair Materialize? - 2
Example No. 20
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 20: A young lady wanted to know if her love affair
would materialize or not.
The sub-lord of 5th cusp Venus which is also the star of 11th
cusp is placed in the star of Mars, the lord of find and 7th houses -
i.e. there is a strong connection of 5th and 7th, ] 1th and 2nd housesi.e. love affair will be materialized but it will take time and face
opposition due to placement of Ketu in ascendant.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology 141

Will My Love Affair Materialize — 3
Example - No. 21
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Example 19 : A young man poses the query if his love affair
will materialize into marriage.
Horary No - 1 65
DOJ = 27-2-03, TOJ = 7pm, POJ = Agra
Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Mars
Ascendant star lord — Mercury
Moon sign lord - Saturn
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology 143

Moon star lord - Sun
Day lord - Jupiter (R)
1. The sub-lord of 5th cusp is Jupiter, which is placed in the
star of Saturn. Saturn is placed in 7th house. i.e. affairs may going
on but will not materialize into marriage.
2. If the-sub lord of 5th cusp is having connection with 6th and
1 2th cusp then the boy and girl may be moving together, may
have good relationship but will not have any sexual relationship.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Entangled Money
Example No. 22
PLaoetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 22 : A clerk working in an institution gave a huge
amount of money to a party. The party refused to pay back his
money. Now the querent wanted to know whether his entangled
money would be recovered or not?
Horary No.- 74
Either to borrow or to take overdraft facilities or recovery of
money are all judged from the 6th house and there are certain
rules in this regard.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Rules : 1 . The querent will not get back his entangled money if
the sub-lord of sixth cusp is retrograde. The rule is also applicable
to borrowing or overdraft facilities.
(ii) The querent will get back his money if the sub-lord of 6th
cusp is in direct motion. He may also get loan or overdraft facilities.
(iii) If the sub-lord of 6th cusp is Saturn then after much mental
torture one gets frenetic and only meagre sum - of what he expects.
(iv) Mercury being the sub-lord of 6th cusp facilitates the help
of mediators. The recovery is fast.
(v) Jupiter indicates mediation of court.
(vi) Government or court will help the querent if sub-lord of 6th
house happens to be Sun.
(vii) Both the parties will settle the matter amicably if either
Moon or Venus happens to be the sublord of si xth cusp.
The nature of the result will depend on the lord of constellation
in which Rahu and Ketu are posited, if they happen to be sublord of 6th cusp.
(ix) In the query related with either borrowing orrecovery of
money the querent will get only 50% of what he expects i f Jupiter
is aspectcd by Saturn.
(x) The same result (ix) will be experienced if Jupiter is
associated either with Saturn or Rahu.
(xi) The use of force or threats i f Mars happens to be the sublord of 6th cusp.
Analysis of the query : What will be the result of the query?
1 . The sub-lord of 1 st cusp, Jupiter, is placed in 11th house
showing money will be recovered. But, Jupiter being in
retrogression will dealy the matter.
2. The sub-lord of 1 st cusp, Jupiter, is also one of the ruling
planets.
3. The sub-lord IstofVIth cusp, Venus, is not retrograde. So
above analysis shows that the querent will get back his entangled
14T~I
New Dimensions of K.P Astrology

money. But he will get part of it - not full - because Jupiter is
conjoined with Saturn and Rahu (Rule X).
Ruling Planets
in 1 1th house. This clearly shows that querent will have to satisfy
himself with a part of the entangled money. He will not be able to
get back his full amount.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of ICR Astrology 1 149
Borrowing from Bank
Example No. 23
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Example 23 : Abusinessman wanted to take loan from bank if
it is possible.
Horary No. 146
Rilling Planets
Ascendant Lord - Mars
Ascendant starLord - Jupiter
Moon sign Lord - Moon
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Moon star Lord - Mercury
Day Lord — Mars
Rule : One will borrow either from a friend or from an institution
if the sub-lord of 6th cusp is posited in the constellation the lord of
which i s not retrograde.
Analysis : 1 . The desire of the querent will be fulfilled because
ascendant is aspected by Jupiter and Venus along with S atum and
Mars. The aspect of Mars over ascendant will not have deleterious
effect because Mars itself is ascendant lord. However the aspect
of Saturn over ascendant will delay the matter.
2. The Sub-lord of 1 st cusp Moon placed in the star of Mercury
is the lord of 1 1 th house but placed in 8th house again showing
hindrance and impediment in getting the desire fulfilled. But
fulfilment of desire is promised because ascendant is having
connection with 1 1th house through Mercury.
3. The sub-lord of 6th cusp is Rahu which is posited in the star
of Jupiter and in the sub of Mars. Both Mars and Jupiter aspect
ascendant, i.e. definately he will get the loan from bank.
Comments : It is the rule of thumb of horary astrology and
especially astrology based on K.P, if the sub-lord of 1st cusp
becomes ruling planet then the desire of the querent, how odds it
maybe, is fulfilled.
2. In the query it is important to know that the native will not
get the loan that he expects because Saturn is associated with
Jupiter. It has been found by us if Saturn is assoicated with Jupiter
the querent does not get what he expects but less.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

162 New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
fr ■
Example No. 24
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 24 : Avery influential man ofAgraneeds some money.
He wanted to borrow it from one of his relatives. Whether he will
get or not?
Horary No. - 3
Analysis : The sub-lord of 6th cusp Saturn is posited in the
constellation on Sim and in the sub ofMercwry. Saturn is placed in
Ilnd house while Sun and Mercury are placed in 4th house. Saturn
is also associated with Jupiter in 2nd house which shows the
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

borrowing amount will be less than what he expects to borrow. At
Comments : Since sub-lord of 6th cusp is related with 2nd
house and with the Sun (Saturn being in the constellation of the
Sun) either eldest brother (2nd house is 1 1 th to 4th house) or any
financial institution (due to Sun) will give loan to this man.
2. We came to know that he borrowed from a bank.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.F Astrology 155
Litigation
Example No. 25
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Example 25 : An old man with many problems in the mind
posed a query about litigation regarding his property.
Horary No - 5
DOJ = 14-1-03, TQJ = 4:50 pm, POJ-Shivpuri (M.P.)
Analysis : 1 . For litigation always takes 6th cusp. If there is
property, service matter etc are always judged from the 6th house.
This question is about the property litigation.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

2. Adispute may arise if the lord of 11 th house or sub-lord of
1 1 th cusp is placed in 6th house.
3 . Sub-lord of 4th cusp Ketu is placed in 8th house along with
Venus. The lord of 1 1 th house mercury though retrograde is placed
in the star of Venus. Ketu is having connection with 8th house
which shows delay and impediments. But both the parties will
reach an agreement out of court due to Venus. Venus, the sublord of 1 1 th cusp, is associated with 1 1 the cusp sub-lord Ketu in
8 th house. So the matter will be settled amicably.
Comments : It is to be noted in this particular question that
querent himself was in a state of confusion and there is likely to be
many questions in his mind. It is evident from the fact that at the
time of query Moon and Rahu were together. This shows ingenuity
or insincerity of the question.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

158 New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
When Will Marriage Take Place?
Example No. 26
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Example 26: A girl asked the question when she would get
married?
Horary No. 217.
Analysis : 1 . The lord of 1 st cusps, Saturn, is debilitated and
placed in 2nd house - it shows delay in fulfilment of disire.
2. Satrun is placed in the star of Venus which is a natural
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

significator of marriage. Venus is star and sub-lord of 7th cusp
and also sub-lord of 1 1 th cusp placed in 1 1th house i.e. desire will
be fulfilled.
Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Saturn
Ascendant star lord - Rahu
Moon sign lord - Sun
Moon star lord - Venus
Day lord - Sun
Mahadasa : Venus Mahadasa, Rahu Antardasa from 20-22002 to 25-1-2003. The marriage took place in Sep. 2002, because Venus and Rahu both are ruling planets as well as strong
significators of marriage.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology I 161
Second Marriage
Example No. 27
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 27 : A lady aged about 38 years wanted to get
remarried. Is Remarriage possible or not?
Horary No. 49
For more than one marriages following rules will help:
Rule 1 - The sub-lord of 1 st cusp either be Mercury or J upiter.
2. The sub-lord of 7th cusp be either Mercury or Jupiter or any
other planet but must have occupied dual sign in horary chart
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

3 . The sub-lord of 7th cusp must have connection with 2nd as
well as the 7th house.
Analysis : On the basis of above rules it can be predicted that
she will not get remarried because the sub-lord of 7th cusp is
neither Mercury nor Jupiter. Secondly the sub lord of 7th cusp i.e.
Saturn is not in dual sign.
Comments : Rules to judge polygamy, polyandry and illegal
marital affairs.
1 . There will be discord in married life if the sub-lord of 7th
cusp is Mercury and placed in 6th house.
2. If the sub-lord of 7th cusp is Mercury and is also placed in
dual sign indicates more than one marriage or many pre-or-postmarital affairs.
3 . Same rule can be applied to Jupiter also.
4. The question related with marriage will be negative if the
sub-lord of 7th cusp is posited in the star of a retrograde planet.
There will be delay and hurdles in marriage if sub-lord of 7th cusp
itself is retrograde.
5. The querent will have more than one affair if a sub-lord of
7th cusp is having connection with 2nd house. There is possibility
of illegal affairs if Saturn or Mars being the sub-lord of 7th cusp is
placed in 1 1th house.
6. There will be inordiate delay in marriage if at the time of
judgement of query moon is having any type of connection with
Saturn.
7. The activities of the native would be doubtful if 7th lord or
sub-lord of 7th cusp is conjoined with Rahu and placed in 8th
house.
8. There is possibility of love marriage if the sub-lord of 5th
cusp is posited in the constellation the lord of which is having
connection with 7th as well as 8th houses.
9. The sub-lord of 7th cusp and the star lord in which sub-lord
is posited indicates about height, colour, nature, behaviour, merits
etc. of the future husband and wife.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

1 0. Whether there will be harmony or discord between husband
and wife is to be decided by the sub-lord of 1st cusp and 7th
cusp. Ifboth the sub-lords are friendly to each other there will be
harmony between the couples. Ifboth the sub-lords are enemy to
each other there will be discoid beweenthem.
1 1 . If the lord of 7th house or sub-lord of 7th cusp is posited in
11th house native gains through wife.
Above cited rules have been found to be absolutely correct by
us after a long research. It is our humble request to esteemed
readers that they must not reach the conclusion in haste while
dealing with the question related with marriage, character, etc.
Any wrong verdict may spoil someone's life.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology 165
Integrity of Partner
Example No. 28
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 28 : Abusinessman questioned the integrity ofhis partner
and desired to know whether his partner could be trusted.
Horary No. 141
This businessman had a court case which had been dragging in
for a long time in court. The dispute is over a piece of land. The
man who wanted to help this businessman was none but the
advocate of the other party. The businessman now wanted to
know if the lawyer of the opponent party could be trusted or not.
New Dimensions of K.R Astrology

Analysis : The sub-lord of 7th cusp is Saturn. Saturn is placed
in 8th house. 8th house shows inimical and secret activities. Saturn
itself is the planet of secret activities.
2. Saturn is placed in the star of Rahu which is placed in 7th
house. Rahu is by nature a malefic and untrustworthy planet.
3. 7th house is also aspectedby Mars. In this way7th house is
under the influence of worst malefics.
4. This lawyer can not be trusted.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

168 New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Well-being of Wife
Example No. 29
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 29 : A man in anxious state of mind wanted to know
about the well-being of his wife.
Horary No. 103
DOJ = 15-2-03, TOJ = 7:18 PM, POJ - Shivpuri (M.P.)
j
The man who asked this query was recently tranferred from
Bastar (a district in M.P.) to Shivpuri. Due to failure of telephone
lines ofBastar district, he was not able to make any contact with
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

his wife. So he was very much anxious to know about her welfare.
Moon reveals the nature of query. Moon is in star of Saturn which
is lord of 7th house. Therefore the question is related with wife
and confirmed. Saturn is planet of morbidity and gloom i.e. native
is having unnecessary fear about the well-being of his wife.
Analysis : The sub-lord of seventh cusp is Venus. Venus is
posited in its own star and it denotes that at the time of query wife
is staying in the house. She is perfectly all right due to the aspect
of Jupiter and Saturn over seventh house.
2. The lord of seventh house Saturn is retrograde and aspects
seventh house denoting that wife is feeling depression-like
condition. I told him that she was perfectly all right and had been
missing; him therefore she had been feeling depression-like
condition.
3 . Next day the querent left for Bastar and telephoned me onl 62-03 at 8 pm to say that my analysis was absolutely correct.
Comments : Question related with wife, husband, marriage,”
second marriage, integrity o f partners, intergrity of the person with
whom we deal, polygamy, polyandry etc. are judged from 7th
house along with 2nd and 1 1 th houses.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology 171
Appointment of Wife
Example No. 30
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 30 : When my wife will be appointed? '
Horary No. 145
In job related questions houses 2, 6, and 1 0 are judged. Since
the question is related with the wife of the querent i.e. 2nd, 6th
and 1 0th are to be reckoned with 7th house and 4th house is 1 0
to 7th house. Thus houses 8th, 1 2th and 4th will be judged for this
question.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Analysis :
Ascendant lord -
Ascendant star lord -
Moon sign lord -
Moon star lord -
Day lord -
Ruling Planets
Venus
Jupiter
Moon
Mercury (r)
Venus
What will be the result of query? The desire of the querent
will be fulfilled due to the following reasons:
1 . The sub-lord of 1 st cusp i.e. Moon is placed in the star of
Mercury. Mercury is placed in 1 1th house. Mercury is retrograde.
As has been said in previous chapters that if star lord or sub-lord
of 1 st cusp, though retrograde, is placed in 1 1th house the desire
is fulfilled after some delay and obstacles (delay is due to
retrogression).
2. The sub-lord of 1st cusp Moon is one of the ruling planets.
3. Mercury is also ruling planet.
Therefore on the basis of analysis the desire of the querent will
be fulfilled. Now the question is when she will be appointed: for
timing of event significators of 8 th, 1 2tb and 4th cusps are taken
into consideration.
Eighth cusp : Rahu, Jupiter, Venus, Mars are the significators
of 8 th cusp.
Twelfth cusp : Venus, Mars are significators of 1 2th cusp.
Fourth cusp : Satrun is the lone significator of the IV th cusp.
Thus the common significators are Rahu, Jupiter, Venus, Mars,
Saturn.
At the time of judgement ofthe query Mercury Mahadasa and
Venus Antardasa were opearting. Mercury is placed in the star
of Mars which is strong significator of 2nd and 6th house. The
appointment letter will be given to her when Mercury will attain
direct motion. Mercury got direct motion on 23- 1 0-01 and the
wife of querent was appointed on 1 2- 1 1 -200 1 . /
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

174 New Dimensions of K.R Astrology
Foreign Journey
Example No. 31
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 31 : A gentleman posed the query if he will go abroad
in near future.
Horary No. 131
Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Rahu
Moon sign lord - Venus
Moon star lord — Venus
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Moon star lord - Jupiter
Day lord - Sun
In order to undertake foreign journey the following rules are
important:
Rule 1 : If the lord of ascendant is either placed in ascendant
or in 9th house then one definitely goes to foreign country.
2. If the lord of 9th house is placed in ascendant in horary
chart.
3 . If the sub-lord of 1 1 th cusp is in direct motion and having
connection with 9th and 1 1th houses.
Analysis : 1 . For foreign journey 9th, 1 2th and 1 1 th houses
are studied.
2. In the above horary chart rule (1) and (2) are absent.
However rule (3) is partially present.
3. The sub-lord of 1 1 th cusp is Mercury which is placed in the
star of Saturn and Saturn is debilitated. Therefore there is no
possibility of going to foreign country in near future.
Foreign visit when? At the time of query Jupiter Mahadasa
and Saturn An ta rdasa were operating upto 9-5-01. Jupiter is
related with 7th, 3rd cusps and aspects 12th cusp. Therefore
Jupiter Mahadasa will take him abroad. But Saturn will not help
because it is debilitated as well as is not the ruling planet. Mercury
and Ketu Antardasa will also not be helpful because both are not
the ruling planets. The Venus Antardasa in Jupiter Mahadasa
which will start from 20-7-04 will take him abroad because Venus,
one of the strong ruling planets, is placed in the star of Mercury,
the ruler of 9th as well as 12th house.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology 177
Transfer - 1
Example No. 32
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 32 : An officer wanted to know about his
transfer.
Horary No. 9
Houses 3,10 and 1 2 are judged for transfer. Here 1 0th house
is important because 1 0th house shows place of work. If
significators of 3 , 1 0 and 1 2 are operating, one gets transferred. If
significators of 3, 9 and 1 2 are operating, one proceeds on leave.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Therefore houses 9 and 1 0 have different influence. 1 Oth cusp
shows transfer due to employment while 9 shows shifting of place
either due to enjoyment or due to leave.
Ruling Planet
Ascendant lord -- Mars
Ascendant star lord - Ketu
Moon sign lord - Venus
Moon sign lord - Mars
Day lord - Venus
Significators 3rd cusp - Jupiter, Mercury
10th cusp - Mercury, Saturn
12th cusp - Mars, Moon, Rahu
Inthiswaysignificatorsof3, 10 and 12 are Jupiter, Mercury,
Saturn, Mars, Moon, Rahu.
Mahadasa : Mars Mahadasa and Moon Antardasa are
operating from 22-2-02 to 1 8-8-02.
Mars is placed in 12th house. Moon is posited in the star of
Mars showing 1 2th house. The transfer is likely to take place in
Mars Mahadasa Moon Antardara and Venus Pratyantar . Moon
is very strong significator being in the star of Mars, the ruling planet
Venus is also one of the ruling planets posited in 1 1th house showing
fiilfilmentof desire. This Dasa will operate from 11-7-02 to 168-02. During this period transfer is likely to take place.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

180 New Dimensions of K.P.
Transfer-2
Example No. 33
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagtia
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 33 : ‘Is my transfer posited?’ - Asked by an officer.
Horary No. 141
Analysis Ruling Planet
Ascendant lord — Venus
Ascendant star lord - Jupiter
Moon sign lord - Mars
Moon star lord - Ketu
Day lord - Saturn
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

10th house
12 th house
Moon, Saturn
Mercury, Sun, Ketu
Mahadasa : Ketu Mahadasa Jupiter Antardasa, Venus
Pratyantara from 16-5-02 to 12-7-02. Venus is placed in its
own star and in the sub of Jupiter. In this way Venus is representing three ruling planets viz Venus, Mars (due to occupation of
sign) and Jupiter (being in sub of Jupiter). The native was transferred on 17-6-02.
Comment : It is to be noted whenever any particular event is
to be materialized the role of ascendant lord is always very important to precipitate the event. In the query Venus, the ascendant
lord, played the same role, though Venus was not significator of
the concerned houses.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology 183
Planetary Position
Transfer— 3
Example No. 34
Cuspal Position

Lagan
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example34. ‘Is my transfer possible?’
Horary No. 129
DOJ = 10-1-03, TOJ = 9:50 am, POJ = Shivpuri (M.P.)
Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Venus
Ascendant star lord — Mars
Moon sign lord - Jupiter (R)
Moon star lord - Mercury (R)
Day lord - Venus
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Significator :
3rd house = Mercury, Sun, Moon, Jupiter
1 Oth house = Jupiter, Mars, Moon, Rahu
1 2th house = Mercury, Moon, Jupiter
Thus the common significator of houses 3, 10 and 12 are
Mercury, Sun, Moon, Jupiter, Mars, Rahu.
Mahadasa : Mercury Mahadasa, Sun Antardasa upto 2-101. Dasanath : Mercury as one of the ruling planets and significator
of transfer is retrograde; therefore Mercury will give the results
when it will attain direct motioa
2. Bhuktinath : Sun being the lord of 1 1 th house and placed in
3rd house signifies transfer. Sun is placed in the star of Venus, the
ascendant lord; so will act as the agent of Venus.
3. Mercury Mahadasa Sun Antardasa and Venus Pratyantar
will operate from 6-8-03 to 27-9-03 and will bring about the
transfer of the native.
Comments : The native was transferred on 5-8-03 and joined
new place on 6-8-03.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

186 New Dimensions of K.R A
Pormotion -1
Example No. 35
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 35 : ‘When will 1 get promotion?’ Query posed by
an officer.
Horary No. 12
DOJ = 3 1 -1 -03, TOJ = 9:55 am, POJ = Shivpuri
For promotion houses 2, 6, 10, 11 are considered. 6 and 10
houses both are related with job and employment. 6th house
denotes subordinate position while 1 0th house shows commanding
position. With each promotion there is an increase in salary (2nd
house) as well as authority ( 1 0th house).
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Analysis Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Mars
Ascendant star lord - Venus
Moon sign lord - Saturn (R)
Moon star lord - Sun
Day lord - Venus
Other ruling planet — Rahu
Significators :
2nd house : Saturn, Mars, Ketu
6th house : Mercury, Jupiter
I Oth house : Sun, Moon
I I th house : Saturn, Mars, Ketu
Thus the common significators ofhouses 2,6, 1 0, 1 1 are Saturn,
Ketu, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Sun, Moon.
Mahadasa : 1 .Sun Mahadasa, Jupiter Antardasa upto 132. Sun Mahadasa Saturn Antardasa will run from 13-10-03
3. Sun Mahadasa Venus Antardasa from 7-12-05 to 7-12In Jupiter A ntardasa promotion is not possible because Jupiter
is not the ruling planet. Saturn is retrograde. Venus Antardasa
will give promotion because Venus is placed in the star of Ketu
which is the sub-lord of 1 1th cusp and also conjoined with ascendant
lord Mars i.e. Ketu will act as an agent of Mars and representative
of 1st cusp.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.P, Astrology 189
Promotion - 2
Example No. 36
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Nirayana Bhava Chaliti Cuspal)
Example 36: Aman who is working in Indian Railways wanted
to know about his promotion.
Horary No. 28
Analysis Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Venus
Ascendant star lord - Sun
Moon sign lord - Venus
Moon star lord - Sun
Day lord - Jupiter
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Significators :
2nd house : Mercury, Rahu
6th house : Mars, Ketu, Mercury. Rahu
I Oth house : Ketu, Saturn, Venus, Saturn, Jupiter
I I th house : Jupiter, Saturn, Jupiter
The common significator ofhouses 2, 6, 1 0 and 1 1 are Mercury,
Rahu, Mars, Ketu, Saturn, Venus, Jupiter.
Mahadasa : Sun Mahadasa, Venus Antardasa and Satun
Pratyantar upto may 1 999.
1 . Saturn is important significator of pormotion. Saturn is also
sub-lord of 1 1 th cusp as well as 6th cusp and also lord of 1 0th
house placed in 1 2th house. It denotes promotion along with
transfer (the placement of Saturn in 1 2th)
Comments : The querent was promoted in may 99 and
simultaneously transferred to a nearby place.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

192 New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Planetary Position
Promotion -3
Example No. 37
Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 37: An officer desired to know about his promotion.
Horary No. 163
DOJ = 22-8-00, TOJ = Iff-: 59 am, PQJ = Agra
Analysis <> Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Mars
Ascendant star lord - Mercury
Moon sign lord - Mars
Moon star lord - Sun
Day lord - Mars
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

1 . Promotion in near future is not possible because Mars, the
ascendant lord, Moon, the sign lord, and day lord is debilitated.
2. Promotion will take place because sub-lord of 1st cusp,
Mars,isoneofthemlingplanets. (An important ruling of the author.)
3 . An important condition for the fulfilment of desire:
Significators :
2nd house : Ketu, Sun, Mercury, Jupiter, Rahu
6th house : Jupiter, Rahu, Saturn, Venus
1 Oth house : Mercury, Mars
1 1th house : Venus
Thus common significators are Ketu, Sun, Mercury, Jupiter,
Rahu, Saturn, Venus, Mars.
Mahadasa : 1 . Sun Mahadasa and Mars Antardasa will run
2. Sun Mahadasa and Mercury Antardasa will run from 8-8Since Mars is debilitated its Antardasa will not bring promotion
to him. The promotion is likely to take place in Sun Mahadasa,
Mercury Antaradasa and Venus Pratyantar which will run from
9-10-03 to 30-11-03 because Venus is the significator of 2nd,
6th and 11th houses.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Promotion-4
Example No. 38
Planetary Position Cuspal Position
CO,
OI

Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 38 : A senior officer in queue to promotion wanted
to know when he would be promoted to the post of manager.
Horary No. 129
The question is related with the post of manager. Since the post
enjoys power and authority as well as facilities. Mars, Jupiter and
Venus must be considered along with ascendant, sixth, tenth and
1 1 th houses. The relation of Mars and Jupiter must be seen in
order to gain power and authority in any field of life, whether it is
political post or service matter.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

What will be the res ult of desire
1 . ITie ascendant lord Venus is placed in eleventh house showing
fulfilment of desire.
2. The sub-lord of first cusp is placed in tenth along with Venus
showing power and authority to the querent.
3. Ascendant is having connection with eleventh as well as with
tenth houses.
4. The placement of Ketu in ascendant is a negative sign
showing delay and hurdles in the fulfilment of desire.
5. From above analysis it is clear that desire of the querent is
fulfilled but with some delay and obstacles.
When his desire will be fulfilled ?
Analysis Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Venus
Ascendant star lord - Mars (R)
Moon sign lord - Moon
Moon star lord - Mercury
Day lord - Mars
Others - Rahu, Ketu
Significators :
2nd house : Mars
6th house : Jupiter, Ketu
10th house : Moon, Sun. Jupiter, Mercury, Rahu, Ketu
1 1 th house : Venus, Mercury, Sun, Moon, Mercury, Rahu.
Thus the common significators ofhouses 2, 6, 1 0 and 1 1 are :
Mars, Jupiter, Ketu, Moon, Sun, Mercury, Rahu, Venus.
Mahadasa : 1 . Mercury Mahadasa - Mercury Antardasa
runs upto 3.02.04.
Mercury is the significator of 1 0th and 1 1 th cusp. Ketu is the
significator of sixth, tenth and eleventh (star lord of eleventh cusp)
and also posited in the sign of Mars and in the star of Jupiter. Thus
the connection of Mars and Jupiter is established. In this way
Ketu Antardasa will promote the querent to the post of manager
before 3-02-05.
Comments: The querent was promoted to the post on 1 6-07New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

198 New Dimensions of K.P. As
Promotion-5
Example No. 39
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 39 : A branch manager-rank officer of State Bank of
India wanted to be senior manager. He asked when he would be
promoted.
Horary No. 127
Analysis — Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Venus
Ascendant star lord - Mars (R)
Moon sign lord - Sun
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Moon star lord - Ketu
Day lord - Mercury
Significators
2nd house : Mars
6th house : Jupiter, Ketu
I Oth house : Moon
I I th house : Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Ketu, Mercury, Rahu
Thus the common significators are- Mars, Jupiter, Ketu, Moon,
Mercury, Sun, Venus, Rahu.
Mahadasa : Ketu Mahadasa - Venus Antardasa runs upto
24-12-03. Ketu is the significator of sixth and eleventh cusp while
Venus being significator of first cusp is also the significator of
eleventh cusp. Therefore this Dasa may bring promtion to him.
Comments : There maybe a doubt in the minds of readers as
to why Venus Antardasa and why not the Sun Antardasa will
bring promotion to him. The reason is that the sub-lord of the Sun
is Saturn which is a slow and delaying planet, while Venus is not
only ascendant lord but also in the sub of Mercury, a fast moving
planet, in the eleventh house. The promotion does not involve
enhanced power and authority because branch manager and senior
manager both posts almost have same power and authority;
therefore Mars and Jupiter are not assoicated with promotion,
giving planets.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology \201
‘Will I Become District Magistrate or not?’
Example No. 40
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 40 : A young and dynamic I. A.S. officer wanted to
be D.M. She asked when she would be made D.M.
Horary No -122
Analysis :
1 . The sub-lord of eleventh cusp, Jupiter, is retrograde and
placed in ascendant Jupiter is posited in its own star i.e. star lord
is also retrograde showing failure of the desire.
2. Tenth house is occupied by Satum. Saturn shows
subordination; therefore, she will have to work in subordinate
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

position.
3 . In order to desire power and authorities Mars and J upiter
must have connection with tenth house. Mars is posited in the star
ofRahu and in the sub of Jupiter. Jupiter is retrograde; therefore
she is not likely to become D.M. at least till 3 0 June 06.
4- The sub-lord and lord of tenth cusp is mercury. Mercury also
shows assistant position; not commanding position. Therefore
up to 30-06-06 she would have to work as deputy or
additional officer under someone.
New Dimensions of K,P. Astrology

204 I New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Lost Gold Chain - Will be Recovered or not?
Example No. 41
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 41 : An old woman lost her gold chain and wanted
to know if it would be recovered or not.
Horary No - 27
This woman hcrsel f was not clear whether she forgot to keep
the chain at some place or someone had stolen it. The confusing
state of mind is due to the following factors:
1 . The significator of mind. Moon, is debilitated; hence showing
uncertainty of thoughts. Mercury, the planet of wisdom, is also
afflicted due to association with Mars and shows blunt and agitating
state of mind.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

2. The sub-lord of seventh cusp is mercury, which is posited in
the star of Rahu in association with Mars in second house.
Placement of Mercury in the star of Rahu shows a case of lost
memory. Mercury posited in second house denotes the chain is in
the house.
3 . The lord of seventh house Mars is placed in second house
and seventh house is occupied by Moon. Mars denotes a young
man and Moon denotes a young and beautiful lady. Both have
kept the chain somewhere in order to play mischief with the old
lady with the object of harassment.
Will the chain be recovered? It is shown by ascendant as well
as eleventh cusp.
1 . The lord and star lord both are placed in third house showing
she has to make efforts to get back her chain.
2. The sub-lord of eleventh cusp, Saturn, is placed in twelfth
house, which is second to eleventh. The second house
automatically involves if the question pertaining to recovery of
money or recovery of lost article is concerned.
3. However Saturn due to its nature will delay, torment and
torture and when hope is given up the same Saturn will fulfil the
desire.
Ruling Planets
Ascendant star lord - Venus
Ascendant lord - Sun
Moon sign lord - Mars
Moon star lord - Mercury
Day lord - Jupiter
At the time of judgement of query Mercury’s Mahadasha,
Venus 'Antardasa and Sun Pratyantara were operating. Since
Dasanath, Bhuktinath and Pratyantara lords are ruling planets
the lost chain will be found.
The lady informed after seven of eighth days that she got her
lost chain.
Comments : The eleventh house is considered for the recovery
of lost articles or lost money or stolen articles. The description of
the thief or the persons involved in mischievous activities is made
from the seventh house.
In such type of cases houses seventh and eleventh are to be
considered with a serious consideration of ascendant.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Dimensions of K.P. Astrology 207
Lost File - Will It be Found
Example No. 42
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 42 : An important file of an officer who was posted
in Sagar district was missing. The officer now wanted to find out
this file. Will it be found?
Horary No - 40
DOJ = 13-04-02, TOJ = 12:50pm, POJ = Bhopal
Analysis Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Venus
Ascendant star lord - Mars
Moon sign lord - Mars
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Moon star lord - Ketu
Day lord - Sat
Sub-lord of 7th cusp is Jupiter, which is placed in the star of Rahu.
Rahu denotes peons of the office. Therefore file is stolen by the
peon. Rahu is associated with Saturn and Mars in 1 2th house; so
other peons of the office are also involved in this activity. File
cannot be recovered because the sub-1 oid of 1 1th cusp is J upiter
having connection with Rahu in 1 2th house and 1 2th is the negation
of the ascendant.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

210 New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Political Success -1
Example No. 43
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagtta
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 43 : One political leader wanted to be the chairman
of a public sector unit. He asked when he would be nominated
chairman of this institution.
Horary No - 148
DOJ = 27-03-03, TOJ = 6: 1 3pm, POJ = Shivpuri (M.P.)
There are certain facts related with this query, which we would
like to bring to the notice of the readers. This institution already
had a chairman. The querent wanted to be the chairman of this
institution after disposing of the present chairman.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Analysis of the query . Ruling Planets
Ascendant lord - Mars
Ascendant star lord - Jupiter (R)
Moon sign lord - Saturn
Moon star lord - Moon
Day lord - Jupiter (R)
What will be the result of query?
1 . The ascendant is occupied by Ketu and aspected by Saturn.
Thus ascendant is badly damaged. Retrograde Jupiter aspects
ascendant; hence it will keep alive hope.
2. For a political post or to get any big post there should be a
relation between eleventh and fifth cusp through a benefic planet.
3. The sub-lord of fifth and eleventh cusp is Venus. Venus is in
the star of Mars and in the sub of the Sun. Mars aspects sixth
house i.e. house of opponents. Mars will subdue opponents. The
sun is in fifth house having aspect over eleventh cusp. Venus itself
is placed in third house indicating that effort would be required to
get the post.
4. As has been said earlier that in order to deriver power and
authority Mars and Jupiter must have connection.
5. As ascendant is badly damaged and Mars and Jupiter are
not related with either tenth cusp or eleventh cusp; therefore there
is a doubt in fulfilment of desire.
Timing of event : At the time o f j udgement o f the query J upiter
was retrograde. Nothing will happen till Jupiter is retrograde. Jupiter
will be in direct motion after 31-07-03. Therefore change will
take place after this date.
Comments : Due to weak ascendant the querent could not
reach the post of chairman but was nominated as director of this
institution in the first week of Aug. 2003 .
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Dimensions of K.R Astrology [213
Political Success -2
Example No. 44
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 44 : This questionis related with the previous one.
The present incumbent wanted to know how longhe would continue •
as chairman of the institution.
Horary No - 153
DOJ = 06-05-03, TOJ = 5:50pm, POJ = Shivpuri (M.P.)
Analysis : Ruling Planets
Asd lord - Mars
Asd star lord - Saturn
Moon sign lord - Mercury (R)
Moon star lord — Rahu
Day lord - Mars
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

What will be the result of query ?
1 . It has been written earlier that the result of query will be
negative if the sub-lord or lord of eleventh cusp is retrograde. The
lord and sub-lord of eleventh cusp is Mercury, which is retrograde.
2. The ascendant is aspected by malefic Saturn. Saturn aspects
Jupiter; therefore Jupiter too has become weak. Therefore he will
not continue for a longer time.
When he will be removed from the post : I told him that he
would continue for some time because divine Jupiter would protect
him. However he would be removed either in Aug. 03 or first
week of Sep.03. Because at the time Mercury, the lord and sublord of eleventh cusp, will be retrograde. The querent was removed
from the post on 3 1 Aug. 03.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

216 New Dimensions of K.P. A
Popularity through Astrology
Example No. 45
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 45 : Will I get popularity through astrology? This query
is posed by an astrologer friend.
Horary No -232
A fellow astrologer friend who was posted with me in Bhopal
and used to do astrology asked the question. For astrological
proficiency Mercury, Jupiter and Sun must be well placed in
horoscope. Apart from that 4, 5, and 8th houses must be occupied
by benefic planets. In this horary chart Mercury is placed in 1 1th
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

house while Jupiter is placed in 4th house. Fifth cusp is influenced
by Saturn and Mercury, therefore the querent will take interest in
divine knowledge. As far as popularity is concerned the sub-lord
of 5th cusp, Jupiter, is placed in 4th house, which shows negation
to 5th house. The sub-lord of 11th cusp, Mars, is placed in
ascendant, which again shows negation. The ascendant and 4th
house denotes that this knowledge will be used to material gains
rather than pursuing spiritual achievements. However the
connection of 1 1th house with 5th through Mercury will provide
astrological knowledge.
Comments : In order to gain mass popularity the 4th, 5th and 1 1 th
house and ascendant must be considered. These three houses
either be aspected by benefic planets or be occupied by benefic
planets. Simultaneously the significator of popularity i.e. Sun must
be placed either in lOthor 1 1th or 5 th house. In that horary chart
Sunisplacedin 12th house. So it will not bring any distinction in
this field.
New- Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Dimensions of K.P. Astrology 219
Will I be Punished in Departmental Enquiry?
Example No. 46
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 46 : An officer who was facing a departmental inquiry
wanted to know if he was likely to be punished in departmental
enquiry?
Horary No - 21
In order to be punished or imprisonment 1 2th house is mainly
judged. If there is a case of imprisonment then the connection of
1 2th house with that of 4th house is studied because 4th house is
permanent residence and 12th house shows isolation. In case of
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

service matter 1 Oth house must have connection with 1 2th house.
Analysis : The desire of querent is that he must not be terminated
from the service. Whether his desire will be fulfilled or not is judged
as follows :
1 . The sub-lord of 1 st cusp, Mars, is one of the ruling planets.
When sub-lord of the 1 st cusp becomes one of the ruling planets
then desire of the querent is fulfilled . Therefore it is sure that he
will not be given severe punishment
2. The sub-lord and lord of 1 st cusp, Mars, is placed in 1 1 th
house, which again shows the fulfilment of desire of the querent.
Whether he will be punished or not?
He will be given minor punishment due to the following reasons:
1 . The sub-lord of 1 Oth cusp, Rahu, is posited in the star of
Saturn, which is placed in 1 2th house. 1 Oth house is having
connection with 1 2th house through malefic planet.
2. He will not lose his job because the sub-lord of 6th cusp
(service) is placed in 1 1 th house. Mercury will save his service.
Comments : The officer was given punishment of withholding
of two increments for one year which was further minimized to the
punishment ofwaming only.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

222 New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology
Selling of House to Pay off Market Debts
Example No. 47
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 47 : A gentleman wanted to sell his house to pay off
his market liabilities.
Horary No - 241
If the sub lord of fourth cusp is placed in the constellation of a
planet the lord of which is either significator of 3rd and 11th houses
or 1 2th house.
The fourth house denotes possession, which ihcludes land,
building but other articles also on which one has ownership right.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Third house is twelfth to fourth house which always shows
separation from possessions Eleventh house always shows gains.
Twelfth house is natural significator of disposal of possessions as
well as payment of market liabilities.
Analysis : 1 . Retrograde Jupiter aspects ascendant, therefore
the desire of the querent shall be fulfilled but with some delay
because ascendant lord Jupiter is retrograde.
2. The sub-lord of 1 st cusp, Mercury, is one of the ruling planet
therefore the fulfilment of desire is very sure.
3 . The sub-lord of third and fourth cusps. Mercury, is posited
in the star of Sun that is placed in eleventh house showing profit
through the disposal of property.
4. The sub-lord of 1 2th cusp is Rahu which is placed in 2nd
house, 3rd cusp falls in the star of moon; therefore payment of
market liabilities will be quick (Moon is a fast moving planet).
5. Since Mercury is the major planet denoting selling of house;
therefore payment will be received in instalments (Mercury gives
in instalments).
6. Rahu is the sub-lord of 12th cusp and shows payment of
market debts but even then it will create problems to the querent.
7. Since Mercury is having connection with 7th house due to its
lordship, the property will be sold off through the mediation of a
property dealer.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

sions of K.P. Astrology 225
Payment of Debts
Example No. 48
Planetary Position Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 48 : A businessman wanted to pay off the liabilities
of markets. He put the query if he would be able to repay the
debts of market.
Horary No - 151
If the sub-lord of 1 2th cusp is posited in the constellation the
lord of which is not retrograde, then one is able to pay off debts .
Analysis : 1 . Ascendant is aspected by Jupiter which shows
fulfilment of desire but the sub-lord of 1 2th cusp, Mercury, is
retrograde and placed in the star of Rahu.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

2. In horary astrology Rahu is not considered as a retrograde
planet because retrograde motion is its natural motion. So in the
above analysis, it will not be assumed as retrograde Mercury is
posited in the star of retrograde Rahu.
.3. Rahu is a very slow-moving planet. It denotes two important
facts:
a. Rahu shows increased burdenof interest, which accrues in
principal amount.
b. It creates unnecessaryproblems in therepayment of debts.
Therefore it maybe assumed that there will be inordinate delay in
the repayment of market debts.
Comments : What is the relation of sub-lord of 1 2th cusp with
repayment of loan is described below :
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

228 New Dimensions of K.P. As
Appointments in Institution
Example No. 49
Planetary Position
Cuspal Position

Lagna
Nirayana Bhava Chalit (Cuspal)
Example 49 : An officer of an institution put the query whether
vacancies in the institution will be filled up in near future or not.
Horary No - 2 1
The query is related with the institution where many posts of
various cadres were lying vacant. The daughter of the querent
applied for a post in this institution.
Due to certain political as well as official reasons the whole
appointment process came under dispute.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

Due to these reasons, the querent wanted to know if appointment
would take place or not.
This is a general type of question; therefore no particular house
is related with such type of query.
The example has been taken to make the readers understand
and also to make them familiar with such type of query in which a
particular house is not studied dr considered.
Such types of questions are only related with ascendant because
these questions are related with desire of the querent. In such
type of questions an astrologer has to read the chart to see whether
the desire of the querent will be fulfilled or not?
Analysis :
1 . The sub-lord and lord of the ascendant is retrograde showing
failure of the query.
2. The sub-lord of 1 1th cusp. Mercury, is retrograde again
showing the negation of the desire.
3. Ascendant is flanked by Rahu and Saturn again showing
failure of the desire.
4. Therefore, the appointment will not take place in this
institution.
Comments :
The government later on itselfbanned the appointments. Since
then no single appointment has taken place in this institution.
New Dimensions of k.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of KR Astrology 231
What Will be the Future of the Institution?
Example No. 50
Planetary Position'
Cnspal Position

Lagrta
Example 50 : The managing director in a pensive mood asked
about the future prospects of the institution.
Horary No - 155
DOJ = 10.4.02, TOJ = 8:26 pm, POJ = Bhopal
1. Ketu is posited in ascendant. Ascendant is aspected by
Saturn and Mars. Ascendant is under heavy affliction of worst
malefic which shows adverse and uncertain future of this
organization.
~ ' 2. 9th house that denotes principles and morals of this institution
will be at stake due to aspect of Saturn and Mars over ninth house.
232 New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

3. As per horary position of Moon, Saturn Mahadasha and
Saturn Antardasa will operate from 8-12-02 to 11-12-05.
Following changes will take place in this organization:
a. Due to aspect of S alum over ascendant and 9th house radical
changes pertaining to administration will take place. There will be
uncertainty and chaos-like situation will generate.
b. During Saturn Mahadasha , Saturn Antardasa and Ketu
Pratyantara , which will run from 10-11-2003 to 13-1-04; and
large-scale administrative changes will take place.
c. Saturn Mahadasha, Saturn Antardasa and Sun Pratyantara
will operate from 7-7-04 to 3 1 -8-04. Major changes will take
place.
Comments : It has been found by us that either Satum-Ketu or
Ketu-Satum period brings many undesirable results whether it is
any organization or any country or personal life of the querent is
concerned, this rule is applicable to natal horoscope also. The
predictionsmade about this organization have come absolutely
correct.
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

K.P. Table of Horary Nos. from 1 to 249
Aries
New Dimensions of HP. Astrology

New DirHensions of NP Astrology

. Libra
New Dimensions of K.P. Astrology

New Dimensions of K.R Astrology

New Dimension of &P. Astrology
