READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: phaladeepika_1950.json
Dataset number: 308 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 613,766 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: 507316-Phaladeepika (1950)
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: 507316-Phaladeepika (1950)
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Phaladeepika XML
  • total_pages: 472
  • total_words: 109769
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.868
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5rT5T smrwfr 3WR*ft
L.B.S. National Academy of Administration
MUSsbORIE
LIBRARY I.-,.
Accession No.
Class No. _
3?5W?r€*rT
Book No. _
NVdM
MAN

MANTRESWARA’S
PHALADEEPIKA
(ADHYAYAS I—XXVIll)
WITH AN
ENGLISH TRANSLATION
BY
PANDITABHUSHANA V. SUBRAHMANYA SASTRI, B.A.,
Asst, Seeretiry to the GovL of Mysore iRetJ,)
AND
Translator of “BRIHAT JATAKA", JATAKARARIJATA",
'•SRIPATIPADDHATI”. etc.
[ SECOND EDITION.REVrSED AND ENLARGED 1
Copy Right Registered
PRINTED AT
ARUNA PRESS. BANGAl.ORE 2

Copies of this book can be had of :—
Panditabhushana V. Subrahmanya Sastri, B.A.,
65, 3rd Cross Road, Basavangudi P.O.,
BANGALORE 4.

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
I am glad I have been able to place before the
Public, the second Edition of Phaladeepika during my
lifetime. Thirteen years have passed since the first
edition was brought to light and many works have
been added to my list since that time. I must say that
the encouragement given to me by the astrologically
minded Public went a longway to enable me to bring
about this edition and if this were to serve the Public
well, I should consider myself amply rewarded.
I must not fail to thank Sri M. Ramakrishna
Bhat, M.A., Superintendent of Indian Languages,
Si Joseph's College Bangalore for his valuable help
and suggestions in bringing forth this edition. My
thanks are also due to the authorities of Aruna Press
Bangalore who helped a great deal in expediting
the printing.
65, III Cross Boad
13. September 1950
V. SUBRAHMANYA SASTRI.

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
Astrology is no longer looked upon with derision.
Interest in the study of ancient sciences has so far
revived that only recently an institution has been
founded for the study of alchemy. My translations of
Jatakaparijata, Sripatipaddhati and Brihatjataka have
been appreciatingly received by the public. People
who started scoffing have stayed on to exhibit a living
interest and to learn what the science of astrology has
to teach mankind. An appreciable number of pre¬
dictions by Cheiro, whose recent demise we all
deplore, based upon his study of this ancient, sacred
and useful system has come true. For the service of
humanity, the value of astrological publications cannot
be gainsaid and no apology is needed by the author
for a rendering of ^'Phaladeepika^' and placing it before
the public in an English garb for the first time with
suitable explanations.
^^Phaladeepika," a fascinating study in the tech¬
nique of Astrology, was so fa available only in Granttha
characters and very lately in the Devanagari script.
Existing publications of Phaladeepika are incomplete
and wanting in some chapters with some slokas in the
text also mismatched. Attempts have now been made
to present the public with a complete text. A great
deal of difficulty was experienced in tracing the XXVIII
Adhyaya which was so far unavailable and in locating
a few slokas in their proper places in the text.
Mantreswara, the author of this important work,
whose family deity was Sukuntalamba, came from the
Tinnevelly District, the Southern end of the Indian
Peninsula, and he appears to have flourished about the
XVI century of the Christian Era, to judge from the

PHALADEEPIKA
intrinsic evidence available from certain slokas quoted
from the Jatakaparijata. His treatment of Astrology is
remarkable in many ways and differs from that of
several others. Mantreswara gives a very reasonable
exposition of the effects of Transits and of cause and
effect flowing from such Transits. We are also indebted
to him for the useful information and guidance which he
furnishes concerning the ef feet of Bhavas. His chapter
on Yogas is an interesting study of truth. The Sarvatobhadrachakra which was referred to only by name in
other publications has been very fully explained here.
The sixteenth sloka in Adhyaya Ill which has been
till now appearing with two different metres for the
former and latter halves finds corrected here. The last
sloka in the XXV Adhyaya which was marked for in¬
completeness is now printed in its entirety. An index
in both English and Sanskrit is also added for easy
reference.
I should take this opportunity of expressing
my gratitude to Mr. A. S. Sowmyanarayaniengar of
Srirangam (Trichinopoly) for his ready and willing
assistance in tracing and supplying some of the missing
slokas and also the XXVIII chapter. I am thankful to
Mr. V. B. Sreekantiah, Proprietor of Messrs. V. B. Soobbiah & Sons, for expediting the publication and for his
personal attention to the details of printing without
which it would have been impossible to undertake or
complete this arduous task satisfactorily.
50, 3rd Cross Road,
Basavangudi, t, SUBRAHMANYA SASTRI.
Bangalore City.
(ith January 1937.

MU.
Vk-
?Nnv?Tn 5 r:
W%*TT»T:
*rt»Tvn^:
*T?:R 13 r«ft»T:
? 5 ?nPT 5 TT^«n 5 r
irTifr^rf ^rjrirprtf.
^^•*TTsr;
^SricT^:
Ssri^sm
sn^iBrf^:
d5T»R:ort3;t«r^«?i3r5Jif%?5rT
3rTcT^<?j5r^rncij5r5Tra^r^ • ••
SiT^mwRT
WwrJTT^:
arw:^:
^«m^iwTW 5
ft ^^m r wi<5 g q [qr fgg<iP)n>i
It
'-Ci

CONTENTS
ADHYAYA PA.OE
I Definitions *— 1
II Planets and their vairietics —• 9
III Divisions of the Zodiac •••• 24
IV Determination of the Shadbalas of Planets •••• 33
V Profession and Livelihood 43
VI Yogas •••• 40
VII Maharajayogas 72
VIII The effects of the Run and other planets in the
12th bbavas from the Lagna onwards B2
IX Effect of Mesha and other signs happening to
be the Lagna •— 98
X Kalatrabhava or the 7th house •••• 10
XI Horoscopes of women ••• 104
XTI Issues or Children — HO
XIII Length of Life ... 130
XIV Diseases; Death; Past and Future Births ... 141
XV Method of studying the effects of the Bhavas ... 152
XVI General effects of the 12 Bhavas ... 103
XVII Exit from the World ... 175
XVIII Conjnotions of two planets ... 184
XIX Dasas and their effects ... 192
XX Dasas of the several Bhava-Lords and their
Bhuktis •••• 201
XXI Sub-divisions of Dasas, viz., Bhuktis, Antaras,
Antarantaras, etc. ... 221
XXII Kalachakra Dasa, etc. ... 243
XXIII Ashtakavarga ... 257
XXJV The Ashtakavarga effects as stated in ‘Horasara’... 206
XXV Upagrahas ... 277
XXVI Transits of Planets ... 286
XXVII Ascetic Yogas ... 319
XXVIII Upasamhara ... 323
Slokanukramanika ... 325
Sanskrit Index (Index to Sanskrit words) ... 341
English Index

DESCRIPTIVE CONTENTS
ADHYAYA 1.
Slokas.
1. Invocatory Verse.
2. The author's purposing to v/rite the work.
3. Preliminaries. A general description of the
work to be done
4. The several parts of the body of Kalapurusha.
Bha Sandhis or Riksha Sandhis.
5. The regions indicated by the signs.
6. The lords of the signs. Uchcha and
Paramochcha Keecha and
Paramaneecha (q'?:JT»f!'cr).
7. Which signs and what portions are Moolatrikonas and of which planets ?
8. Prishtodaya Ubhayodaya
and Sirshodaya signs. Which’signs
dominate bir night and which, by day ?
Urdhva (31^)* Adhaha (^31^:), Sama
and Vakra signs.
9. Signs—moveable, immoveable and dual;
Dwara (SPC), Bahis (^%:) and Garbha (anf);
Dhatu (qrg), Mula (jJcT) and Jeeva (gftq');
Krura (jpa:) and Saumya (^Vpt) ; odd and
even ; Male and female; Eastern, Western,
etc.
10—16. Th^2 bhavas and their names. Leenastthanas
(^SnrwR).
17. Dusstthana and Subhastthana (gvT-
^•r) explained. Kendra (%?sr)> Kantaka
and Chatushtaya (^rg^qr).
18. The terms Panaphara Apoklima
Chaturasra , Upachaya
and Trikona (r^ot) explained.
ADHYAYA 2.
1— 7. Inform^ation that can be ascertained through
the Sun and other planets.
8—14. The nature and characteristics of the several
planets.
B,

PHALADEEPIKA
IS—16. The portions of human abode or human haunt
signified by the planets. The points of the
compass of which the planets are lords.
17>-20. Additional informations (other than what are
contained in slokas 1—^7 supra), —occupation,
beast and bird appropriate to each—that can
be gleaned through the several planets.
21—22. The natural friends and enemies of the several
planets enumerated.
23. Temporal mutual relation among the planets.
24. The periods signified by the planets.
The ca.atos of the planets. Their division
into 5=7?^ (Satva), (Rajas), and
(Tamas). The seasons they represent.
25. T wo pairs of planets playing the role of parents
during day and night respectively.
The nearest relations signified by Mars,
Jupiter and Mercury.
26. Body and soul of a person signified by the
Moon and Sun respectively. The five senses
an dthe planets representing by them.
27. Planets—benefic and malefic—male, female,
and hermaphrodite* The deities presiding
over them. The elements which they control.
28. The grains appropriate to the planets. The
countries signified by them.
29. The precious stones ascribed to them.
30. Substances pertaining to the planets. Their
articles of apparel.
31. The flavours signified by the planets.
32. Parts of the body where the characterstic
marks or moles of the planets are to be found.
The stages of life typified by the planets.
33-'34. The effect of Rahu and Ketu upon the charac¬
ter and appearance of the person born under
their infuence.
35. Their appropriate metals and apparel. Their
friends and enemies.

CONTENTS
36. When are planets said to be badly placed and
when well-placed ?
37. The character of trees generated by planets.
ADHYAYA 3.
1. The Dasavsrgas. Vargottamamsa
2. The Saptavargas. The Shadvargas. The effect
of a Navamsa is equal to that of the Rasi.
3. The extent of the effect of planets in the Rasi
and the other Vargas. The five states or
conditions of a planet, measured by its pro¬
gress in a Rasi.
4. The Horas and their lords. The Decanates and
their lords. The Dwadasamsas and their
lords. The Trimsamsas and their lords.
The Navamsas.
5. The Shashtyamsas.
6. The Saptamsas. The Dasamamsas. The Shodasamsas and their lords. 7, 10 and 13 benefic Vargas.
7. Vaiseshikamsas.
8—^9. Their effects.
10. Effects of planets being weak or strong in all
or any of the 10 Vargas. Effect of a planet
being in the five states mentioned in sloka
3 above.
11. Effect of planets strong in Shadvargas.
12. Effect of planets occupying the 2 Horas.
13. Ayudha (snjvr), Pasa (qf^r), Nigala (fir»r5y)
and Pakshi (qf^) decanates explained.
14. Chatushpada quadruped deca-
' nates. Their effects. Which of the three
decanates of a Rasi will be good, bad, or
ordinary and in what Rasis ?
15. Effect of planets owning the Lagna decanate,
Lagna Hora, Lagna Dwadasamsa and Lagna
Trimsamsas occupying his own, exaltation
or friendly house.
16. A clue to find the Lagna from the position of
Mandi at a birth or from the Moon himself
if the Moon be strong.

PHALADEEPIKA
17. Effect of Moon in good vargas. Effect of pla¬
nets posited in their own Trimsamsas. EHect
of a single planet in exaltation or own
house, aspected by or associated with a
friendly planet.
18—19. The several states or conditions of planets.
20. The extent of the effects of planets in the
aforesaid several conditions (or Avasthas).
ADHYAYA 4.
I. The six kinds of strength enumerated. Dinaratri
tribhagabala Pakshabala
(’T^5s).Varshapabala (^g^TSr), Masapabala
Dinapabala Horapabala
2. Cheshtabala (%fTg5r), Yuddhabala
Uchchabala Digbala (% >gg r).
3. Vargajabala (^^f 3 rgar)>^Kendradibala
g?r;, Dreshkanabala (^^TorgeJ), Nisargabala
(ffT^rgg^T).
4—5. When is a planet said to be strong and when
weak ?
6. Bhavaphala («nggi5r)-
7. Extent of strength accrued to planets through
their position in exaltation, Moolatrikona,
Swakshetra, friendly and other houses.
8. Strength gained by planets in the four Kendras.
9‘ Importance of the 7th house aspect.
10. Of the Nisarga (f?r?lTr)and Tatkalika
friendships, the former is more preferable.
II. In warding off evil and promoting prosperity
Jupiter, Mercury and Venus compared. Moon'
is the basis for the strength of all planents.
12—20. Chandrakriya Chandravasttha
and Chandravela and their
effects.
21. Pakshabala special to the Moon and
Stthanabala (^gtgg^). important to the other
planets.
22—23. The standards of of Shadbalas of planets,
24. Bhavabala (vngg^) how computed ?

CONTENTS xiii
ADHYAYA 5.
1—8 The sources of a person's wealth and the
profession to be followed for the sake of a
livelihood.
9. Acquisition of wealth without exertion. The
country of acquisition.
ADHYAYA 6.
1. The five Mahapurusha yogas stated.
2. Effect of birth in Ruchaka and Bhadra
(«nr) yogas.
3. Effect of birth in Hamsa (^?t) and Malavya
yogas.
4. Effect of birth in a Sasa (ig^r) yoga. Effect of
a birth in which one, two, three four or all
the five yogas are present.
5. Sunapha Anapha (3R*ltT) and Durudhara yogas. Kemadruma
yoga.
6. Effect of birth in the Sunapha and
Anapha (8i;rf>r) yogas.
7. Effect of birth in a Durudhara and
Kemadruma yogas.
8. Subhaveshi Subhavasi (^qi#r),
Subhobhayachari and the cor¬
responding Papaveshi and other
yogas explained. Subhakarthari
and Papakarthari and Susubha
yogas explained.
9. Effect of birth in Suvesi (^^), Suvasi
and Subhayachari yogas.
10. Effect of birth in Asubhavesi (3Tfrei%^), Asubhavasi and Asubhobhayachari
(arwsfbenraft) yogas.
11. Effect of birth in Subhakarthari (srvTR^fr) and
Papakartari yogas.
12. Effect of birth in the Amala (snr^T) yoga.
13. Effects of birth in Susubha Subhakartari and other yo^as are only
similar to that of Sunapha and other
yogas caused by benefics, etc.
n

PHALADEEPIKA
14. Mahabhagya (JTfT>insf?r)> Kesari Sakata
(TPW?) Adhama (siotN Sama (^m), and
yogas explained.
15. Effect of birth in a Mahabhagya yoga.
16. Effect of birth in a Kesari yoga.
17. Effect of birth in a Sakata yoga.
18. Effect of birth in Adhama (ar^q'), Sama (^|q)
and Varishta (qftg') yoga.
19—20. Vasumat Amala (arq^) and Pushkala
(5^5?) yogas and their effects.
21—25. Subhamala(OTqqrarr), Asubhamala (qfrqqrar)
Lakshmi and Gouri (jftsft) yogas and
their effects.
26—27. Saraswati (??i^5EeRfl) yoga and its eftects.
28—31. Srikainta Srinatha (^rtqT^T) and
Virinchi and their effects.
32. Parivartana yogas 66 in all. Of these,
30 are Dainya (%?q) yogas; 8 are Khala (^r^y)
yogas, and the remaining 28, Maha (q^T)
yogas.
33—34. Their effects.
35—36. Kahala (gqi^) and Parvata (qqq) yogas and
their effects.
37—38. Raja (?:r3r) and Sankha yogas and their
effects.
39—41. The seven Sankhya yogas and their
offocts
42—43. The Adhi yoga (qfqqtq) and its effects.
44—56. Chamara (qrmr), Dhenu (^), Saurya
Jaladhi (qwfq). Chhattra (^), Astra (qqr),
Kama (gj.q), Asura (qr^), Bhagya (qrrq),,
Khyati Suparijata (^Ttfenq) and
Musala yogas and their effects.
57 69. Ava(qq), Nisswa Mriti Kuhoo
(1E¥1' Pamara (q7*Rr)5 Harsha (^q), Dushkriti'
Sarala ^ps), Nirbhagya (f^qf^q),
Dur i^c), Daridra (qfef) and Vimala (^q^)*
yogas and their effects.
70, Another kind of Duryoga (^dfq).
ADHYAYA 7.
1—5. Certain self-evident Rajayogas.

CONTENTS
6. A Rajayoga caused by the lord of the Lagna
or the Sun.
7. A Rajayoga caused by the Moon.
8. A Rajayoga caused by Venus and the lord of
the Lagna.
9. A Rajayoga caused by Mars.
10. A Rajayoga in which the Sun causes the
birth of a powerful king.
11. A Rajayoga in which the Moon ushers a
famous king.
12. A strong Moon aspected by a strong planet
in the Lagna ushers an emperor into the
World.
13— 25. Some more Rajayogas.
26—30. NeechalDhanga Rajayogas
ADHYAYA 8
. l-~ 4. The effect of the Sun being posited in 1 1 e
several bhavas from the Lagna onwards.
5— 7. The effect of the Moon being porited in the
12 bhavas from the Lagna onwards.
8—10. The effect of Mars being posited in the 12
bhavas from the Lagna onwards.
11—13. The effect Mercury being posited in the 12
bhavas from the Lagna onwards.
14— 16. The effect of Jupiter being posited in the 12
bhavas from the Lagna onwords.
17—19. The effect of Venus occupying the l2 bhavas
from the Lagna onwards.
20—24. The effect of Saturn being posited in the 12
bhavas from the Lagna onwards.
25—27. The effect of Rahu being posited in the 12
bhavas from the Lagna onwords.
28—33. The effect of Ketu being posited in the 12
bhavas from the Lagna onwards.
34.. When does a planet produce the full effect of
the bhava it occupies ? In giving effects,
Rahu is similar to Saturn and Ketu is like
Mars.

phaladeepika
35. Planets posited exactly in the centre of a
bhava produces full effects.
ADHYAYA 9.
1— 12. Effect of the several Basis from Mesha onwards
happening to be the Lagna.
13. Similar effects should be predicted when the
several Basis from Mesha onwards happen
to contain the Moon in them.
14—-19. Effect of a planet occupying his Uchcha (TV),
Swakshetra a Mitrakshetra (^9^)
a Satrukshetra (?[rf%3r)j Neecha
or becoming Astangata (3|’^cT|p9‘)
20. Effect when a planet is retrograde in motion
or occupies a Vargottama Navamsa.
ADHYAYA 10.
1. Yoga leading to the aquisition or loss of a wife
2— 3. Yogas leading to the loss of a wife* A yoga
for getting a chaste and fortunate wife.
4. Yogas leading to separation from one's wife.
Yogas leading to a liaison with other people's
wives.
5. Yogas leading to wifelessness or childlessness.
Yogas leading to two wives. How to predict
the number of wives a person'can have ?
6. A clue to find the number of women that a
person may associate with. How many of
these will die early and many will survive,
etc.
7. Yogas leading to loss wife or husband. Yogas
leading to a happy and lucky couple.
8. A yoga leading to a woman being remarried.
Toga leading to the demise of both the woman
and her husband.
9. Yogas leading the native to be blessed wHh
wife and children.
10. Yogas leading to a person's wife being happy
and endowed with children.

CONTENTS
11. A clue to find the Janmarasi of the
wife.
12. A clue to find the direction of the country of
the wife, and. time of marriage*
13—14. Time of acquisition of a wife.
15. A yoga for the loss of wife.
ADHYAYA 11.
1. The various effects that have to be deduced
from the several bhavas in a female's horos¬
cope.
2. A clue to find out the character, nature, luck,
etc., of a female.
3. Bodily appearance character, status, etc., of
the husband. The mutual relationship
(friendliness or otherwise) between the
couple.
4. Alpasutarkshas Yoga for a female
to have diseased organs. Yogas to become
unchaste.
5. Yoga for a female to be fortunate and chaste.
Yoga leading to barrenness.
6—8. The effects of the birth of a female in the
several Trimsamsas of each of the 12 Basis.
9. Effect of a female's birth in the asterisms
Jyeshta, Aslesha, Visakha, Chittra, Ardra,
Satabishak, Moola, Krittika and Pushya.
10. A Saubhagya yoga.
11. Menses. The yoga which makes it possible
for a woman to mix sexually with man. The
time to be recommended for impregnation.
ADHYAYA 12.
1. Yogas under which the acquisition of children
is assured.
2. Yogas under which a person can have no
issues whatever.
3. Exception to the above (si. 2). Childless Basis.
4. Yogas for a person to have a child late in life
after a great effort.

PHALADEEPIKA
5. Yogas leading a person to have children
through a second wife. Yogas under which
a person becomes the father of many
daughters.
6—7. Yogas leading to family extinction.
8. Yogas leading a person to have a son by
adoption.
9. Yogas leading to loss of children.
10. Yogas for having many children.
11. When will all the children be males ?
12. Time when conception may take place.
13. How to determine the number of issues ?
14. Method to ascertain the strength of fecundity.
15. To determine whether progeny is assured
or not.
16—18> Methods advocated to ward off barrenness.
19—22. Cause of childlessness.
23—24. Remedies recommended to ward off the sins
leading to childlessness*
25—32. Time when the acquisition of a son may be
expected.
33. To determine the time of delivery.
34. Bases for predition of effects.
ADHYAYA 13.
1. The longevity of the person should be the
first thing to be ascertained.
2. Various opinions about the correct time that
has to be taken for the Lagna at a birth.
3—4. The life of children under 12 years cannot be
calculated for the reasons stated.
5. Remedies to ward off the evil effects due to
Balarishta.
6. Balarishta Yogarishta
Alpayus Madhyamayus (iT«qrin-
) and Purnayus ), defined.
7. Maximum period of human life and its divi¬
sions into three kinds.
8. Death of the child if born; Dinamrityu (f^-

CONTENTS
^fg-) Dinaruk and Vishaghatika
portions, and fateful influence on
the parents, child and the maternal uncle
if born in specified portions of certain
asterisms.
9. Yogas leading to death very soon after birth.
10—11. Which portions of the signs with the Moon in
them become fateful ?
12. Another yoga leading to the death of the child
very soon after birth.
13. Yogas leading to the early demise of a child
and the probable periods of exit.
14—15. Yogas leading to Dirgha Madhya
and Alpa (st^) Ay us.
16. A yoga for a person to be long-lived.
17. Another set of yogas for Dirgha (^[^), Madhya
(jfeg) and Alpa {ar^g) Ayus.
18—'19. The times of exit in the above three cases.
20. To determine the best lucky time for a person.
21— 24. Yogas which counteract Arishta (arftg) and
secure long life.
25. Ayus (an^flr) should be predicted only after a
correct examination of the Dasas described
by Sripati (%ftg%)/ of the Ashtakavargas, the
Kalachakra Dasas, etc.
ADHYAYA 14.
1. The planets through whom the diseases have
to be determined in a nativity.
2—9. The diseases caused by the several planets.
10—11. Certain yogas leading to some specific
diseases, (eye disease, ear disease, belly¬
ache, bleeding from rectum, disease in the
private parts).
12^20. The manner in which a person meets with his
death and the cause of the same.
21. Yoga leading to a happy death or otherwise.
22— 23. The region to which a person goes after his
death. The refuge of the departed.

XX PHALADEEPIKA
24—29. All information about one's past and future
births.
ADHYAYA IS.
1. When will the bhavas produce good effects?
2. When is a bhava said to be strong, when
mixed and when weak ?
3— 6. Conditions determining the destruction of a
bhava.
7— 8. Time when such destruction comes to pass.
9—10. The lord of the Lagna, whether benefic or
malefic, promotes the prosperity of the
Bhava it occupies. - An example where the
lord of the Lagna is malefic.
11. In the case of a planet owning*two houses, the
the conditions and the time during which
the effects of these two houses will happen.
12. Same as slokas 7—8.
13. A situation when the effects predicted above
as going to happen may not at all come to
pass
14. The effect measured.
15—16. What can be determined from the several
planets as Karakas ?
17. — The Karakas of the 12 bhavas.
18. The planetary effects will be full or otherwise
according to the nature—friendly or inimical
—of the sign occupied by the planet Malefics in the 6th, 8th and 12th and benefics in
the other houses generally promote advance¬
ment of the native.
19. Malefics in the Dustthanas do good to the
native while benefics, evil.
20. The method of determining the effects of any
Bhava.
21. The method of ascertaining information about
one's father, mother and other relations of a
person.
22—24. All information about one' father to be ascer¬
tained by treating the Sun's position in the
nativity as the Lagna and proceeding in the
usual way.
25. Similar details about one's mother, brother, etc.

CONTENTS
should be ascertained by treating the res¬
pective Karaka's position in the nativity as
the Lagna, etc. Good effects of any Bhava
are assured when the lord as well as its
Karaka are both strong.
26. Bhava Karakas in their respective Bhavas will
cause distres.3.
27. The lord of the Lagna produces the effects of
(1) the Bhava owned by the planet if any
associated with him and (2) the Bhava occu¬
pied by him.
28. The lord of the Lagna produces happy or ad¬
verse effects (of the Bhavas above referred to)
according as the number of benefic dots in
his Ashtakavarga is more or less than the
normal (4).
29. If a planet owning two hou.s3s one of which is a
Dusstthana, be posited in his other house, he
will give the effects of only that house and
not the effects due to the Dusstthana. An
example.
30. The five kinds of connection or relationship
recognised between two planets.
ADHYAYA 16
1. The colour and appearance of the native and
the proportions of his body and limbs.
2—30. Some effects of the Lagna and the other
Bhavas.
31—32. Time when the effects of any Bhava will
happen.
33. Evil effect caused by the conjunction of the
lord of the 1st and 6th Bhavas.
34. A clue to find whether there will arise any
rivalry, envy or friendship between the
native and another and the time when the
same will be caused.
35. Time when the good or bad effects of any
Bhava may be expected.
ADHYAYA 17.
1. A clue to find out the time when a Bhava
suffers annihilation.
2. A clue to ascertain the time of one's demise by
means of the transit of Saturn.
D

PHALADEEPIKA
3—4. A clue to find the time of one's demise by
means of the transit of Jupiter.
5. ; A clue to find the time of one's death through
Moon's transit.
6. A clue to find out the times of demise of one¬
self and his brother.
7. A clue to ascertain the times of demise of
one's father and mother.
8. A clue to find out when a son's demise may
happen.
9. Another clue similar to these given in 3—4.
10. Another clue similar to the one given in SI. 2.
11— 12. A clue to find the month and the Lagna of
one's demise.
13—28. A clue to find the time when a person's death
may be looked for—the particular Dasa
period, the year, the month and the day when
the event may happen.
ADHYAYA 18.
1. Effect of the Sun being in conjunction with
each of the other 6 planets.
2. : Effect of the Moon being in conjunction with
each of the 5 planets other than the Sun.
3. Effect of Mars being in conjunction with each
of the 4 planets other than the Sun and Moon.
4. Effect of Mercury being in conjunction with
Jupiter, Venus or Saturn. Effects' of Jupiter
being in conjunction with Venus or Saturn.
5. Effect of Venus being together with Saturn.
Effect of conjunctions of more than two
planets.
6—11. The effect of planetary aspects on the Moon in
the 12 Basis.
12— 15. The effect of planetary aspects on the Moon
in the sever^ NavamaSas.
16. What has been stated in slokas 6—11 should
also be understood to Apply, in ,the case; of
Dwadasamasas also.
17. The conditions for the fullness ortotherwisp. of
the good and bad effects described above.

CONTENTS
ADHYAYA 19.
1. The author's justification in his setting forth
the Mahadasas.
2. The nine Mahadasas and their respective
periods.
3. To find the unexpired portion in years, etc.,
of a Dasa at the time of a birth.
4. A Solar year defined.
5 6. General effects of the Sun's Mahadasa.
7. Effect of the Moon's Dasa.
8. An examination of the Moon's strength is
necessary before any declaration is made.
9—17. General effects of the Dasas of Mars, Mercury,
Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu.
18—26. Some more effects of the several Dasas stated.
ADHYAYA 20.
1. A brief description of what is indicated in this
Adhyaya,
2—14. Effects of the Dasas of the planets owning the
Lagna and the other Bhavas when the Bhavas
are strong and their lords are well-placed.
15—20. Effects of the Dasas of the planets owning the
Lagna and the other Bhavas when they are
occupying inimical or depression Rasis, or
have been eclipsed or happen to be badlyplaced.
21. References to certain things in some of the
previous adhyayas as relevant and applicable
to a Dasa under examination.
22. The Dasa of a planet in a Vargottamamsa will give
favourable results while the Dasa and Bhukti
of planets badly placed will be unfavourable
23. Certain Bhuktis in the Dasa of a malefic
produce untoward effects.
24. What Dasas prove fatal ?
25—26. ' Mars and Venus in certain positions produce
most beneficial results during their Dasasi '

PHALADEEPIKA
27. Nature of the effects of the Dasas of planets —
benefic or malefic—when in depxessioni
inimical or bad houses.
28. The evil effects resulting when the Bhukti
period of aplanet inimical to the lord of the
Dasa or of a planet occupying the 6th house
or of a planet inimical to the lord of the
Lagna is in progress.
29. A clue to ascertain the nature of the effects of
a particular Bhukti through the Bhuktinatha.
30. The good influence of a planet in its several
positions.
31—32. Certain clues to find out the planet whose
Dasa will prove fatal.
33. A yoga in which the middle portion of the life
of the native is good. The fruit of a planet's
Dasa matures differently according to its
position in a Prishtodaya, Ubayodaya and
Sirshodaya Rasi.
34. Planets prove prosperous during their Dasa
periods if they transit at the time their
Swakshetra, Uchcha or Mitra houses.
35. The destruction of a Bhava during the Dasa of
the planet occupying it, if the planet be weak
or is in depression or inimical house*
36. In what position the Moon influences a Dasa
beneficially and in what otherwise ?
37* When will the effects of the Bhukti of a planet
be good and when evil ?
38* The particular time at which the good or bad
effects of a planet's Bhukti period is
manifested*
39. Nature of the effects of Rahu's Dasa will be
similar to that of the planet he associates
with. The Dasa of a planet thouh benefic if
associated with Rahu will prove malefic at
the end.
40* The Maraka places defined* Conditions when
the Dasas of their lords may prove fatal.
41. Nature of the Dasas of planets owing (l)
iC&udta or Trikona houiiies (2) 3rd, 6th and

CONTENTS
8th houses* Sun or Moon will only give
good effects during his Dasa when he hap¬
pens to own the 8th house.
When the lord of a Kendra is in Trikona or
vice versa, their Bhuktis in each other's
Dasa will be very auspicious.
When will planets reveal the effects of their
Dasas or Bhuktis ?
Lords of a Kendra and a Kona even if by
themselves causing evil become powerful
to make the native prosperous.
Planets becoming Yogakarakas.
Conditions under which Jupiter and Venus
cause evil and prove fatal during their
Dasas.
Malefics when they own Kendras become
more auspicious in their effects.
Nature of Rahu and Ketu in their effects when
posited in a Kendra or Trikona.
Nature of Rahu and Ketu in their effects when
they occupy houses owned by benefics and
are associated with any planet.
Effect when a Rajayoga is in progress and the
Karaka Bhuktis intervene.
The several planets which are untoward to
the native.
Some varieties of a Dasa explained.
A clue for ascertaining the time of death of
a person.
When will a Dasa prove auspicious ?
The good or evil to be experienced in a Dasa
dependent on the position of its lord during
its course and also with ’reference to the
Moon.
Details of the same.
Author's instructions to the reader before
attempting at predictions.

PHALADEEPIKA
ADHYAYA 21.
1. Sub-division of a Dasa into Bhuktis. Time of
fruition of planetary effects.
2. Method of determining the Bhukti period o^
a Dasa.
3—11. The Sun's Dasa and effects.
12—20. The Moon's Dasa and effects.
21—29. Kuia's Dasa and effects.
30—38. Rahu's Dasa and effects.
39—47. Jupiter's Dasa and effects.
48—56. Saturn's Dasa and effects.
57—65. Mercury's Dasa and effects.
66—74. Ketu's Dasa and effects.
75—83. Sukra's Dasa and effects.
84. .. How the effects have to be predicted.
ADHYAYA 22.
1— 2. Stars grouped by triads. The order in which
they are cast. Apasavya and Savya
3. The years assigned to the planets.
4. How the formula for each of the several Nakshatrapadas is composed and its connection
to the total life-period and the several subDasas composing them.
5—9. The formulas for the several Nakshatrapadas.
10. The initial Dasa and how it is calculated.
11. How the Rasi Mahadasas of a life are deter¬
mined.
12. Manduka Gati—A swa Gati and Simhavalokana.
13. How to calculate the period of a Bhukti or
Apahara in a Mahadasa.
14. The number of years of Parama Aytt's for the
severed formulas.
15. Effects already stated before the several Maha¬
dasas will apply also in the cause of Utpamna
and Adhana Mahadasas.
16. Utpanna, Adhana and Kshema Dasas ex¬
plained.
17. Naisargikadasa periods of thOseveral planets.

CONTENTS
18. Amsayurdaya.
19. Vyayadiharana (sir^TT^T^) Chakrapatardhahani Satrukshetraharana
20. The dictum of Satyacharya on the several
reductions.
21. Pindayurdaya
22. The computation of Lagnayus in the Pinda¬
yurdaya system.
23. Reduction in the Ayurdaya of a planet on
account of it s being in a depressed position
or in an intermediate position.
24. Views of other Astrologers on the Pindayur¬
daya method.
25. The Ayurdaya of Jeevasarman.
26. The maximum length of life in the case of men*
27. The order of the Dasas.
28. When are the three systems—Amsa {3T5r),
Pinda ifgvir) and Naisargika Ayurdayas—to be adopted ?
29. What should be done when the Sun, Moon
and the Lagna are of equal strenth ?
30. Kalachakra Dasa system when
to be resorted to ?
31. Maximum period of life in the case of men and
some of the other living creatures.
32. The perons to whom the Ayurdaya
rules apply.
ADHYAYA 23.
1—2. Purpose of the Ashtakavargas and the mode
of setting the dots.
3 -9. The Ashtakavargas of the Sun and other
planets.
10. ' The ■ malefic places in the several Ashta¬
kavargas The good effects revealed by ihe
Ashtakavarga are advanced by the planet
Qoncerned being well-placed, that is in an
Upachaya, in a friend's house, in his own

xxviii PHALADEEPIKA
house or in his exaltation. The same fail of
effect when the planet is posited in an
Apachaiya place, in his inimical house or in
his depression Rasi.
11. Effects to be deduced through benefic dots
ranging from 0 to 8 in any Rasi.
12. How benefic dots are computed.
13. A planet in its transit through the exact degree
in the Bhava it had originally occupied at
the time of birth reveals the full effects due
to that Bhava—'good or bad as the case
may be.
14. Time when a Bhava is advanced or suffers
decay.
15. Cases where the interests of a Bhava are pro¬
moted in an intense manner.
16. ' How to ascertain the exact time of fruition
of a particular benefic dot in a Rasi.
17. Prastara Ashtakavarga explained.
18—19. The lords of the 8 divisions into which a
Rasi is divided and the time of fruition of a
particular benefic dot in the same.
20—21. The Sarvashtakavarga. Effect of benefic dots
in any Rasi being above, equal to or falling
short of 28.
22. The bases for computing Ashtakavarga are the
positions of the several planets and the
Lagna at the time of birth.
23. A malefic when he is in his Swakshetra will
only promote the Bhava he occupies, while
in depression or inimical house he will only
cause the Bhava's ruin.
24. Effect of a benefic in exaltation if he owns a
Dussthana. Effect of a malefic in exadtation
when he is not in Dussthana, but happens
to own good houses.
ADHYAYA 24.
1—6. Clues to ascertain the time of demise of one's
father.
7—3. Time of demise of one's mother.
9. To ascertain the number of brothers, relations
and maternal uncles.

CONTENTS
E
To ascertain the number of issues.
Effects to be guessed through the figures in
Sukra's Ashtakavarga.
To ascertain one's own demise by the figures
in Saturn's Ashtakavarga.
Trikona reduction.
Ekadhipatya reduction.
Rasi and Graha Gunakara (multipliers.)
Process for finding the Ayurdaya through the
Ashtakavarga system.
A speedy way of computing the figures of the
Sarva Ashtakavarga in the several houses.
To ascertain the effects in the case of a horos¬
cope, the Ashtakavarga system is the best.
Certain inferences that can be deduced from
the figures in the Sarvashiakavarga.
Conclusion.
ADHYAYA 25.
The nine Upagrahas enumerated.
Mandi or Gulika and its position in the several
week'days.
Similar positions of Yamakantaka and Aidhaprahara.
The position of Kala.
The position of Dhuma, Paridhi, Indra Chapa
and Ketu.
Scope of the effects of the Upagrahas treated
in this chapter.
Effect of Gulika in the 12 Bhavas. A clue to
find out the Lagna in a nativity through the
position of the Gulika therein.
Effect of Gulika being associated with the
several planets.
Gulika and Yamakemtaka very powerful in
causing evil and good respectively. Other
Upagrahas have only half the power of Mandi
in causing evil.
Nature of the effects of the Upagrahas com¬
pared with those of some of the planets.

PHALADEEPIKA
22—26. Effect of Dhuma and other Upagrahas when
associated with planets in the Lagna and
other houses.
27. Effect caused by Dhuma and the four other
Upagrahas when they are visible.
28—29. Form and appearance of Dhuma, Vyatipata,
Parivesha.
30. Effect of the lord of the sign occupied by
Gulika being in a Kendra, a Trikona, his own,
exaltation or a friendly house.
ADHYAYA 26.
1. Importance of the Janma Rasi (Rasi occupied
by the Moon). Gocharapala to be predicted
with reference this alone.
2. Particular houses through which when the
several planets transit, they give auspicious
effects.
3— 8. The auspicious houses of transit and the
corresponding Vedha places for the Sun and
other planets.
9—11. Effects of the transit of the Sun through the
12 houses.
12. Effects of the Moon's transit through the 12
houses.
13—16. Effects of Mar's transit over the 12 houses.
17. Effects of Mercury's transit over the 12 houses.
18—20. Effect of Jupiter's transit over the 12 houses.
21. Effects of the trasit of Venus over the 12 houses
22—23 Effects of Saturn's transit over the 12 houses.
24. Effects of Rahu's transit over the 12 houses.
25. Planets grouped according as they produce
effect in the initial, middle or final portion
of a sign. .
26— 27. Sapthasalaka, and effects to be deduced there¬
from. ,
28. Certain fateful stars and the effect of the tran¬
sit over them by the planets.
29. Effects of transits by planets over certain
specified positions in the zodiac and times
of certain astronomical occurence.

CONTENTS
30. The nullification of effects produced by
planets o/ring to certain aspects.
31. Planets badly placed will not do harm if posi¬
ted in their exaltation or Swakshetra Rasis,
'*■ ' while planets in such positions, if they be
well placed, give beneficial results during
their transit over such Rasis.
32. Effects of planets while in transit through
favourable and unfavourable places when
they occupy depression or inimical houses or
are eclipsed.
33 . Effects of the transits of Saturn, the Sun, Mars
and Jupiter over the 12th, the 8 th and the
1 st houses reckoned from the Moon's place.
34. TheMaranastthana («f?:or5E«rR) in the case of
the several planets.
35. The distribution of the 27 stars over the
several limbs of the native during the Sun's
transit and the effects thereof.
30 —40. The same with reference to the transits of the
Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus,
Saturn, Rahu and Ketu.
41, Effect of transits by planets over houser
containing more benefic dots in the
Ashtakavarga.
42—44. Puro Lattas or forward Lattas and
Prishta Lattas or rear Lattas.
45—46. Effect of the Lattas.
47 . Conjunction of two or more Lattas and its
effects.
48. Effects of transit in Subha (^VT) and Asubha
Vedhas in the Sarvatobhadrachakra
49. Expiation by Santhis of evil effects arising
from bad Dasas, Apaharas, low figure of
benefic dots, transit through bad places, etc.
50. Planets are always productive of good to

PHALADEEPIKA
persons who do not harm others, do virtuous
acts, etc.
ADHYAYA 27.
1. The planetary conditions leading to isceticism.
2. The particular class of ascetics to which the
native concerned would belong.
3—4. Some more ascetic Yogas.
5. The various kinds of ascetics mentioned.
6. Yoga for becoming a miserable devout.
7. Effect of a Rajayoga co-existing with the Yoga
mentioned in the previous sloka.
8. Yogas leading one to become a successful
ascetic and respected by all.
ADHYAYA 28.
1—4. The contents of the 27 Adhyayas.
5. The author's birth place.
6. His family deity.

H «raHirpr sw: II
ft ^
PHALADEEPIKA
ftRl^^OTT
trc f^5Tg jt: ii?ji
ADHYAYA I.
Sloka 1 .—May we be blessed with beatitude
without end by that Supreme Reality—the one heavenly
light without a second (the Sun), which when once
above the horizon, remains on end in full view of the
moon-dwelling manes, pole-dwelling celestials and the
earth-dwelling mortals, for (/. e., which has for these
beings a diurnal arc measuring) half a synodic lunar
month, half a solar year and the entire day time of a
solar nycthemeron respectively, and which sometimes
(to wit, with northern declination under north polar
heaven) is dextra^ (/. e., moves on almucantars from
left to right), and sometimes (to wit, with southern
declination under south polar heaven), sinistral (/. e.,
moves on almucantars from right to left).
*T^r*nrR: *ninT% ?(rTf«n snir^wr?:*^ i

Adh. I
Sloka 2—1, the astrologer Mantreswara, first make
my reverent obeisance to Saraswati~the Muse of
Learning, to my family-deity, to my parents and
ieachers, to the nine planets beginning with the Sun,
which bestow omniscience {viz., knowledge of past,
present and future) to Ganesa, the lord of Siva's
cohorts of divinities, and, above all, to Siva, the
Supreme, and then proceed to give out here for the
delectation of astrologers a very limpid conspectus of
the teaching of Atri, Parasara and the rest, under the
title "Phaladeepika” ( = "light on Apotelesmatics").
SJoka 3. —The exact time of the birth of a person
with the actual number of Vighatikas elapsed as reveal¬
ed by foot-measurement or by the gnomonic shadow
and other apparatus should first be specially ascertain¬
ed. Then the positions of the plants coincident with
observation should be set down with the help of
mathematical (expedients) instruments. Then the
Bhavas and the strength of planets should be investi¬
gated and through them the effects should be judged.
Sloka ■#.—The parts of the body of the person <R!SF
fKala) beginning with the Lagna are respectively (1)
the head (2) the face (3) the breast (4) the heart (S) the

belly ( 6 ) the hip (7) the groins ( 8 ) the private part (9)
the two thighs ( 10 ) the two knees ( 11 ) the two calves
and (12) the two feet. The concluding portion of the
signs, Vrischika, Meena and Kataka is called
(Bhasandhi) or (Rikshasandhi). Others apply
this term to the last portions of all the signs.
M firerf «n% i
Sloka 5 .—The abodes of the 12 signs front Mesha
onwards are respectively ( 1 ) the forest ( 2 ) a field under
water (meadow) (3) a bed room (4) a chasm with water
in it (5) a mountain ( 6 ) a land with water and corn
(7) the house of a Vaisya ( 8 ) a hole or cavity ( 9 ) King's
residence ( 10 ) water-abounding forest ( 11 ) the spot
frequented by potters and ( 12 ) water.
Sloka 6. —Mars, Venus, Mercury, the Moon, the Sun,
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Saturn and
Jupiter are respectively declared the lords of the signs
from Mesha onwards. Mesha, VrishaSha, Makara,
Kanya, Karkataka, Meena and Tula are the exaltation
signs of the seven planets respectively from the Sun
onwards, their signs of 'fall' being the 7 th from their
exaltation ones. The highest exaltation and fall of the
planets counting from the Sun are the 10 th, the 3 rd,

Adh. 1
-the 28th, the 15th, the 5th, the 27th and the 20th de>
^rees of the several signs.
^iTTrsnlg[^l^[5T5Tjgsi ir^tifsr #5tsfe5(r
r^ran: ^» i < r w? :i l c y <T;? : i;
n \\'S\i
Sloka 7.—Simha, Vrishbha, Mesha, Kanya, Dhanus,
Tula and Kumbha are the Moolatrikona (first triangu¬
lar) signs of the planets from the Sun onwards. The
first 20 degrees of Simha, the last 27 degrees of
Vrishabha (27 degrees jifter the highest exaltation
degree), the first 12 degrees of Mesha, the 5 degrees
following the highest exaltation degree of Mercury in
Kanya (i. e., 16° to 20°), the first 10 degrees in Dhanus,
the first five degrees in Tula and the first 20 degrees
of Kumbha form respectively the Moolatrikona por¬
tions of the 7 planets from the Sun onwards. The first
half of Dhanus, Kanya, Mithuna, Kumbha and Tula are
bipeds or human signs. Vrischika is a 1^(7 (Keeta=
reptile) or centiped sign; Karkataka, latter half of Maka
ra and Meena eure watery signs. The rest, viz., MeshaVrishabha, Simha, Dhanus (latter half) and Makara (first
half) are quadruped signs.
qtisr^; urmSloka 8 .—^The signs Vrishabha, Karkataka, Dhanus,
Mesha and Makara rise with their back
lodaya). Mithuna and Meena come under Ubhayodaya

appear with their faces and are
termed Sirshodaya (?ifHf5r*r) signs. The Prishtodaya
signs and Mithuna belong to the Moon and are termed
nocturnal Basis. The other six. belong to the Sun cuid
are termed diurnal signs. The four signs counted from
the Rasi last passed (left) by the Sun are in their order
termed (1) (Urdhva) or tending upwards (2) aiq;
(Adhah)-beneath or under (3) {Sama)-even or level
and (4) (Vakra)-bent or crooked. The same order
holds good in the case of the other 8 signs.
«bPi>c ii (V<Kt qT^r%m? srnnf^snm: stwi-
?;wvr 5*Tf»
Sloka 9.—The signs from Mesha taken in order are
(1) ^IT (Chara)-moveable or cardinal, (Sthira)-
fixed and (Ubhaya)-dual, mutable or common;
(2) 8CR (Dwara)-entrance, (Bahis)-outside and ’TW
(Garbha)-inside; (3) yijJ (Dhettu) or mineral, (Mula,
or vegetable and «fhr (Jeeva) or animal; (4) (Krura)
or fierce and (Saumya) or auspicious; (5) odd and
even and (6) male and female. Mesha, Vrishabha)
Mithuna and Karkataka with their Trikona or triangular
signs represent the four quarters commencing from
the East. The six houses from the 7th represent the
left-side limbs of Kalapurusha, while the other six
houses (/. s., reckoned from the Lagna) represent the
right-side ones.
liNi ^nwTi5Tri«t 'tBwt
Sloka iO.—Lagna, Hora, Kalya Deha (^)
tJdaya (5rf*r), Rupa (^). Seersha Vartamana

Adh. !
- living) and Janma (SFW) are the names of the
Ascendant or the first house. Vitta (f^W- wealth), Vidya
* learning)' Swa (^)» Annapana (^WTR-riches)
food and drink)> Bhukti * (eating), the right eye
• Dakshakshi), face (sireT - Asya), letter or docu¬
ment Patrika), speech (WT^-Vak) and Kutumba
(^^■Mj) are appellations for denoting the second house.
^ ^ wicrt *sr i
^ jirr: ^ nun
Slokaa 11-12 .—Duschikya (5^*1^),Uras (^^-breast),.
the right ear, army, courage, valour, prowess and
brother are the designations of the third house. House,
land, maternal uncle, a sister's son, a relation, a friend,
vehicle, moth'er, kingdom, cow, buffalo, perfume,
clothes, ornaments, the nadir, Hibuka (%|[7)) Sukha
happiness), water, bridge and river are the terms
to denote the 4th house.
Rajanka (TT^TT^'Sovereign's mark\ a minister, Kara
{%K-laiX, hand or toll)# Athman (*ITfR*J[), intelligence
('Sfif-Dhi), knowledge of the future, Asu (aTf - life
son (?fT-Suta), belly (iRT - Jatara), SrutiC’?^ • Vedic
knowledge) and Smriti ' traditional law) are the
names of the 5th house.
3Trfjr?rI%?ft?wfi^cTw*TR: 'rfimimTrafj \i
Sloka 23.—Rina * debt), Astra (5T^-arms), Chora
(*5ft?:-thief), Kshata (^' wounds), Roga (^t*r-disea8e)»
Satru (^CT^ • enemy), Jnati (fT^* paternal relation), Aji

(an% - battle), Dushkxitya wicked act), Agha
(ssrar - sin), Bheeti * fear) and Avajna (3T^?I -
humiliation) are the names of the 6th house. Jamitra
(3rri^^)> Chittottha (^RTtf^*desire), Mada (*r?''passion)*
Asta (3l?cf-set), Kama (^W-desire), Dyuna
Adhvan («r5^-a way or road)/ Loka * people), Pati
•('rfir * husband), Marga (*TT^i'-wa y) and Bharya (^Twl“
wife) are the designations of the 7th house.
Sloka 14 .—Mangalya (*rv#«*r) > Randhra (^C^) > Malina
<*r%?r)» Adhi (snf^ - mental pain), Parabhava ,
defeat or insult), Ayus Klesa ■ sorrow),
Apavada (3T<I4I4 " blame or scandal), Marana (JRHT *
death), Asuchi (STSjfe’* impurity), Vighna (f^ST-obstacle
or impediment) and Dasa " servant) are the terms
to denote the 8th house. Acharya (sTraT’*!’ * preceptor),
Daivata (^^“deity), Pitru - father). Subha (spiT *
anything auspicious), Purva bhagya * previous
luok)» Puja ■ worship), Tapas penance),
Sukruta ‘ virtue or religious merit, a good or
virtuous act), Pautra * grand son), Japa (ST'T-prayer)
and Aryavamsa (sTWra^-noble family) are the names for
the 9th house.
Sloka 15.—The terms to indicate the 10th house are

Adh.r
Vyapara (s*irnT - commerce), Aspada ■ rank or
position), Mana (>TR * honour). Karma (<<v)ft-occupation)r
Jaya (snr* success), Sat (^31^-good), Kirti (^ftf^-fame),
Kratu sacrifice), Jeevana (afhw - livelihood or
profession), Vyoma(wi)*|-sky or zenith), Achara
good conduct), Guna ' quality), Pravritti
iuclination), Gamana (^raR-gedt), AinaCaTWI- command)
and Meshurana (i)^<<Jl) Labha (SfW • gain), Aya (^W'
income), Agamana (sTT^nnT-acquisition), Apthi (sTlfH •
getting, gain), Siddhi * accomplishment, fulfil*
ment), Vibhava - wealth or riches), Prapthi (srrfH’
profit), Bhava (*r9)j Slaghyata (^IMfcfl-veneration,
commendation), eldest brother or sister, left ear, Sarasa
{*Br^'any thing juicy or succulent), and (hearing of
some) pleasing or delightful news are the expressions
for the 11th house.
*iR?ftrs«r
Sloka 26.~The designations used for the 12th
house are Duhkha (5*^ * misery), Anghri (wBT'leg),
Varna Nayana (^TJIiPnT - loft eye), Kshaya (^R-loss,
decline), Suchaka (^^TC - a tale-bearer, spy), Anthya
(si?R-last), Daridrya (i^'llbtl-poverty). Papa (RV'sin),
Sayana {5iq»T • bed), Vyaya (s*ra’)>Ripha and
Bandha (^^'imprisonment)' Thus have been declared
in their order the names of the 12 houses. The 3rd, thethe 6th, the 12th and the 8th houses are termed Leena
Stthanas («R«i'«'e4i«i 'concealed or hidden houses)*

Sloka i 7 .—The 8 th, the 6 th and the 12th houses
are known as Dussthanas or houses of evil.
The rest are termed good houses and will be propitious
to the native. The 1st, the 10th, the 7th and the 4th
houses cure known by the terms Kendra (^^)' Kantaka
and Chatushtaya ).
Br^or
II jr?"^»ar?:Bp:Br<n?rr ?i^!v*?Tr!T: sr»iTr: ii
Sloka 2 S.~The houses next to the Kendras, f. e., the
2 nd, the 5 th, the 8 th and the 11 th are known as Panaphara (9*il9>c). The 3rd, the 6 th, the 9th and the 12th
are Apoklima (3IRltf|pT) houses. The 4ih and the 8 th
are designated Chaturasra houses. The 10th,
the 3rd, the 6 th and the 11th houses are called Upachaya (irq^^T) 5 the 9th and the 5th are known as Trikona (BRBtor) or triangular) houses and these are
auspicious.
Thus ends the first Adhyaya on '"'Definitions'' in
the work Phaladeepika composed by Mantreswara.
il II
or*A—2

Adh. II
ADHYAYA II.
Sloka 1 .—It is through the Sun that a wise man
ought to ascertain about a person's copper, gold, father,
anything auspicious, one's own self, happiness,
prowess, courage, power, victory in war, service under
the sovereign, glory, any work relating to the God
Siva, trip to forest or mountainous regions, taking an
active part in Homas or Yajnas, temple, acuteness and
'enthusiasm.
5^ 'qK55T% JOTlftr I
Sloka 2 .—It is from the Moon that one ought to
determine the welfare of the mother, mental tranquilli*
ty, sea-bath, white chowire, umbrella, good fan, fruits,
tenderness, flowers, corn, agriculture, fame, acquisi¬
tion of pearls, bell-metal, silver, sweet substances,
milk, etc., cloth, water, cows, women, good meals,
bodily health and beauty.
Sloka 3 .—It is through Mars that a person should
ascertain his strength, products derived from the
Earth, the qualities of his brothers, cruelty, battle,
daring act, odium, kitchen, fire, gold, kindred,
weapon, thieves, enemies, energy, attachment to
females not his own, uttering falsehood, prowess,
mental dignity loftiness of thought), sin, commanding
an army, and wounds.

5^5 €55|(5l5UI<Tt JTig^
^n^Tg^TRRT^^StTf ^?n?5 51% jrf^ 1
?w gfe f^fR^ssR?
f vqn?j; m\
Sloka 4 .—It is Mercury that influences one's learn¬
ing, eloquence, skill in the fine arts, eulogy from the
learned, maternal uncle, dexterity in speech, clever¬
ness in religious meditation and the like, aptness for
acquiring knowledge, intelligence, sacrifice, any
religious rite relating to Vishnu, truth - speaking,
oyster-shell, place of recreation, skill in mechanical
arts, relatons, the rank of an heir-apparent, friends and
one's sister's son or daughter, etc.
Sloka 5 .—It is through Jupiter that one ought tO'
seek information about one's knowledge, good quali¬
ties, sons, minister, behaviour, teaching, magnanimity,
knowledge of Vedas, Sastras and Smritis, prosperity
in everything, beatitude, reverence to Gods and
Brahmins, sacrifice, penance, religious faith, treasurehouse, wisdom (learning), conquering of the senses,,
happiness of the husband, honour and compassion.
ii^ii
Sloka 6.—Information regarding one's wealth, vehi¬
cles, cloths, ornaments, hoarded goods, triple sym-

12 Adh. II
phony (union of song, dance and instrumental music),
wife, happiness, scents, flowers, sexual intercourse,
couch, house, prosperity, pleasure in poetry, addiction
to many women, sport, lasciviousness, ministership,
charming speech, marriage and festivity should be
sought for through Venus.
^ itIH *5rpr5T
Sloka 7.—As regards one's longevity, death, fear,
degradation, misery, humiliation, sickness, poverty,
labourer, reproach, sin, impurity, censure, misconctciicy, rcroillug ic lovr ]::3opJe,
drowsiness, debts, iron, servitude, agricultural imple¬
ments, jail and captivity, one ought to guess through
Saturn.
Sloka S.—The Sun’is of a bilious temperament and
is strong in bones in the body. He has a limited
quantity of hair, and possesses a dark-red form. He has
eyes of a reddish brown colour. He is clad in red and
has a square-built body. He is valiant and wrathful,
and has massive arms.
»fk: n
Sloka 9.~The Moon has a huge body, and is young
as well as old; he is lean and white; has fine lovely
eyes, black and thin hair. He governs blood. He is
soft in speech, wears a white garment and is beautiful

in complexion. He has wind and phlegm in his
composition and is mild in temperament.
Shka 10. —Mars has a slender waist, curled and
shining hair. He has fierce eyes; he is bilious and
cruel in nature. He wears a red garment, and is of a
reddish hue. He is wrathful but exceedingly generous.
He has a youthful appearance and governs marrow
in the body.
Sloka ij.—Mercury is green as the blade of Durva
or panic grass. He is a mixture of the three humours
(Vata-wind), (Pittha-bile) and (Kaphaphlegm). His body is full of veins. He is pleasant in
his speech. He has red and long eyes and is clad in
green. He governs the skin, is fond of fun and possesses
even limbs.
Sloka 12. —Jupiter has a body of yellowish hue. His
eyes and hair are brown. He has got a fat and elevated
chest and possesses a big body. He is phlegmatic in
temperament and is exceedingly intelligent. His voice
is similar to that of a lion or the sound of the conch.
He is always after wealth.
If ^^WVJR: be the reading, the translation will be,
"He governs fat."

Adh. IE
^<T>Tf^^ c» TT i
^JRt f^5rT9r%5ft ^ 5 : ^nf^erg??^; ii^^ii
Sloka 13. —Venus is clad in a garment of variegated
colo]u.r. He has black curled hair. His limbs and bodyare huge. He has much wind and phlegm in his compo>
sition. His body has the colour of the Durva sprout. He
is very lovely and has broad eyes. He has treasured
his virile power.
wn:wirJT^ ^fnr: 1
€1?: sr^wftnrcr: «rre?Ef?:: iit«H
Sloka i<—Saturn is dark in form, lame, and has
wind in his composition. He has got deep eyes, and a
lean and tall body full of arteries and veins. He is idle,
and is exceedingly cedumniating. He governs the
muscle in the body. He is cruel, and has no pity. He
is dull-headed. He has got large nails, teeth, stiff hair
and limbs. He is dirty and is of sinful disposition. He
is fierce and is a personification of anger. He is ripe
with old age and wears a black garment.
Irw «rw ^:SR»T5r«B»T«5^
f^WTTWTT
Sloka 25 .— The following are the places -irequentedT.
by the Sun: A temple belonging to Siva, an open area,
an open place where there is light, a region destitute of
water and the Eastern quarter. The Moon's abodes are-

the place where Goddess Parvati is kept, the spot oc¬
cupied by a female, a place where there is water, a herb
or plant, a spot where honey or liquor is kept and the
N orth-west quarter. The places resorted Jo by thieves,
or occupied by low people, one where there is fire, a
battle-field and the Southern quarter are declared to
belong to Mars. Mercury governs the places frequent¬
ed by learned men, the spot where God Vishnu is kept,
an assembly, a recreation ground, a mathematical hall
and the Northern quarter.
Shka 16.—The places belonging to Jupiter are:
‘Treasury, the Aswattha (Pipul) tree, the dwellings of
Gods and Brahmins, and the North-east quarter., The
places of Venus are: courtesan's quarters, the harem,
the dancing hall, the bed room, and the South-east
quarter. Saturn's abodes are the lines where low
people (out-casts) live, dirty places. Western quarter
and the temple of the deity (Sasta-gencrally
known as (SsrreS^ in Tamil and analogous to
sJoofierf drioa in Kannada). The places of Rahu and Ketu
are : an ant-hill, the dark holes occupied by serpents
and the South-western direction. ^
lll\SII
Sloka J7.“A worshipper of Siva, a physician, a
king, a performer of a sacrifice, a minister, tiger, deer.

Adfa. IS
and the ruddy goose, are signified by the Sun. One
who worships (Sasta) deity, a female, a washer¬
man, a cultivator, an aquatic animal, a hare, an ante¬
lope, crane and the Greek partridge are denoted by
the Moon.
Sloka 18 .—Matters relating to the cook (in the kit¬
chen), an arms-bearer, a goldsmith, a ram, a cock, a
iack 2 d, a monkey a vulture and a thief belong to Mars.
A cowherd, a learned man, an artisan, a clever account¬
ant, a Vishnu bhakta (worshipper of Vishnu)i Garuda,
a Chataka bird, a parrot and a cat are represented by
Mercury.
gift
Sloka id.—An astrologer, a minister, a preceptor, a
Brahmin, a Sanyasi-chief, an important personage, a
pigeon, a horse and a swan relate to Jupiter. About a
musician, a wealthy man a sensualist, a merchant, a
dancer, a weaver, a courtezan, a peacock, a buffalo, a
parrot and a cow, one ought. to ascertain through
Venus.

Sloka 20.—An oil monger, a servant, a vile person
a hunter, a blacksmith, an elephant, a crow, and the
cuckoo—these have to be assigned to Saturn. A Bud¬
dhist, a snake-catcher, an ass, a ram, a wolf, a camel, a
serpent, a place enveloped in darkness and the like, a
mosquito, a bug, an insect and an owl—all these should
be declared to belong to Rahu and Ketu.
Sloka 2i —Mercury is the Sun's neutral; Saturn and
Venus are his enemies. The Moon's friends are the
Sun and Mer^jury; the rest are all neutrals to him.
Mars' neutrals are Venus and Saturn, and Mercury is
his enemy. The Moon is Mercury's enemy ; Venus and
the Sun are his friends.
wit:
Sloka 22 .—Venus and Mercury are the enemies of
Jupiter; Saturn is neutral to him. Jupiter and Mars are
neutral towards Venus. Saturn and Mercury are his
friends. Jupiter is neutral towards Saturn. Venus and
Mercury are his friends. In cases where certain planets
have been omitted, they must be considered to fulfil
the relationship that has not been mentioned.

Adh. II
»fhTsig«ifOTt
’jpf ^nw ^ ?nR5yr?^tiflrf^ wrm?i; iR^ii
Sloka 23 .— Planets are mutually friendly for the
time being when they occupy the 3rd, the 4th, the 2nd,
the 10th, the 12th and the 11th from one another.
Ascertain what planets are naturally friendly, what are
naturally neutral and what are inimical and then de¬
duce from these two kinds of friendship those that are
very friendly and those that are very inimical.
Saturn casts a full glance at the 3rd and 10th
houses; Jupiter at the 5th and 9th; and Mars at the 4th
and 8th. All planets cast a quarter glance at the
3rd and 10th houses, half a glance at the 5th and 9th ;
three-quarters of a glance at the 4th and 8th; and a full
eye at the 7th.
5r%^ IR«II
Sloka 24. —The planets from the Sun onwards sway
over periods of half a year, a Muhurta (2 ghatikas), a
day, two months, one month, 15 days and a year
respectively.
Venus and Jupiter are Brahmins; the Sun and
Mars are Kshatriyas. The Moon is a Vaisya;
Mercury is the lord of the Sudra community. Saturn is
the leader of the outcastes. The Moon, Jupiter and the
Sun are planets typifying ?!|^ (Satva). Venus and Mer¬
cury are essentially the planets of Rajas or
passion. Mars and Saturn own Tamas or dark¬
ness as their distinguishing characteristic.
The lords of the six seasons reckoning from
Greeshmaare (1) The Sun and Mars, (2) The Moon, (4)
Mercury, (4) Jupiter, (5) Saturn and (6) Venus.

?TT?Tn^ Brf^ sn«n^Ct*^
<Tsn:^ ft?I3?r*n!|5;T^r5ft^5rT fTf^fun^t i
5%sr«^^c: ^rlTrinr: ^%rr: IR'^II
Sloka 25. —The Sun and Venus are termed father
and mother respectively of the child born in the day;
Saturn and the Moon, during the night. Failing to play
the role of parents, each of these pairs of planets gets
the designation of paternal uncle and maternal aunt.
The Moon represents the left eye, while the Sun,
the right one. Mars represents the youngest brother
andJupiter, the eldest one. Mercury denotes the
adopted son.
Sloka 26.— The Moon represents the body, and the
Sun, the soul. Mars and the other planets denote the
five senses. The enemies of the Sun, viz., Rahu, Gulika
and Ketu will cause trouble to the body and the soul.
Mercury governs smell, (nose); Venus and the
Moon, taste; (the Sun and Mars, govern sight; Jupiter,
sound. The rest, viz,, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu govern
touch.
5 tmn: ’CTvivsi Bri:
; 5rf5PnT:g^: i
Sloka 27.—The waning Moon, the Sun, Mars, Rahu,
Ketu and Saturn are known as malefic planets. Mer-

Adh. II
'K55?(tnT’5WT
cury too in conjunction with any of them is malignant
also.
Ketu, Mercury, and Saturn are eunuchs. Venus,
Rahu, and the Moon are females. The rest, viz., the SunMars and Jupiter are males. Rudra (Siva), Amba (Parvati), Guha (Kumara), Vishnu, Brahman, Lakshmi, Kala
(Yeuna), the serpent Adisesha and Brahman are the
presiding deities of the planets from the Sun in their
order.
Fire, water, fire, earth, ether, water and air are
the constituents respectively of the Sun and other
planets taken in their order.
Sloka 28. —The Sun's grain is wheat; the Moon's,
rice ; the grain belonging to Saturn is sesamum; that
of Jupiter, Bengal gram; that of Ketu, horsegarm. The
grain signified by Mars is Dhal. Mercury represents
green gram; Dolichos lablab or cowgram (Qu>rr€Fss>^)
is denoted by Venus, and black gram by Rahu.
The countries signified by the nine planets, Rahu,
the Sun, Saturn, Mars, Jupiter, Mercury, the Moon, Ketu
and Venus are respectively : (1) Ambara, (2) Kalinga
(3) Saurashtra, (4) Avanti, (5) Sindhu, (6) Magadha,
f7) Yavana, (8) Parvata and (9) Keekata.
sfNr iR^ii
Sloka 29. —The ruby is the Sun's precious stone;
the pure spotless pearl which is fit to be beautifully

worn belongs to the Moon. Coral belongs to Mars.
Mercury's precious stone is the emerald shaped like
the bird Garuda. Topaz belongs to Jupiter. Venus
owns diamond. Saturn's gem is the stainless sapphire.
Agate and the Lapislazuli or Turkois are said to belong
to the remaining planets Rahu and Ketu respectively.
Sloka 30. —The substances ascribed to the planets
from the Sun onwards are copper, ^ell-metal, copper
ore, lead, gold, silver and iron.
The articles of apparel for the several planets will be
such cloths as bear theirrespective colours. But the one
belonging to Saturn is a rag while the one appropriate
io Mars will be a clothsinged by fire.
^ qmq-: ii
Slokn 31 —Pungent bitter, saltish, mixed, sweet,
sour (acid) and astringent are the flavours respectively
of the Sun, Mars, the Moon, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus
and Saturn.
!n«T cTt 5r^ ;nT
Sloka 32, —The Sun, Jupiter, Mercury and Mars have
their characteristic mark or token on the right side.
"The rest have their marks on the other eide. The
planets from the Sun onwards have marks on the hip,
on the head, on the back, on the arm-pit, on the
shoulder, on the face, and on the leg.

Adh. ll
The Sun is a person of 50 years. The Moon is one
of 70 years. Mars is 16 years old. Mercury is a lad of 20
years. Jupiter is a person 30 years old. Venus isia child
of 7years. Saturn and Rahu are each 100 years old.
VTJTr i
Sloka 33 .—Rahu is black in colour, tall in stature,
and of a low caste ; he has got skin-disease ; he is a
heretic; he has got hic-cough; he speaks falsehood;
he is cunning; hysuffers from leprosy; he reviles
others and is devoid of intelligence.
%g: i
farg sTOTiff rnwsr
Shka 3 -.- -Ketu has a red and fierce look, a veno¬
mous tongue, and an elevated body; he is armed; he
is an outcast, of a smoky colour, and is inhaling smoke
always; he has bruised limbs; he is lean and is
malicious.
«T1JT: 5Enft
Sloka 35. —Lead and an old garment belong to Rahu,
while a mud vessel and a mixed cloth of variegated
colour have been allotted to Ketu.
Mercury, Saturn and Venus are the friends of Rahu
as well as Ketu. Marsis neutral to them* The rest areenemies.

1SI 3fi-37
Sloka 36. —Planets are said to be badly-placed when
they are eclipsed, debilitated (occupy a depression
sign or Amsa), when they are posited in the house of
an enemy, or when they occupy the 8th, the 6th or the
12th house. In other positions, they are said to be
well-placed.
If the Moon be in the 12th, 11th, 1st, 6th, 5th,
or the 7th house at the time of a query aboutwater in
a big irrigation project, increase of water can safely
be predicted.
^rifhrr:
5T^T:^jTiTTsr Fnc?r^jr:
tfT'^CTr^'TnRTT
Sloka 37- —The Sun represents trees that are inward¬
ly strong and at the same time tall. The Moon and
Venus indicate creeping plants. Ketu and Rahu
signfy a clump of trees or a bush. Mars and Saturn
indicate thorny trees. Jupiter and Mercury signfy
respectively fruit-bearing and fruitless trees. Venus
and the Moon represent those that are sappy and
blossoming. The Moon represents herbs; all sapless
and weak trees are signified by Saturn. Rahu indicates
trees.
Thus ends the 2nd Adhyaya on "Planets and
their varieties" in the work Phaladeepika
composed by Mantreswara.

Adh. Ilf
fvr\ ♦
II gs(i%s«jra: II
^ arTT?rf?r?Tfgm vr?^ ?iw; it:
ADHYAYA III.
Sloka 1. —(Kshetra or an arc of 30’’), STSSW Drekkana, Decanate or an arc of 10°), •T^TT^T (Navamsa or an
arc of 31'"), (Dasamsa or an arc of 3° or portion
of a sign), (Hora or ^ of a sign, ;.e., an arc of 15°),
nrSTTSr (Trimsamsa or portion of a sign, i.e., an arc
of 1°), (Saptamsa or Hh portion of a sign, i.e., an
arc of 4®°), (Shashtyamsa or Kcth portion of a
sign, an arc of i°) and (Kalamsa or r-^ por¬
tion of a sign, i.e., an arc of 1%-°)—these along with the
(Dwadasamsa or portion of a sign, i.e., an
arc of 2|°) are termed Dasa Vargas or ten-fold divisions
of the Zodiac. IftFHinT (Vargottama) is the name given
to that particular Navamsa in a Rasi which bears, the
same name as that of the Rasi itself.
sflrsrrsTw irii
Sloka 2.—From the aforesaid ten Vargas if we omit
the Dasamsa, Shashtyamsa and Kalamsa, the remaining
7 kinds of divisions are known as Saptavargas.
If from this we exclude the Saptamsa (<4Riw,) the
remaining 6 kinds of division are known as
Shadvargas. Some are of opinion that the effect ema¬
nating from,a Navamsa is similar (or equal) to that of
the Rasi and Bhava.

TO:^iTRcre^sr?wr^: tot;
«n?rni
Sloka 3. —The effect is full in the Rasis. In the
other Vargas, it is half; and in the Shodasamsa, Dasamsa
and Shashtyamsa Vargas, it is Ith. In an odd Rasi,
planets are said to be in infancy, in boyhood, in adoles¬
cence, in advanced age and in extremis according to
the first, second, third, fourth and the last six-degree
portions respectively advanced by them in the sign.
But in an even sign, these several divisions have to be
made regularly in the reverse order.
^ ifg T H h 1 gi gid ^ w
sq-^ fir^rrarsnw; Jrqf^n; iiyn
Sloka 4.- -Hora means half of a Rasi; in an odd
sign, the halves belong respectively to the Sun and the
Moon, and in an even one, to the Moon and the Sun.
The Drekkana or the third portions of a sign, are own¬
ed by the lords of the sign itself, of the son's or the 5th
house and of the 9th or the house of Subha. The
owners of the Dwadasamsas or iVth portions of a sign
are to be reckoned from that sign. In an odd sign, the
Trimsamsas or degrees, /.e., s^th portions allotted to
Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury and Venus are re¬
spectively 5, 5, 8, 7 and 5. In an even sign, it is re¬
versed. That is, Venus, Mercury, Jupiter, Saturn and
Mars have S, 7, 8, 5 and 5 degrees respectively. The
first Navamsas in the several signs from Mesha on¬
wards commence respectively with Mesha, Makara,
Tula and Karkataka.
qt ^ aw 5W ^
Sfiq qtq qnt qq" %eri ^ I

Adh. Ill
5rni ^5r ^ «r*f
^lampn: iimi
Sloka 5.—In the case of an odd sign, the Kruia
Shashtyamsas or unpropitious ircth portions are 1st,
2nd, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, ISth, 16th, 30th, 31st,
48th, 51st, 52nd and 59th. The rest are Saumya or
propitious ones. In the case of even signs, it is reverse,
that is the Shashtyamsa portions stated as Krura in
the odd signs are the propitious or Saumya ones in the
^VBzi signs dnd v/ce versct,
#»rf: mf ^ arjfifjfrfiranr wnis srflr^; <tt: ii^ii
Sloka 6 .—The Sapthamsas or the ^th portions are in
the case of an odd ^ign to be counted regularly from
the sign itself, while in the case of an even sign they
-are to be reckoned from the 7th onwards. In the case
of an odd sign, the Dasamamsas or i^^th portions are to
be counted from the sign itself; in the case of an even
sign, from its 9th onwards. The lords of the Shodasamsas or the iVth sub-divisons in the case of an odd
sign are those of the 12 signs reckoned from that sign
onward and Brahma, Vishnu, Hara and Ravi. In the
case of an even sign, this is reversed. The renowned
or auspicious parts of great excellence arise from the
several Vargas (Rasi, Hora, Drekkana, etc,) by the
combination ^of the special characteristics) of Trikona,
Moolatrikonabhavana, Swakshetra, Swochcha, Kendra
and Vargottama, and number 7 in the case of the
Saptha Vargas and 10 in the Dasa Vargas. Others
reckon them as 13.

SI- 7.B
f5%5 TSf wrpt: I
g i ^aij^ 44q i ft5 n ;T^^^ frowT
Shka 7.- Consider with reference to the 13 Vargas
a planet's position, whether it is in a friendly house, its
own house or its exaltation house. You will have the
following kinds of Vaiseshikamsas resulting. The com¬
bination of 2 Vargas is called Parijata (qrfirsntTj '» the
union of 3 Vargas is termed Uttama ; that of 4,
Gopura (jftj’C). When 5 Vargas combine, it is called
Simhasana The union of 6 Vargas is • called
Paravata (qroWcf)- The combination of 7 Vargas is
called Devaloka ; that of 8 Vargas, Suraloka
Airavata (^gRT) is the name given for the
union of 9 Vargas.
Suppose Jupiter's position is 8—1'’—25'—1" or the
2nd degree of Dhanus. He occupies his (l)Moolatrikona
- (2) Drekkana (3) Saptamsa (4) Dasamsa (5) Dwadasarasa
and (6) Kalamsa. Thus Jupiter must be declared to have
attained a Paravatamsa.
m ii^ii
Shka 8. —A planet in a Parijatamsa will make the
native respectable, endowed with many good
qualities, wealth, happiness, power and dignity. A
planet situated in an Uttamamsa will make him modest,
clever and of good behaviour. A planet that has
attained a Gopuramsa secures to the person concerned

Adh- III
good intellect, wealth, lands, cows and house. A planet
placed in a Simhasanamsa will enable the native to be¬
come the friend of a king or one on a par with him.
«nT«nwr5«r^fH ^5 ii^ii
Sloka 9. —The planet that has attained a Paravatamsa
will make the native endowed with very good horses,
elephants, vehicles and other princely appendages.
The person in whose nativity a planet has reached a
Devalokamsa will be a king widely renowned for his
good qualities. The planet that has gained an Airavatamsa in a person's nativity will make him a second
God Indra fit to be saluted by kings. The planet
in a Suralokamsa secures to the native good luck,
wealth, corn, children and kingship.
^ *IWTW5T ^ ware*!; 1
Sloka JO.—Ii at a birth a planet be weak in all the
TO Vargas, it will cause the death of the native. If 9, 8,
7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, or 1 out of the 10 Vargas be weak, the
following are the effects in their order as a result there¬
of: (1) destruction (2) grief (3) calamity (4) unhappi¬
ness (5) love of relations (6) foremost among relations
<7) friend of a king (8) a wealthy man and (9) a king.
If a planet should be strong in all the Vargas, the native
will be the best among kings'. The effect of a planet's
Iseing in the Bala and other Avasthas will be that

the native will be (1) progressing (2) happy (3) a king
-(4) suffering from disease and (5) dead respectively.
ypS^V-J- ri'* ‘
Sloka ll.~ll there be a preponderance in strength
of benefic planets in the Shadvargas, the native
will be very wealthy and live for a long period.
If the Lagna should happen to occupy Krura Amsas in
the several Shadvargas, the native will be poor, short¬
lived and of a wicked disposition. But if the lords of
those Amsas be strong, the person concerned will be¬
come a king. If the lord (1) of the rising Navamsa»
^2) of the rising decanate or (3) of the (rising) Lagna
Rasi be strong, the native will respectively be a person
(1) endowed with happiness and comfort, (2) equal to
a king, or (3) a ruler of the Earth possessing good
fortune.
Sloka 22.—The person at whose birth malefics occu¬
py the Sun's Hora in odd Rasis will be strong and
sturdy, cruel in his behaviour and wealthy, while the
one born with benefics posited in the lunar Hora of
even signs will be brilliant in appearance, will speak
mUdly, will be pleasant and graceful. If it be otherwise,
'the effect also will be otherwise. If it be mixed, the
effect will be mixed. In the case of a nativity where
'the Lagna and the Moon are very strong and the lords

Adh. lit;
of the signs occupied by them also similarly strong,
the person concerned will be endowed with long life -
without any sorrow and will be widely renowned.
«Tirg: i
fsranrffrTJTsr wrff^ ^Ktsn^si; ii^.?ii
Sioka 13. —The last decanates of Simha, Mesha,
Dhanus, Tula and Mithuna, the first ones of Dhanus
and Mesha, the middle ones of Kanya and Mithuna are
termed (Ayudha Drekkanas) or 'armed'
'decanates. The middle decanate of Vrischika is called
"Pasa” (iTW or noose). The first Drekkana of Makara is
called "Nigala" (l^riT^y-fetters) decanate. The first de¬
canates of Simha and Kumbha and the middle one of
Tula are vulture-faced. The last decanate of Vrishabha
is a bird (g%-Pakshi) and the first decanate of Karkataka has a face like that of a pig.
5rW3’5<TTi^ <»>?nT«tsT*B|dw5?n I
^ Hl«r
Shka H.—Ihe first decanate of Scorpio, the last
one of Cancer and the last one of Pisces are termed
Serpent decanates. The second of Mesha and Vrisha¬
bha, th^irst of Leo and the last of Scorpio are called!
quadn^d decanates. Persons born in these (/.e., when,
these decanates are rising) will be without wealth,
cruel in disposition, vile in character and indigent. In.

a dual sign, the 3 decanates in their order will be srcniT
(Adhama or bad), (Madhyama or moderate) and
or good), while, in the case of a moveable
sign, this order will be reversed. In a fixed sign, the
order will be bad, good and mixed. Thus will the
effects also be, when these decanates are rising. So say
the wise.
’Tacf?^5Tmsrr% snr^n^nBi^ ^ i
SJoka i5.~If the lord of the (rising) decanate be in
his own Varga, or associated with a benefic planet or
be in his own exaltation or friendly house; if the lord
of the (rising) Trimsamsa, Dwadasamsa or Hora (Lagna?)
possessing strength be in a similar position, the per¬
son concerned will be endowed with all good quali¬
ties, will always be pure, clever, long-lived, merciful
and wealthy, will possess children, will be widely re¬
nowned and enjoy all comforts in a royal style.
iK^ii
Shka 16 .—Note the Rasi occupied by Mandi at a
birth and note also where the lord of that Rasi is posit¬
ed. The Lagna at birth will be a position triangular to
that of the aforesaid lord or one triangular to the
Navamsa occupied by the owner of the sign represent¬
ing the Navamsa occupied by Mandi. It may be
•'triangular to the Navamsa Rasi occupied by Gulika.
Ijnien the Moon is strong, the Lagna should be de-

32 Adh. Ill'
duced similarly through the Moon alone instead of
through Mandi.
q f > g ^ rrqr?K<r gqr
Sloka J7. -The Moon if posited in her own or a
friend's decanate will make the native beautiful in
appearance and possessed of good qualities. If she has
attained an (Uttamavarga), she will also make
him very lucky ; if she be posited anywhere else, she
will endow the native with such qualities as belong to
the planet owning the house occupied by her.
Planets that are in their own Trimsamsas will do all
that have been ascribed to them as Karakas. If there
be at least one planet in his own or exaltation house
and at the same time aspected by or associated with a
friendly planet, the native will become a king endow¬
ed with riches.
Sloka IS.— A planet is blazing when he is in his
exaltation; he is happy in his Moolatrikona; he is
confident in his own house; he is delighted in a friend's
house; calm when he has reached the Varga of a benefic planet. He is capable when ho shines bright with
unclouded splendour.
Sloka 19.—He is tortured when overcome by another
planet. He is base by union with the Varga of a malefic

planet. He is exceedingly distressed when he occupies
an enemy's house. He is greatly afraid when he is in
his depression. He is failing when he has set or disappeared.
IRoll
wnr ?i5ftwts«nw:
Sloka 20 .—In the case of a planet in a
(Pradeeptavastha), the good effect will be full, while it
will be nil for a planet in a (Vikala) state. In the
case of the intervening conditions (Avasthas), the
auspicious effects will be decreasing proportionately
while the unpropitiousness of the effects will corres¬
pondingly increase. The nature of the effects of the
several Avasthas will be quite in accordance with
the appellations they bear.
Thus ehds the 3rd Adhyaya on "Divisions of the
Zodiac" in the work Phaladeepika
composed by Mantreswara.
II 11
“w WTRj; ii^ii
ADHYAYA IV.
Shka 1 .—The strength of a planet is said to be six
fold and they are in the following order:—(1) Kalajaor temporal, (2) Cheshta or motional, (3)
Ucchaja or that derived from its exaltation posi-

Adh. IV
Si
tion, (4) Dik (f^) or directional, (5) Ay ana (sttst) or
that derived from its declination (north or south) and
<6) Sthana positional. In the night-time. Mars,
the Moon and Venus are strong. Mercury is strong at
all times. The rest are strong during the day. In the
bright-half of a month the benefics, and in the dark-half,
the malefics, are strong. Planets when they happen to
be the lords of the year, month, day and hour get i, I,
5 and 1 Rupa respectively.
^r^jnir ir<ii
Sloka 2 .— The Moon gets Cheshtabala when
she is full. The Sun gets it when he is in his northern
course; the other planets, when in their retrograde
motion. In planetary war, those that are posited in the
north and who have got brilliant rays should ba con*
sidered as victorious. Planets have their full
Uchcha bala when in their highest exaltation. As re¬
gards directional strength, the Sun and Mars are strong
in the 10th Venus and the Moon in the 4th; Mercury
and Jupiter in the 1st and Saturn in the 7th. Mercury,
Saturn and the Moon have their Ayana bala
in their southerly course. The rest have the same in
their northern.
Sloka 3—The strength accruing to a planet in the

six Vargas {viz. Rasi, Hora, Diekkana, Navamsa, Dwadasamsa and Trimsamsa) on a consideration of its be¬
ing posited in its exaltation, its own and its friendlysigns, etc., is termed its positional strength. That aris'
ing from its being in Kendra and other Bhavas {Le.,
Phanapara and Apoklima) will be 1, i and 1 Rupa
respectively. The hermaphrodite planets are strong in
the middle, the male ones at the initial and the female
ones at the concluding portions of a Rasi. Saturn,
Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, the Moon and the Sun
are in their order increasing in their natural strength.
Sloka 4.—R. planet is said to possess strength when
he is retrograde or when his rays are full and brilliant,
though posited in a depression or inimical Rasi or
Amsa. Like the Moon, a planet though occupying an
exaltation, friendly or his own Rasi or Amsa becomes
weak, should his rays be overpowered or eclipsed,
giFWT ^rfesrs =¥^1^ %
?rTTi?rKi«rt i
Sloka 5 .—All planets are strong when they are in
exaltation. The Moon is strong and auspicious when
■ she has her full ^aksha bala and the Sun when he has
his full Dig-bala (/.e., when he is in the 10th house or
the Meridian). The other five non-luminous planets are
strong when they are retrograde. . Rahu in Karkataka,

Adh. IV
Vrishabha, Mesha, Kumbha and Vrischika and Ketu in
Meena, Kanya, Vrishabha and the later half of Dhanus,
in Parivesha and Indra-chapa are
strong if there be a conjunction of the Moon and the
Sun and the time be night.
Sloka 6—If the first Bhava be a biped sign, one
Rupa has to be allotted to it; if it be Vrischika, the
bala is i; if it be any other sign, the strength is The
strength of the Lagna is equal to that of its lord and is
very powerful when the lord occupies an Upachaya
<3rd, 6th, 10th or 11th) house. The same is also th®
case when it is occupied or aspected by its lord, Jupiter
or Mercury, when it is associated with Venus and is at
the same time without the conjunction or aspect of any
other planet. The day-signs possess strength in daybirths, while night-signs are declared powerful in
night-births.
Sloka 7 .—A planet gets one full Rupa as positional
strength when he is in his exaltation Rasi. The strength
is when he is posited in his Moolatrikona Rasi. It is ^
when the planet occupies his own Rasi. When the
planet is in a friendly house, his bala is only i. In an
inimical house, he gets only very little. The strength
is nil when he is in his depression sign or eclipsed by
the Sun's rays.

^5% ¥5r ?r?5% sr*rerei»it i
SJoka 6 .—The strength of the planets occupying
he 4 Kendras (1st, 4th, 7th and 10th) has been distin*
guished by the astrologers in the following manner; It
is 1th in the 4th house; | in the 10th, f in the 7th
and full in the 1st or Lagna, thus increasing it by 1 in
each stage.
?rT a as!n5!=«r?%: i
g ii^ii
Shka 9 .—The aspect from the 7th house is the only
one that should be declared as most effective in all
cases; not so, the rest. But there are others who opine
that the special aspect (of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars) is
in no way less efficacious in producing full effect in all
Yogas and the like.
«T%?!TJrniT \
Sloka 10 .—Natural enmity or friendship between
two planets is more fully effective than and preferable
to their corresponding temporal ones as the latter is
only a variable quantity and not a permanent one.
. g iiUii
Sloka 11.—In completely warding off evil and in
promoting prosperty, Jupiter is the most powerful of all
'the planets. Mercury and Venus have a i and ?

Adh. IV
respectively of that power. The Moon's strength
serves as a basis as it were for the strength of all the
planets.
II am II
5nTR^II?^ll
Sloka 12 .— ^Find what portion of the asterism occu¬
pied by the Moon has elapsed at birth. Reduce the
same to Vighatikas. Divide this result by (1) 60 (2) 300
and (3) 100. The three resulting -iuotients are termed
(1) (Chandrakriya) (2) (Chandraavasttha) and (3) 5er?s?^55T (Chandravela) respectively.
Their effects are described below:
II am ii
apft sar i
mrasaTrn::
daft 5r?i%5r: f^arenhr: i
snarnFft *sr tra:iT^«m! ^mprf anrami: ^^araftflrjrRfimd <ftarts ^?i^ i Ri4i ; ii^wi
^ftarrd %a:% r
ft gd fir ff aq ?rgc«ftaft ^ anar fN f d
fi r g iifft ^ Tar: frarai: iiimri
^loka 13.—(1) One that has fallen from his positio

>(2) one practising austerities (3) one intent on
others' wives (4) a gambler (5) one who is mounted
On a mighty elephant (6) one seated on the throne (7)
a ruler of men (8) one that destroys enemies (9) a
commander of an army (10) a virtuous person (11) one
that is dead or quite exhausted (12) one that is
decapitated (13) one whose hands and legs are injured
<14) a prisoner (15) one that is lost or spoilt (16)akin9
17) one that studies the Vedas (18) one that sleeps (19)
one of a good character (20) one who practises virtue
Sloka 14. —(21) one that is born of a good family
(22) one who has come by a treasure (23) one belong¬
ing to a renowned family (24) one clever in exposition
(25) a destroyer of enemies (26) one who is sickly (27)
one that is vanquished by his enemy (28) one that has
left off his native country (29) a servant (30) one who
who has lost his wealth (31) one that is always seen in
royal assemblies (32) a good counsellor (33) one that
is in charge of others' lands (34) one that lives with
his wife (35) one who is afraid of elephants (36) one
who is timid in conflicts (37) one that is generally very
timid (38) one that lives concealed or incognito (39)
one that feeds others (40) one who falls into the fire.
SJoka 15. —(41) one that suffers from hunger (42)
-one that eats cooked rice (43) one that is wandering
(44) one that eats flesh (45) one that has been injured
by a missile or weapon (46) one who is married
(47) one with a ball in his hand (48) one who amuses
himself with dice (49) a king (50) one that is distres¬
sed (51) one that is in his bed (52) one that is served,
by his enemies (53) one that is surrounded by his
iriends (54) a seunt or devotee (55) one that is with his
"Wife (56) one that eats sumptuous food (57) one that

Adh. IV
drinks milk (58) one that does good or virtuous acts
(59) one that is confident or self-possessed and (60)'
one who continues to be happy.
ancJRmsnrsr^^ft ^5Tcrr snorifT^-
q gr fe r f# ^ »fhn wik f S r^ g rarr rg WKm
Sloka 16—The following are declared by the wise
as the effects of the 12 (ar^^^O Avasthas of the Moon:
(1) Absence from one's head-quarters (2) becoming a
favourite of an esteemed king (3) danger of losing one's
life on account of service to another (4) possessing
qualifications of being a ruler of the world (5) delight¬
ing to have qualifications and merits befitting one's
family (6) sickly (7) holding a royal Darbar (8) fear (9
torment ‘by the pangs of hunger (10) marriage with
a young lady (11) desire to have handsome bed and
(12) eating sumptuous food.
II 3r«r
gl^T ?nnT
5r?rnnr: gfeerar i
Ulvsil
'BcJfs sj?nofg?jr!rm ^

^%«^rerfST ift^ ?fhi# i
tmFiTC: s^r»?iTf srf5 sr^>:# srl^w WVKW
Sloka iZ.—The effects of the Moon's 36 Velas (%55T5)‘
have been thus described by the wise:—(1) headache
(2) pleasure (3) performing a sacrifice (4) living hap¬
pily (5) eye disease (6) being happy (7) amusement
with young damsels (8) violent fever (9) adornment
with golden ornaments (10) shedding tears (11) de¬
vouring poison (12) coition (13) stomach-ache
Sloka IS. - (14) amusing oneself in water, merriment
and painting (15) anger (16) dancing (17) eating food
along with ghee (18) sleeping (19) gift (of presents)
(20) tooth-ache (21) quarrel (22) starting (on a journey)
(23) intoxication or insanity (24) swimming in water
(25) enmity
Sloka 19, —(26) the act of bathing according to
one's own inclination (27) hunger (28) fear (29)
acquisition of a sacred lore (30) wantonness (31)
meeting (32) fighting (33) doing a virtuous act (34)
practising evil (35) perpetrating cruel actions and (36>
exultation.
ssr giii ^ sr^ i
Sfoka 20.—The Chandra kriya and others
described above will be found to be useful and
productive of effect in the case of a birth, a Muhurta
(celebration of an auspicious event) and a query. One
ought therefore to particularly examine them and then
only set about predicting.

Adh. IV
?^sT ^€5nBr wfBr fl 553 : ii^ilii
Sloka 21. —(tr^nr^) Pakshabala (fortnightly strength)
is of special importance to the Moon, while the Bala
arising from Sthana (^»TT«T position) is important for
the other planets. This when added to the other kinds
of strength of the several planets will become very
great. Other kinds of strength, there are many, similar
to this.
II II
gracTW <Tsr •
’T2jT«r ii^^ii
n
Sloka 22.~The Sun is declared strong when his
strength is 65 Rupas. In the case of the Moon, it is 6
Rupas. Five Rupas are assigned to Mars and 7 to Mer¬
cury. Jupiter's (tjiirgr^s') Purnabala is similar to that of
the Sun, that is, 6^ Rupas. Venus is strong when he
^ets 5i Rupas.
% 'T|g(5rr i
frcrurr gf^5«r%rqF>giBr iR^ii
Sloka 23.“Saturn should have 5 Rupas. These
are the figures representing the total Shadbala
ior the several planets. If the respective figures be
otherwise, /.e., less than the above, the planets should
be considered as weak. It is only after a minute
examination of the several kinds of strength (the Shad*
balas) of the several planets, one ought to declare their
affects.
gin%gTsn»ffg'nE?r gffgfgqgmf > i
f^flr gf ftg T iW TO T IR'«il»

SI. 1
'KcT^Rr^ra-r
srw ^«iJs«n?T:
Sloka 24 .—In the case of the Lagna and other Bhavas, add one Rupa to the strength of the lord of the
Bhava concerned. Supplement this by the Directional
strength (f^WTST-Digbala) due to that Bhava and also by
the strength of aspect (^^Ryl-Drigbala) of that Bhava.
The aggregate sum - total is the Bhavabala
required.
For more details about the several kinds of strength
of planets, please see Adhyayas II and III of my edition
of Sripatipaddhati.
• Thus ends the 4th Adhyaya on "Determination
of the Shadbalas of Planets" in the work Phaladeepika
composed by Mantreswara.
II II
aTsi?f?t q:«r«fer?r^%5fl; sn^?T?r: %gT5
fitsr!n«f®ir5r%iTt 5r^t?rn5f?r:
ADHYAYA V.
Sloka i.—One ought to declare the acquisition of
wealth by any person with reference to the predomin>
ance of the Lagna or the Moon as the case may be in
his horoscope. The source of such an acquisition will
be the father, mother, a foe, a friend, a brother, a wife
or a servant, according as the Sun or any of the other
planets taken in order occupies the 10th place from the
Lagna or the Moon whichever is stronger. His profes¬
sion will be that prescribed for the lord of the Navamsa

Adh. V
occupied by the planet owning the 10th place
from the Lagna, from the Moon and from the Sun (seve*
Tally) whichever is strongest.
Sloka 2* If the lord of the 10th house be posited in
ihe Sun s Navamsa, the person born will earn his liveli¬
hood through fruit-trees, by the repetitions of
Mantras, by fraud, by gambling, by uttering falsehood,
through wool, medicine and the like, by working on
metals or through service under a king or some re¬
spectable person.
ii^ii
Sloka 5 . —If the Navamsa occupied by the lord of
the 10th house be that of the Moon, the income of the
person concerned will be through trade in water-pro¬
ducts (pearls, corals, etc.,) through agriculture and
cattle - farming, pilgrimage to holy shrines, service
under a damsel or trading in clothes.
’T^'Tcnqrrjsr^TTf^^r ii«ii
Sloka 4 .—If the Navamsa in question be that of
Mars, the sources of income may be through metals,
fighting in battles, cooking, lands, gold, inflicting
trouble to others, weapons, acts of adventure, associa¬
tion with wicked men, spying or through theft.
ii'^h ,
Sloka 5 .—In the case of a person born with the
lord of the 10th posited in a Navamsa owned by
Mercury, the earning will be through composing

poems, the study of sacred scriptures, by being a
scribe or through some clerical work, or some trick,
through a knowledge of astrology, through the study of
the Vedas on other's behalf, by repetition of Mantras,
or by playing the role of a priest or by some pretext.
3?i«ir5Ti^r<i«ii^ii
Sloka 6. —If the planet concerned be in a Navamsa
■ef Jupiter, the person born maintains himself through
the help of Brahmins, Gods or through royal favor, by
reciting Puranas, by the study of Sastras, by the preach¬
ing of morality, by religious instructions or by lending
money (profession of usury).
ii^ii
Sloka 7. —The earnings of a person with the lord of
the loth house posited in a Navamsa owned by Venus
will be through a woman, cows, buffaloes, elephants,
horses, through triple symphony (i.e., dancing in
accompaniment to vocal and instrumental . music),
through silver, scents, milk, ornaments and silken
iineries, by virtue of being a companion (Aid-de-camp.)
to a king, or by his poetic talents.
Sloka B. —The person in whose nativity the lord of
the 10th house is sheltered in Saturn's Navamsa lives
by dealing in roots and fruits, by physical exertion,
■ (sweating labour), through servants, rogues and
through the earpings of men of low morality, through
'.Isa^ grains, by carrying burden, by resorting to-base

Adh. VI ’
avocations, through sculpture, wooden materials andby functioning as an executioner or a butcher.
3T?T^?ft’^5r ^
?Er3n%: wvi
srm ’T^iits«Twr: ii
Sloka 9.—When the planet owning the Navamsa is
strong, there will be acquisition of wealth without any
exertion. If it should be weak, very little wealth ac¬
crues. The country of acquisition will be that signified
by the sign representing the 10th house or the Navamsa
occupied by the lord of the 10th house. But if this sign
be occupied or aspected by its lord, he will earn in his
own country. The same will be the result if the
Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 10th house be an
immoveable Rasi. And if the said sign be occupied or
aspected by planets other than its lord, the native will
earn in a place other than his own native country.
Thus ends the 5th Adhyaya on "Profession and
Livelihood" in the work Phaladeepika
composed by Mantreswara.
il tl
Wrg?frf^ n^ii
ADHYAYA VI.
Sloka A—(Ruchaka), ^ (Bhadra), (Hamsa),.
(Malava) and (Sasa) are the five Yogas whick-

are formed by the planets—Mars, Mercury, Jupiter,
Venus and Saturn respectively when each of them oc¬
cupies a Kendra identical with its (Swakshetra)
or (Swochpha).
Sloka 2.-The person born in the (Ruchaka) Yoga
will have a long tace, will acquire wealth by doing
many daring deeds, will be brave, will overcome bis
enemies, will be powerful and will be arrogant. He
will become renowned for his merits, will be a leader
of an army and will emerge victorious in all his
attempts, The man born in the *r2f (Bhadra) Yoga will be
gifted with long life and keen intellect, will be clean,
praised by the learned, will lead men, will be very rich
and clever in addressing an assembly.
fef.’ i
f^rsTFsr^wrferr: ii^ii
Sloka 3 .—The person born in the (Hamsa) yoga
will be a king extolled by the good. He will have in
his legs and hands marks of (Sankha), (Padma)
flrW (Matsya) and (Ankusa) Rekhas. He will pos¬
sess a beautiful body, will eat sumptuous food and will
be of a righteous disposition. The man born in the
■(Malavya) Yoga will have strong limbs, will be resolute,
wealthy, endowed with wife, children and good fortune

Adh. V
will be prosperous, will eat good meals, enjoy
pleasures, command good vehicles,^.and will become
famous and learned. He will possess unperturbed
senses.
gra nge ^i^ggr
?ci3rr ii«ii
Sloka 4.-—The person born in the (Sasa
Yoga) will be extolled by all, will have good servants,
will be strong, will be the headman of a village or a
King, will be wicked in disposition, will have intrigues
with women not his own, will usurp others' wealth and
be happy. Just as these five Yogas arise when reckon¬
ed from the Lagna, similarly they are possible when
counted even from the Moon's place. They bestow on
the native an empire and perfection. The person who
happens to have one, two, three, four or all the five
Yogas will respectively be a (1) fortunate man (2) one
equal to a King (3j a King, (4) an Emperor, and ( 5 ) one
superior to No 4.
Sloka 5 .—When planets other than the Sun occupy
the 2 nd, the 12 th or both houses reckoned from the
Moon, the resulting 3 Yogas are respectively styled
(Sunapha), (Anapha) and 3 ^?:? (Duru
dhara). In the. absence of the 3 Yogas defined above,
there is the %n 2 ['i|' (Kemadruma) Yoga. There are some -
who declare that there is no (Kemadruma) where-

a Kendra or the Moon is associated with a planet, or
where planets occupy a Kendra house reckoned from
the. Moon.
fK ^JT'JTWT ^«TJr^mf?nTfKr i
Sloka 6.—The person who has had his birth in the
jr^nrr (Sunapha) Yoga will be a king or his equal, with
self-acquired property, and renowned for his wisdom
and wealth. The man born under the (Anapha)
Yoga will be powerful, healthy, with amiable manners,
known to fame, blessed with material comforts, welldressed, contented and happy.
^5nnm: ii^sii
Sloka 7.—Taking freely to the joys of life as they
crop up and blessed with abundance of wealth and
vehicles, the person born under the (Durudhura)
Yoga is bountiful and waited upon by faithful at¬
tendants. But those bom under the (Kemadruma) Yoga, though they may be of a princely race,
become obscure, miserable, given to base ways,
penurious, drudging as menials and wickedly-inclined.
tmr^TirT: i
iigwV sr »fnrfl{i%5 iicii

Adh. VI
Shka 8.—li benefic planets other than the Moon oc¬
cupy the 2nd, 12th and both the Bhavasfroxn the Sun,
the resulting Yogas are respectively termed
(Subhavesi', ^niT?T^ (Subhavasi), and
{Subhobhayachari). But if the planets in qestion be
malefic, the concerned Yogas are called (Papavesi), etc.. When the 12th and the 2nd Bhavas from the
Lagna are occupied by benefics, the Yoga is
(Subhakartari).' It is called (Papakartari), when
the above two houses are occupied by malefics. If bene¬
fics unaspected by malefics, occupy the 2nd house
from the Lagna, the Yoga is termed (Susubha).
%Wcr: i
’Tnr*i>wni. \\%\\
Sloka 9. —The person born in a (Suvesi) Yoga
will be yery handsome, happy, a store of merit, brave, a
■ Xing and virtuous. He who is born in a (Suvasi)
Yoga will become famous, will be liked by all, will be
'exceedingly prosperous, liberal and the favourite of the
sovereign. The man who has his birth in the
(Subhayachari) Yoga will have beautiful limbs, will be
affable in address, will delight the world, will be
eloquent in his speech, renowned and wealthy.
Sloka 20.—The person born in the gsjg^ftrfAsubha-

vesi) Yoga will unjustly vilify others; lose his
splendour (beauty), will associate with the low and
will be wicked. One who is born in an
(Asubhavasi) Yoga will be deceitful, will abuse others,
and will befriend the wicked. He will be of unrighteous^
conduct, but will quote Sastras and Scriptures.
The man with an (Asubhobhayachari>
Yoga will be mentally much afficted owing to public
dishonour. He will be bereft of learning, wealth and
luck.
?ITSJoka 11—The person who has his birth in a
(Subhakartari) Yoga will be long-lived, fear¬
less, free from disease, without enemies, happy and
rich. He who is born in a (Papakartari) Yoga
will be poor, impure, unhappy, bereft of wife and
children, deprived of some limb and short-lived.
Shka 12.—The person born in the (Amala)
Yoga will be virtuous, pious, kindly disposed, fortu¬
nate, amiable, highly revered by his sovereign, gentle,
affable in his speech and wealthy.
wS; HWPK# HUH
Sloka 23—In the case of (Susubha),
<Subhakartari),(Subhavesi) and other Yogas

Adh. vr
the effects given for (Sunapha) and other Yogas
caused by benefics should be adopted. In the case of
(Asubha), (Papakartari), (Papavesi) and other Yogas caused by malefics, the effects
will be just the contrary.
^fWrf I
g ;nf^ 5r?rTsrfe^TTs iil«ii
^oka 7-^.—If, at a day - birth in the case of a male,
the Sun, the Moon and the Lagna are in odd signs, the
(Mahabhagyaj Yoga is formed. The same Yoga
in the case of females will arise when the birth is at
night and the Sun, the Moon and the^ Lagna are posited
in even signs. The Moon in a Kendra position to
Jupiter brings on (Kesari) Yoga. The Moon in the
12th, 8th or 6th house from Jupiter causes
fSakata). But if the Moon be in a Kendra house from
the Lagna, there is no (Sakata). The 3T«rJf
(Adhama), (Sama) and (Varishtha) Yogas are
formed when the Moon occupies respectively a
Kendra, a Panaphara and an Apoklima housg counted
from the Sun.
^ «r5Ti*nw«^^r%?rT
^TvrflWHRn ill’ll!
Shka 75.—The person who has his birth in a
(Mahabhagya) Yoga will cause immense pleasure to
ell people, by his mere appearance, will be very liberal
in his gifts and famous. He will be a ruler of the

•«arth, living for 80 years and of a spotless character.
If a female be born under this Yoga, she will be
endowed with wealth, a long-lived husband, sons, and
grandsons. She will be exceedingly lucky and
well-behaved.
S]oka 16. —The person born in the (Kesari)
Yoga will destroy, like a lion, all his enemies. He will
speak loftily or nobly in an assembly. He will be
passionate and emotional in his behaviour. He will be
long-lived, highly renowned and exceedingly intel¬
ligent. He will conquer everything by his own valour.
Sloka 17. —The person born in the tiTC? (Sakata)
Yoga will often become unfortunate (lose his luck), and
may again regain what he once lost. He will be a very
ordinary and insignificant man in the world. He will
attain much mental grief that is inevitable and will be
-exceedingly unhappy.
Sloka iS.— According as the Yoga at birth is Kashta
-CS or srq^ir-Adhama), Madhyama (IT^^ or ;gir-Sama),
or Vara or ^ftg'-Varishtha), the wealth, vehicles,
fame, happiness, knowledge, intellectual precision,
modesty, ability, learning, liberality and enjoyment of
the person born will be at the lowest, middling or
liighest respectively.

Adh. Vf
55?r <T^f?r ^^Rrtnt w^rj^^c?; iil^ii
Sloka 29.—If all the benefics occupy (Upachaya) houses whether reckoned from the Lagna or the
Moon, the resulting Yoga is termed (Vasumat).
When benefics occupy the 10th house counted from the
Lagna or the Moon, the Yoga is called (Amala)*
If the lord of the Rasi occupied by the Moon is in
conjunction with the lord of the Lagna and be posited
in a Kendra or in the house of a very friendly plane
and if at the same time a benefic planet possess
ing strength aspect the Lagna, the resulting Yoga
is called (Pushkala).
^fsrg: iRo|i
Sloka 20.—The person born in the (Vasumat)'
Yoga will always keep to his house, and will command
plenty of money. He who has his birth in the 3TIT^.'
(Amala) Yoga will rule over the earth, will be wealthy,
will have sons, will be famous, prosperous and prudent.
He who is born in the (Pushkala) Yoga will be
wealthy, will be honoured by Kings, and become
famous. He will be decorated with beautiful ornaments
and clothes. He will be sweet-tongued, supremely
good and a lord.
^rt vssTf ww mcHsi ft«rm

Sloka 2 l If all the benefic planets in regular order
occupy the 5th, 6th and 7th houses, the Yoga is called
f «TJnan (Subhamala). But if they should be posited in
the 8th, 6th and 12th houses, it is called STsrvnrRT
(Asubhamala). If the lord of the 9th and Verius be
posited in their own or exaltation houses identical with
a Trikona or a Kendra, the resulting Yoga is
^Lakshmi). If the Moon in the above position be
aspected by Jupiter, the Yoga is jf^ft (Gauri).
%i^TT555r?EcfV sT^igrr i
Sloka 22. —The person born in a (Sumala)
Yj|ga will be a governor (or director), will be extolled
by Kings and will be devoted to enjoyment. He will
be liberal in gifts, helpful to others in getting their
work done, and will love his relations. He will be
blessed with a good wife and sons and will be
courageous.
Sloka 25.—He who is born in an 3T7rvnTT^?RT
Vd
Asubhamalika) Yoga will resort to bad ways, will be
unhappy, will tease or kill others, will be ungrateful,
will bs timid, will have no reverence for Brahmins, will
be cursed by the public and will be fond of (promoting)
' quarrels.
n?n%
qr IR9I1
Sloka 24.—The person born in a (Lakshmi)
"TToge will ever be sporting with a damsel of a very

Adh. Vf
amiable disposition. He will be free from disease,
wealthy and brilliant. He will protect all his people. He
will be the recipient of blessings from the Goddess
of wealth. He will go in beautiful palanquins or travef
on horseback or seated on an elephant. He will be the
best of Kings pleasing all his subjects and liberal in
his gifts.
?:nrflr iR'^ii
Shka 25. —The person born in ther^^ (Gouti) Yoga
will have a beautiful body, will come of an illustrious
family, and will be a friend of the sovereign. His sons
will be of a very good character. He will have a lotus,
like face, and his success (over his opponents) will%e
praised by one and all.
iR^ii
Sloka 26. —'If Venus, Jupiter and Mercury occupy a
Kendra, a Trikona or the second house, and Jupiter be
also in his exaltation, his own or a friendly house and
possess strength, the resulting Yoga is termed
(Saras wati).
^?^Rcnr»r?snTt^f?nsr%^ grra?
iRvsn
Sloka 27. —The person who has his birth in the-
(Saraswati) Yoga is highly intelligent, clever
in dramaturgy, in prose composition, versifying,
accounts and poetics. He is skilled in poetry, innarrative composition and in the exposition of sacred-

texts. His fanie hds sprsad over the three worlds.
He is exceedingly wealthy, and is endowed with wife
and children. He is fortunate, and commands respect
from tho best of kings.
%?srfin^onfsnTr:
srp1^?rT?JnT^3n?Tf^rrfTlrfi:f^PTtTreT?r: ir«:«
S!oka 28 . —If the lord of the Lagna, the Sun and
the Moon, being in Kendra or Trikona occupy their
exaltation, own or friendly houses, the resulting Yoga
is termed (Srikantha). If Venus, the lord’of the
9th and Mercury be similarly placed, the Yoga is called
(Srinatha). If Jupiter, the lord of the 5th and
Saturn occupy similar positions, the Yoga formed is
called (Virinchi),
3Trc*n‘=lord of the 5th house. C. Tfsrr^
.®fc. (I-12=supra.)
srgf^?r: \R%\\
Sloka 29.— The person born in the (Srikantha)
Yoga will be decked with Rudraksha rosaries, with his
body made white by the besmearing of the sacred
Ashes. He will be magnanimous, and will be always
meditating at heart on God Siva. He will rigidly observe
prescribed rites and will coijsecrate himself to the wor-
•hip of God Siva. He will help the virtuous. He willjbe
iree from malice towards the creed or religious beliefs
m-.A—R

Adh. VI
of others. He will become powerful and his heart will
become delighted by the worship of God Siva.
srr?:i?TarTpff ?r:
?T>srrmff?Ts?rnrtT^«r wsr#; i
srcRT^ir:
5r^JTrir«rlsi^5*T*r: sff;rT«r«ft*ft5fg: ii^o i
I’-h'rj 3D .—The person born in the %Tt<n^ (Srinatha)
Yoga will be wealthy, resplendant and clever in speaking agreeably and in a humorous vein. He will have
■^in his body) marks of God Narayana (such as 5T^—
Sankha, gip-Chakra, etc.). He will be always reciting
in company with the viTtu''U5f the charming verses
containing the name of that God. He feels very happy
in showing reverence towards those that worship that
<3od. He will be endowed with a good wife and sons.
He will be loved by all and will be exceedingly
amiable.
JTiw^sr«rT5Tt goft
Sloka 3!. —The person born in the f^Rrfsi' (Virinchi)
Yoga will be fully absorbed in the knowledge of
Brahma. He will be highly intelligent and will assign
a predominant position to the Vedas over other sacred
writings. He will be endowed with all good qualities
and will be always glad at heart. He will not swerve
in any way from the course of conduct prescribed in
the Vedas. He will have a good number of distinguish*
ed disciples; He will be gentle in his speech and will
possess much wealth, wife and sons. He will shine

with spiritual lustre. He will live long and have his
senses under control and will be saluted by Kings.
^fr^T'T^: tsRTT
SJoka 32. —When two planets each owning a Bhava
(«n^) mutually interchange places, /. e., each occupy
the other's house, the action is termed Parivartana
(M'R^nCr) ; and there are 66 such interchanges caused
by the several pairs of Bhava-lords beginning from the
Lagna and ending with the 12th. Out of these, 30 are
caused by the lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th and are
termed\rqr (Dainya) Yogas; and Bare caused by the
lord of the 3rd ; thus : -
Tlie loiVl of t.li 0 12tjh occupying any ono of tlio other 11
hous.w and the lord of this latter house occupying the 12th ... IT
The lord of the 6th occupying any one of the remaining
1. 2. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 and ll Iiouses and tlie l'>rd of this
occupying the 6th ... ... ... 10
The lord of the 8th occuiiyiiig any one of the remaining
1,2, 8, 4,5, 7, 9, 10 and 11 hou-sos and tlie lord of tliis
occupying the 8tli ... •••• ... 9'
The lord of tlie Srd occupying any one of the remaining
1, 2, 4, 5, 7. 9, 10 and 11 houses and the lord of this occu¬
pying the 3rd ... ••• • • ^
These 8 are called (Khala) Yogas. The remain.
ini 28 are termed n^r (Maha) Yogas.

Adh. VI
Tlioy lire fuiined thus:—■
Tiio i)i\l of tJio Laiiua (Kicupy anyone of the remain¬
ing 2, -1, 5, 7, 9, 10 and 11 liouses and the lord of tliis liouse
occupying tlic liUgna ... ... ^
The lo’ii nf the 2nd house occupying any one of the
remaining; 0 liouses, ‘I’ir., 4, 5, 7, 9, 10 and 11 and tlio lord of
tiiis latter occupying the 2nJ ... ... ...
The lord of the Itli liouso occupying any one of 5, 7, 9,
10 and 11 houses and the lord of this occupying tlie Itli ... 5
Tlie lord of tdie 0th liouse occupying any one of 7, 9, 10
4 ind 11 houses and the lord of this occupying the 0th ... 4
The lord of the 7th occupying any one of 9, 10 and 11
and fcJio lord of ihis occupying the 7th ... ...
The lord of the 9th occupying the 10th or lltli house
and tlie lord of this occupying the 9th •. 2
The loi’d of ;.iie 10th occupying the 1 Ith and vice versa ••• I
Sloka 33 —The man born in a%wr (Dainya) Yoga
■will be a fool, will be reviling others and commit sin¬
ful actions. He will always be tormented by his
enemies, will speak woundingly and will be unsteady
in mind. Interruptions will arise to all his undertak¬
ings. The man born in the (Khala) Yoga will at
one time go astray, while at another time gentle
in speech. Sometimes he will regain all kinds of
prosperity, while at other times he will have to endure
much distress, poverty, misery and the like.

Sloka 34. —^The person born in a (Maha) Yoga
will be the repository of the blessings of the Goddess
(Sri) and will be a lord and wealthy. He will wear
• cloths of variegated colour and bedeck himselt with
gold ornaments. He will receive rich presents from his
sovereign and certain powers (authority) also will be
conferred on him. He will command vehicles, wealth
and children.
«f#?Tns?T;
Sloka 35. -Find where the lord of the Rasi occupied
by the lord of the Lagna is posited. If the lord of this
Rasi be in his exaltation or own sign identical with a
Kona or Kendra, the Yoga is called (Kahala). If
the lord of the sign occupied by the lord of the Lagna
be similarly situated, the resulting Yoga is termed
(Parvata).
sT^T'sr; 1
Sloka 36.—He who is born in the (Kahala)
Yoga will thrive well, will be noble, benevolent, kind
and propitious. He will be respected by other men.
The person who is born in the (Parvata) Yoga will
have everlasting wealth and happiness. He will do acts
causing eternal benefit. He will become the lord of
the Earth.

Adh- Vf
Sloka 37' — W the lords of the 9th and 10th houses
occupy in conjunction an auspicious Bhava, it con¬
stitutes Raja Yoga. If the lords of a Kendra and a Kona
be similarly placed, i. e., be in conjunction in an auspi¬
cious Bhava, the resulting Yoga is called (Sankha).
mm?!: ^PITsrnrr «iTsrf5irTT*TtJT^i'T%«sjJr: ii^«iii
Sloka 38. —^The person who has his birth in a ?i3r
fSaja) Yoga will be a King who (when he set out) will
be accompanied by elephants, horses, litters, palan¬
quins and the like, the roaring of kettle drums and the
sounds of the conch shell, with a circular umbrella
made of soft vroven cloth held over him, praised by
bards and minstrels and solicited by eminent men with
various kinds of presents in their hands. The person
born in (Sankha) Yoga will enjoy all comforts in
the company of many beautiful damsels.
3»T ^ *ft5r«n«nsT. ii^Mi
Sloka 39 —(Vallaki) or (Veena>, ^JT
(Dama), gnjr (Pasa), (Kedara), tjinr (Sula), ^ir (Yuga)
and after (Gola) are the seven '.Sankhya=numeri¬
cal) Yogas respectively produced by the seven planets
occupying as many Basis as are denoted by the seven
figures commencing from seven and diminishing
successively by one, i. e., by the numbers 7, 6, 5, 4, 3,
2 and 1. These (Sankhya) Yogas are to be rec¬
koned when those mentioned previously are absent.

tTr$t ?fji:f^^3r5^: ii«o|i
Sloka '/O.' The person born in the ^ijtt (Veena)
Yoga will be fond oi dancing and music and will be
wealthy. The man born in the (Dama) Yoga will be
very liberal, a King and a benefactor. The person
whose birth takes place in the (Pasa) Yoga will be
opulent, devoted to enjoyment, and have good
conduct and relatives. The man who has the
(Kedara) Yoga in his nativity will be endowed with
wealth and agricultural lands.
3*n?s^ i
Sloka 4L —The peison born in the (Sula) Yoga
will be cruel, of an angry temperament, and
indigent. The man whose birth is in the gif (Yuga)
Yoga will be heretical and without wealth. He who is
born in the (Gola) Yoga will be without wealth,
will commit sinful deeds, and associate with low
people. He will be a bad artisan, indolent and short¬
lived.
JTFsft ^rrSEi^ ?5?ricr: ii
Sloka -^2.—When benefic planets occupy the 7th,
the 6th and the 8th places reckoned from the Moon or
the Lagna, there results what is called the STf^Ttrr
(Adhiyoga) wherein takes place the birth of a Com¬
mander (Police Superintendent or head), a minister or
a ruler (of a District or Province) respectively. He who
is born in the srf^^rlsrr (Adhiyoga) becomes famous,
prosperous, wealthy, long-lived and high-souled.
3T?«nft*Tvr^ ;R^9ar5C! •
argiTT

Adh. VI
Sloka 43 .—The person born in the (Adhiyoga) will become the lord of men, will be wealthy
throughout life (have everlasting wealth), will feed
many of his i relations, will overthrow his enemies,
enjoy long life and become widely renowned.
S]oka 44. —Bhavas being occupied or aspected by
benefics, their lords occupying good houses or being
brilliant and in their exaltation or Swakshetra, con¬
stitute certain Yogas and there are 12 such for the 12
Bhavas from the Lagna onwards. Their names are in
their order:—(1) (Chamara), (2) ^ (Dhenu), (3)
(Saurya\ (4)3r5rnT (Jaladhi), (5) ©sr (Chhatra), (6)
anp" (Astra), (7)^p (Kama), (8) srrg?: (Asura), (9) an»P
(Bhagya), (10) (Khyati), (11) (Suparijata)
and (12) (Musala).
sr^ psrfw i^g^rsrr i
pm^rsnRr: iia'^ii
Sloka 45.—The person born in the PT P ?: p t»T (Chamarayoga) will every day be growing in importance
like the waxing Moon and will be'of a virtuous disposi¬
tion. He will become famous, a leader of men, longlived and a store-house of prosperity.
m ^ i i«^ii
Sloka 46 .—The person born in the (Dhenu)-
Yoga will command good food, drink, etc. He will be

wealthy. Ho will have a very good education all round.
He will be blessed with a large family. He will have
in plenty gold, gems, wealth, corn, etc., and he will
shine like God Kubera.
^ liavSH
Shka 47. —Praised by his younger brothers who
have themselves attained glory, and endowed with
valour that commands the admiration of others, the
person born in the (Saurya) Yoga will shine like
Sri Rama, fully engrossed in State affairs, (fondled)
loved by every body and exceedingly famous. ■
Sloka The person born in the (Jaladhi)
or (Ambudhi) Yoga will be rich in cattle, wealth
and corn, will have a beautiful mansion full of relations,
an excellent wife, gems, clothes and ornaments.
Further, he will hold a respectable and high position.
His happiness will be steady and lasting. He will travel
on elephants, horses and vehicles. He will be honour¬
ed by Kings. He will eagerly engage himself in
doing work for Brahmins and the Gods and in sinking
wells and tanks by the road side.
srmwl: «RWiir: n
Sloka 49.—The person born in the (Chhatra)
Yoga will be blessed with a happy family life and

m
Adh. vr
children. 'He will be the abode of wealth, renowned, of
^ood speech and learned. He will become a minister
to a King. He will be keen-witted and respected by
others.
a‘orrf^?nifw
Sloka 50.-T-The person who has his birth in tjie
<Astra) Yoga will forcibly subdue his very powerful
foe«!. He will be rough in his behaviour and arrogant.
He will have bruised limbs, but will possess a strong
body. He will be quarrelsome.
RT?r^ ’(BTira:
Sloko 52.“Tbe person born in the epw (Kama) Yoga
will not even cast a look at others' wives. He will
be blessed with an excellent wife, children and
relations. With his good qualities, he will shine better
than his father, and he will attain to very great
prosperity.
Sloka 52.~-The man born in the (Asura) Yoga
will spoil others' work and will become a tale-bearer.
He will be intent on securing his own interests. He
will be poor and have forbidden cravings. He will do
mean acts and be troubled by the effects of kis own
disastrous doings.
gn>ggft

Sloka 53. —He who has his birth in the (Bhagya) Yoga will move in a palanquin (in the midst) ful^
of sounds caused. by musical instruments and with’
chowries waving to and fro. He will have everlasting
wealth, will be saluted by eminent men, and will
always pursue a righteous course of conduct. He will
please his Pitres, Gods and the hosts of Brahmins by
worshipping them in the most appropriate way possi¬
ble, will follow the righteous conduct, make his family
illustrious and will have a very good heart.
Sloka 54.—The person born in the (Khyati)
Yoga will become a King who will protect his good
subjects by following a course of conduct approved
by all. He will be blessed with sons, friends, wife and
wealth, and will be prosperous and widely renowned.
iihhh
Sloka 55.—The person born in the (Parijata)
Yoga Will always be in the midst of festivities (or
auspicious ceremonies), will become a King, will be¬
come the lord of much hoarded wealth, will own a
large family, will be intent on hearing stories of
great people, will be learned and doing something
auspicious.
Sloka 56.—The man born in the (Musala)
Yoga will become the owner of wealth earned with
much difficulty.; he will suffer humiliation ; his wealth

■6® Adh. VI
will be unsteady; he will spend money only for
legitimate purposes. After his demise he will certain¬
ly attain heaven; he will be foolish and fickle-minded.
wm-
«ft»n ariT?r ^
Sloka 57, —If the lords of the several Bhavas from
■the T ngna orr-ards occupy.tha 6th, 8th or 12th, or if
the Bhdvas be associated with or aspected by raalefics,
12 kinds of Yogas are declared to arise for the 12 Bha¬
vas from the Lagna. They are in their order: (1)
(Avayoga) (2) (Nisswayoga) (3) (Mritiyoga) (4) (Kuhu yoga) (5) g(lT?;^(T (Pamar&
yoga) (6) (Harshayoga) (7) (Dushkriti
yoga) (8) (Sarala yoga) (9) (Nirbhagya yoga) (10) (Duryoga) (11) (Daridra
yoga) and (12) (Vimala yoga).
Sloka 58. —The man born in an (Avayoga)
will be insignificant. He will suffer from extreme
poverty and will be short-lived. He will be humiliated,
he will associate with the wicked, will be of bad be¬
haviour and will be deformed. His position itself will
Be shaky.
jfwwc* ‘
Sloka 59 .—The person born in (Nisswa
yoga) will be devoid of good (kind) words, will have a
'^arren wife, will be in the midst of bad associates.

will have bad teeth and eyes; he will be wanting
in intelligence, will have no children, will have no
learning, and n6 power. He will be robbed of his
wealth by his enemies.
3Tgf^?nr^sriT^rft%5ft f ^ gf^gqr;
Sloka 60.—The person, who has his birth in a
(Mriti) Yoga will be vanquished by his enemies, will
have no brothers, will be devoid ui shame, sirengLh
and wealth, overcome by fatigue caused by doing
improper acts and will be of an excited temperament.
Sloka 61. —^The man born in a (Kuhu Yoga)
will be bereft of mother, vehicles, friends, happiness,
ornaments and relations, will be without a situation
or house having lost the one already got, and will be
attached to a low female.
Sloka 62 .—He who is born in a qi*l?:qhr (Pamara)
Yoga will have a miserable living and will be in¬
discriminate. He will be a liar and a cheat. He will
lose children or will have no issue at all. He will resort
to low and wicked people. He will be an atheist and a
.glutton.
Shka 63 .—The person born in (Harsha)
Totfa will be endowed with happiness, enjoyment.

70 Adh. Vf
good fortune, and a strong constitution, will overcome
his enemies, and will be afraid to commit sinful acts ;
he will become a friend of illustrious and prominent
people. He will have wealth, splendour, friends, fame
and sons.
Sioka 6-#.—The man born in a (Dushkriti)'-
Yoga will lose his wife, and be addicted to others'
wives, will be roaming on the roads unperceived,
will suffer from gonorrhea and such other venereal
diseases, and trouble from the sovereign. He will be
despised by his relations and suffer distress as a result
thereof.
Sioka 65.—He who is born in a (SaralaV
Yoga will be long-lived, resolute, fearless, prosperous^
and will be endowed with learning, children and
riches. He will achieve success in his undertakings^
overcome his foes, be pure and widely celebrated.
sioka 66 .—The person born in
(Nirbhagya) Yoga will lose all his paternal propierty
such as lands, house, etc , he will despise the good and
elders and will be irreligious. He will wear old and
worn-out clothes, will be indigent and reduced togreat misery.

Sloka 67.—The effect of a person's birth in
fDuryoga) will be that anything done by his own bodily
labour becomes fruitless. He will be insignificant in
the eyes of the public. He will be a triaitor to the
pebjple, will be highly selfish, and caring to feed his
own belly. He will be constantly absent from home
.and living abroad.
Sloka G3 .—He who is born in ^^5‘i£rf»T iDaridra
Yoga) will be loaded with debts, cruel, foremost among
the poor, will suffer from ear-troubles, will be devoid.
of good brotherhood, will entangle himself in criniinal
or sinful actions, will speak indecently and vtfill be a
jnenial to others.
fwgor: sT?ftcft
SJoka 69 .—The person born in a (Vimala)
Yoga will spend little and save much money. He will
be good to every body. He will be happy and indepen¬
dent and will have a respectable profession or con¬
duct and be renowned for his good qualities.
llvSoll
!TW^s«rW! II .
■ Sloka 76.—li the lords of the 8th, 6th and 12th
’^houses occupy in strength Kendra or Ttikona houses,
■and the lotds of the Isf, 10th, 4th and 9th houses be

Adh, VI
weak or eclipsed and be posited in the 6th, 8th and
12th houses, the result is (Duryoga). But if the
above position be reverse, (/. e., the lords of the 8t h
6th and 12th being weak or eclipsed occupy ithoser
houses, and the lords of the 1st, 4th, 9th and 10th
houses being strong occupy Kendra or Kona houses,
the person concerned will be a King fortunate,
wealthy, happy and virtuously diposed.
Thus ends the 6th Adhyaya on "Yogas" in the
work Phaladeepika composed by Mantreswara.
n ii
ii^ii
ADHYAYA VII.
Shka i.—The person born with three or more pla¬
nets in exaltation or Swakshetra and at the same time
posited in Kendras, will become a King widely renown¬
ed. If there are five or more such planets in a nativity,
they will make the person, even if born in an ordinary
family, a King (ruler of the world) endowed with
numerou:i elephants and horses.
ST 3n?rrewT
Sloka 2. —Persons bom in a royal family will be¬
come Kings if, at the time of birth, they axe not bornunder any (Duryoga) or if the-planets be not
eclipsed by the Sun's rays. Three or more planets in

Kendra positions at birth identical with their own or
exaltation signs will make Kings- of the persons born
of royal families. Others under the above Yogas will
only become their equals or sometimes Kings.
^ m m irfi: i
5r5frmTi%f^qRn
ii^ii
Sloka 3.- Even a single planet, though in depression,
is capable of making the person born a King's equal,
provided he be with brilliant rays, retrograde in
motion and occupy an auspicious house (/. e., other
than the 6th, 8th or 12th). Should there be two or
three such planets at a birth, the native will become a
King. If there are many such posited in auspicious
Basis or Amsas, they will usher a King endowed with
all the insignias of royalty such as a crown, umbrella
and waving chowries.
lit wr smw ^
Shka 4 .—If at a birth two, three or more planets ar&
endowed with Digbala, the native will, if he be a scion
of a royal family, become a King and be victorious.
Should there be 5 such (excepting Saturn) or at least
4 planets possessing Digbala, the person born though
-of an ordinary family will become a King.

Adh. VII
Shka 5.—When the Vargottama Navamsa in the
Lagna is just rising, or the Moon is occupying a
Vargottama Navamsa, and when the Lagna is aspected
by four planets other than the Moon, the native though
born of a low family will become a King.
srr i
5JV srsni# “^h
Shka 6.—When the lord of the Lagna occupies a
Kendra or the 9th house attaning a Vargottama Navam¬
sa, and the lord of the 9th house is in his exaltation or
Swakshetra attaining a similar Amsa, the Yoga will
usher into the world a King who will sit at ease in an ex¬
ceedingly beautiful golden vehicle placed on the back
cf an elephant, with chowries adorning the two sides.
rr3«T
snprRr
Shka 7.-~Even a low-born will become a King if at
his birth the Moon shining with white lustre be aspect¬
ed by a planet placed in exaltation or Swakshetra. The
-full Moon posited in a Kendra othejr than the Lagna
will usher a King endowed with elephants and horses.
gjmir Bnnftn!
Shka 8.—When Venus occupies the asterism.Aswini
in the Lagna and is aspected by three or more plaiietS/
he will usher into the world a King who will destroy hll

SI- 9-11 HairlicTTr:
his enemies. If the lord of the Lagna be strong and
occupy the 2nd Bhava which is neither his depression
sign nor is owned by an enemy and be in conjunction
with Venus, the person born will become a King.
r; i
iT^iTiTrrar JT«r^ it#: it
Sloka 9—If at the birth of a person Mats occupy
Mesha, Simha or Dhanus identical with the Lagna, and
be aspected by a friendly planet, a ruler of the earth is
ushered into the world. If the lord of the lOth
be in the 9th and the lord of the latter in the 10th, the
person born in the above Yoga will become a King
who will be extolled by his people.
5ar i
5r^cn srtrrrrflrin h?*'!!
Sloka 10. —The Sun has reached the centre of
Dhanus; the Moon is just there; Saturn is in the Lagna
and Mars possessed of much power is in the exalta¬
tion sign. If this be the planetary position at a person's
birth, he will grow into such a mighty King that his
eneniies, overwhelmed by his fiery valour will do
homage to him from afar, regarding him with terror.
iVofe—Here Saturn may be in the Lagna identical
with Dhanus, Meena or Tula.
vfffenjir: sr
Sloka J2—If the Moon brilliant with digits resemb,
ling nectar or slaked lime and lotus stalk in colour (i. o.,
the full Moon) occupy a Navamsa owned by the Sun

Adh. VII
and when bcnefics unassociated with malefics occupy
Kendras, the person born will become a King and will
own many elephants.
Sloka 12.--li the Moon is as white as milk and conch
shell (r. e., full) and three planets not occupying their
<iepression or inimical Vargas but being strong and .
being aspected by benefics, get posited in their own
Amsas, the person born will become a King and will
vanquish all his enemies.
sqtussnflr i
^ Iri
iTggf;n«r5 : IIUll
Sloka 13. —If the Moon that has attianed Vaigottamamsa be aspected by a strong planet and if there
be no malefic planet posited in the Lagna, the person
born will become an emperor and possess a beautiful
body.
ft 5n^%?rg?rT vIt
Sloka 14.-~li at a birth Jupiter, Mercury, Venus or
ihe Moon occupy the 9th with bright rays, uneclipsed
and also be aspected by, or associated with, friendly
planets, the native concerned will become a great
King worshipped by his subjects like a deity.

^qfTgisr«s%g srfife ^:gT-
^ ii^mi
Sloka 15. —Venus, Jupiter, and Saturn are in Meena.
Tbe Moon almost full is in exaltation. The Sun is
aspected by Mars; and sign Mesha is rising. The
person born in the above Yoga will become a King
owning a vast army by whose march large quantity of
dust is raised which makes the Sun invisible and as a
consequence all the lotuses begin to contract under
the impression that the Sun has set.
Another meaning : The Sun aspected by Mars is in
Mesha or the Moon is aspected by Mars and the Sun in
Mesha.
gro gggg n m gg gt i
«ngf fggngrSloka 16 .—If there be a birth at night when be¬
nefice are in depression or inimical houses identical
with the 11th, the 6th or the 3rd house, or be in their
highest exaltation, or be all posited in the Kendras,
with bright rays, and if the Moon be in Karkataka
identiced .with the 10th house, the person born will
become an emperor ruling the thre'e worlds under one
umbrella.
«TT3t g«Ti?r5r%5i>S3'f;dRr \\\^n
£loka 17 .—If the Moon with full digits (full Moon)

78 Adh. Vlf
occupy a Vargottamamsa, the person born will be¬
come a mighty ruler of the earth and hfs fame will be
immense. He will command a good number of horses,
the dusts raised by whose hoofs will so overpower the
Sun that he will resemble the Moon in the morning.
Sloka 18.—li at a birth, Jupiter and the Moon occu¬
pying a Kendra be aspected by Venus and there be noplanet in depression, the native will become a King'
whose fame will be unparalleled.
Sloka 19. —'If the Moon occupy a water-resorting
Rasi or Amsa identical with the Lagna or be in his own
or in a benefic's Varga, the person born will become
a King who will do good to his subjects, own many
elephants. Or, provided there are no malefics in
Kendras, should the Moon in the above Yoga occupy
a house other than a Kendra, the native will turn out
a King owning many elephants but oppressing his
people.
filKW ?T5*ft i
Kfe ^«FtrRrsrr ii^®i i
Sloka 20.—h scion of a royal family will become a
King if at his birth Venus is aspected by Jupiter.
Jupiter occupying a Rasi other than Makara identical
with the Lagna will usher a King endowed with ele¬
phants in rut. The lord of the Lagna occupying a

Kendra in full strength will cause a ruler of men to be
born. Mercury in the above position aspected by
Jupiter will usher into the world a person whose orders
will be obeyed by Kings.
^ ?TI»5RT»T flrvi% |R» It
Sloka 21 .—-A single planet occupying his highest
exaltation point and aspected by friendly planets
produces a King. Such a planet will make him immensely wealthy if he be also associated with another friendly
planet. The Sun in his own Amsa and the Moon in
Swakshetra will make the person born a Kiiig en¬
dowed with horses and elephants.
^ ^ rN f~s.
5R!ir»rrRl^?f ??^sr5r*^
Sloka 22,—The Moon with full rays occupying
Meena and aspected by a friendly planet will usher
into the world a King pre-eminent in position and de¬
lighting the world. If the Moon be full and occupy his
exaltation, the person born will become a King, very
generous and charitable and praised by the good.
!r«n it gor! vrfT:?r! ii^sSii
Sloka 23 .—^.The Moon in the Amsa of a very friendly,
planet and aspected by Venus will usher into the world
a King endowed with much wealth. If the Moon in the
above position be aspected by Jupiter, the person born
will become a King who will rule the entire earth.

Adh. VII
srrwfgirrar^ 1:^5^ i
^3riT!'?raft9TSloka 24.—The following are 4 Rajayogas declared
by those versed in the science: (1) malefics posited in
the 3rd, 6th and 11th houses reckoned from the one
occupied by the lord of the Lagna or of the Janma Rasi ;
(2) Mars and Mercury occupying the 2nd house from
the Lagna; (3) the Sun and Venus situated in the 4th
house from the Lagna; and (4) Mars, Saturn and Jupiter
quartered in the 10th, 11th and the Lagna.
Shka 25. —If, out of the lords of the 11th, the 9th
and the 2nd houses, there be but one that occupies a
Kendra position with respect to the Moon and if Jupiter
happens to be the lord of the 2nd, the 5th or the 11th
house, the person born under the Yoga will become
the ruler of a full-blown empire.
II ii
H TTiTT «rl^iT3Sr^;^*R9!ff ii’t^ii
Sloka 26.—Ii, at a birth, a planet be in its depres¬
sion and if the lord of the sign of depression or that of
the planet's exaltation Rasi be in a Kendra position
with respect to the Moon's place or the Lagna, the
person born will be a King and a just ruler.
ATote—According to some, means the planet
that is exalted in that Rasi; ^r; ^mwft
srw: JTK I
ssrr^5r^ff5T«r%s'aTniTr^Sfilr

’irpt ^ g ?nT^?Ri!n®^®^JtfEr5 w^w
Sloka 27. —When a planet is in depression, if the
lord of that depression sign and the lord of the planet's
exaltation sign are in Kendra positions mutually, the
Yoga will produce a King who will become an
emperor respected by all the other Kings.
#sr?:^!rRft^'iiT%rTarr^ i
g?«IR^^5!T: 'TTm%?Sr:ll^><ir
S/oita 28.—When a planet is in depression, but is
aspected by the lord of that Rasi, the Yoga will make
the native a ruler of the earth and famous. And in the
above Yoga if that depressed planet should be in an aus¬
picious house (that is in a house other than the 6th, 8th
or 12th), where is the doubt about his becoming a
foremost King ?
5ft% %arf^
5ft^r»rw i
Sloka 29. —When a planet occ jpies his depression
sign, if the lord of the Rasi so occupied or the lord of
the planet's exaltation Rasi be in a Kendra position
with respect to the Lagna or the Moon, the person born
will become an emperor endowed with full riches, will
be virtuously disposed, respected by other Kings,
mighty, famous and affluent.
5ft% sq‘??R?r anr%^ ^ i
^s'jCW^N^SRff TT: ll^'4l
srw

Adh. VIII 0
Sloka 30 ,—^If a planet be in depression and if the
lord of that depression sign as well as that of the
planet's exaltation sign, or at least one of them be in a
Kendra, the person born will become an emperor and
will be saluted by other Kings.
Note—Here the words may also be rendorod as ‘‘the
one in depression.”
There are five kinds of as follows:—
(1) The lord of the depression sign or the planet that is exalt-
■ed in that sign is in a Kendra position from the Lagna or the Moon.
(2) The lord of the depression sign and the lord of the exaltation
sign of the depressed planet are mutually in Kendra positions.
•(3) The planet in depression is aspected by the lord of that sign.
(4) The lord of the depression sign or the lord of the exaltation
sign of tlie depressed planet is in Kendra from the Lagna or the
Moon. (5) The planet in depression is in l(endra witli respect to
tiie Lagna or the Moon.
Thus ends the 7th Adhyaya on "Maharaja Yogas"
in the work Phaladeepika composed by Mantreswara.
II II
ft>?n5r?T?nT: irHV
?*Rtei?£r:
ii*ii
ADHYAYA VIII.
SJoka I,— If the Sun occupy the Ist house at a
person's birth, he will have very little hair; he will be
most inactive to do any work; he will be angry and
impetuous, and tall in stature. He will be proud, will
have soiled eyes and a lean body. He will be valiant,
impatient and cruel-hearted. If the Lagna at birth be

Cancer and the Sun occupy it, he will have a cataract
in the eyes; if it be Mesha, he will suffer from eyedisease. If the Sun be in Leo identical with the Lagna,
the person concerned will be night-blind. If Libra be
the Lagna and the Sun occupy it, he will suffer from
poverty and loss of children.
3rJT?T?ft*T ^
Sloka 2. —^When the Sun is in the 2nd house in a
person's birth, he will be devoid of learning, modesty
and riches and will be stammering. If the Sun should
occupy the 3td house, the person concerned will be
strong, brave, wealthy and liberal, but inimical towards
his relations. If the Sun be in the 4th house, the person
born will have no happiness, no relations, no lands,
no friends and no house. He will serve 'the State and
spend away his paternal property.
^^T«r«Tr3! f^*T?rTr% ii^ii
Sloka 3. —If the Su n should occupy the 5th house
from the L agna, the person born will be bere ft of happi¬
ness. riches and children_a nd- hiBr-Ii{e will be sh orty
He will be intelligent and will travel over forest
regions. If the Sun be in the 6th house, the person
born will become a King, famous, of good qualities,
wealthy and victorious. If the Sun occupy the 7th
house at a birth, the person concerned will incur the
displeasure of the sovereign, and will be deformed;

Adh. VIII
he will be wandering, without a wife and suffei
humiliation. If the Sun should be in the 8th house;' the
person born will lose his wealth, and friends; he will
not be long-lived and will have defective eye-sight
or be blind.
^wiirsrirarr:
sqf^nrtl’ iivii
Shka 4. —If at the time of birth, the Sun should
occupy the 9th house, the person concerned will lose
his father; he will have children and relations and will
revere Gods and Brahmins. If hie occupies the 10th
house, the person will have sons, vehicles, laudation;
intelligence, wealth, strength anid fame,. He wilt' be a
King. The Sun in the 11th house will make the person
born very wealthy and long-lived. He will be a King
and will have no sorrow. If the Sun be in the 12th
house, the person born will hate his father. His eye¬
sight will be defective and he will be without wealth
and children.
Sloka 5. —If at a person's birth, the Moon be waxing
/and happens to be in the first house, the person con¬
cerned will possess a strong constitution and a long
lease of life. He will be free from fear, very powarlul
and wealthy. But if the Moon be waning, the effects
stated above will be quite the reverse. If the Moon

should occupy tho^ 2nd house, the person born will be
rich, very learned or soft-tongued; he will be a
sensualist but defective of some limb. If the Moon
be in the 3rd house, the person born will have
brothers, will be lascivious, strong and powerful but
very miserly.
^ TO!
"'Sloka 6.—If at a birth the Moon be in the 4th house,
ihe person concerned will be happy and indulging in
sensual pleasures. He will be liberal in gifts, will have
friends, vehicles and become renowned. If the Moon
shoul d occupy the 5th house, the person born will
Kiy® gpod^ sons, will be very inteUlgeiLt/ will walk_
^1^^ become a min ister . If the Moon be in
the 6th Eouse, the person born will be short-lived,
ignorant, will suffer from stomach-ache, etc., he
will also suffer humiliation. If the Moon should
occupy the 7th house, the person born will be agreea¬
ble to look at, will be loved by a beautiful damsel, and
will be exceedingly lovely.
iivsii
Sloka 7 .—The person at whose birth the Moon is in
the 8th house will suffer from diseases and will be
short-lived. If the Moon should occupy the 9th house
•at a birth, the person concerned will be prosperous,

Adh. VIIf
virtuous and blessed with children. He will bevictorious, and all his undertakings will be crowned
with success a^ the beginning itself. If' the Moom
should occupy the 10th house at a birth; the person
concerned will do good acts and will be helpful to the
virtuous. If the Moon be in the 11th house, the personborn will be high*niinded, long-lived, and endowed
with riches, children and servants. If the Moon be in
the 12th house at a birth, the person conceriled will
be odious to others; he will suffer misery, will be
insulted and will be most indolent
^STJTlfWrT: I
35:/^ iicii
Sloka S.-If Mars occupy the Lagna at a person's birth,
he will have an injured limb; he will be short-lived
and will be very cruel and adventurous. If Mars be in
the 2nd house, the person concerned will be adverse
or ugly-faced, devoid of learning and wealth and will
be dependent on bad people. If Mars occupy the 3rd
house, the person born will be of good qualities, pos¬
sess wealth, will be brave, unassailable, happy and
will have no brothers. If at a birth Mars should occupy
the 4th house, the person concerned will be without
friends, mother, lands, happiness house and vehicles.
IIMI
Sloka 9, —If at a birth Mars be in the 5th house, the

SMO-li
B7
person concerned will be unhappy, without children,
■lull of reverses, back-biting and weak-minded. If Mars
'o6cupy the 6th house, the person born will be ex¬
ceedingly smitten with love, wealthy, aa^ famous : he
will be a King and victorious (in battle). Mars in the
'7th house makes the person born do improper acts,
suffer affliction through disease, wander in the roads
■and lose his wife. If Mars be in the 8th house, the
person born will have a deformed body, will be poor,
short-lived and cursed by the people.
srvr^ srqwsrsRSrr: i
5nTJrf%?r: ftrgsftsvTJr: ii^oii
Sloka JO.—If Mars occupy the 9th house at a per¬
son's birth, the native will, though a friend of the sove¬
reign, be hated by others; he will be fatherless and
will commit homicide. Mars in the 10th house
makes the person born a King cruel, liberal and prais-
•ed by important people. If at a birth Mars should be
in the llth house, the person concerned will be
■endowed with riches and happiness. He will be brave,
will have no sorrow and possessed of good character.
When Mars occupies the|12th house at a birth, the
p erso n concerned will have detormed eves ; he will be
■c ruet, and without a wifa. He will ba a slanderer and
A mean wretch.
gjgrf it? ?ti
Sloka JJ.—If at a person’s birth Mercury occupy the
Lagna, he will be long-lived, speaking Sweetly and

Adh. Vllf
clevexly. He will be sharp-witted, and learned in aU
Sastras. If Mercury be in the 2nd house, the person
born will acquire weedth 'by his own talents, will be
a poet, sinc^^ and attractive in his specah, and will
eat sumptuous food- If Mercury should occupy the 3rd
house at a birth, the person concerned will be bra'ye,
of medium life, and have good brothers; he will
suffer fatigue and be dejected. Mercury occupying
the 4th house at a birth makes the person concerned
learned, witty in speach happy and possessed of
friends, lands, corn, wealth and enjoyment.
jtrt!
Shka 12 .—If Mercury be in th^Sth house at a birth,
the person concerned, "wHl'be^Teafhed^r~EapPir""Wtl'd -
^urageous . He will have a good number of children"
and will be conversant with charms or spells. Mercury
in the 6th house makes the person born angry through
disputes, harsh in speach and idle. The native will
destroy the power of his enemies. When Mercury occu¬
pies the 7th house, the person born will be learned; he
will dress himself beautifully, will* have all the great¬
ness, and will have a rich lady as his wife. If Mercury
should be posited in the 8th house at a birth, the
person concerned will be widely renowned, and longlived; he will be the supporter of his family, a
lord and a commander of the army.

Sloka 13, —If at a birth Mercury should occupy the
9th house from the Lag^aa^ the parsorL^.Cimcerjied rwl^^
have learni^^^ wealth; he will be of good conduct;
he will be religLipus-Jiiiiu^ every ¬
th ing/ a nd very jeloggentin sneech7 If Mercury be in
the loth house, the person born will be successful
in whatever he undertakes, will have good learning,
strength, intelligence, and happiness. He will do
good acts and be truthful. Mercury in the 11th
house makes the person born long-lived, truthful, very
rich, happy and possessed of servants. If Mercury
be in the 12th house, the person born will be
miserable, devoid of learning, suffer humiliation, will
be cruel and inactive.
33^ fefr «TJft I
Sloka 14—li at a birth Jupiter should be posited in.
the Lagna, the person concerned will be handsome, for¬
tunate, long-lived, fearless, and blessed with children.
If Jupiter occupy the 2nd house, the person born will
be eloquent, and a good connoisseur in food. He will
have a lovely face, will be wealthy and learned. If
Jupiter be in the 3rd house at a birth, the person
concerned will be treated with disrespect, will be
miserly, will have a renowned brother, will commit
sins, and will be wickedly-disposed. When Jupiter
occupies the 4th house, the person born will live with
his mother,friends, attendants, sons, wife, corn, etc.
and be happy.

'iraR^tnniraT
Adh. VIII
SO
ftsft
Sloka 15. —Jupiter in the 5th house at a birth makes
“the native suffer distress through sons. The person
will be intelligent and will be a king's adviser. If
Jupiter should occupy the 6th house at a birth, the
person concerned will be very inactive, suffer dis¬
respect, destroy his enemies, and clever in charms and
exorcising. If Jupiter be in the 7th house, the person
born will possess a good wife and sons. He will be
very amiable, and more munificent than his father. ^If
J upiter be posited in the 8th house, the pe>[®9B.
will be poor and earn his livelihood as a me nial: he
will be sinful but long-lived.
^*r5TT iW5eT%«r5ft ^ i
?TRr*ft
fddSR: IIWI
Sloka 16—11 lupitej^cupy the 9th house at a perI son's births he.JW:iU become a fi wfll be
endowed with wealth and children and will be anxicus
^o do virtuous_act^._If Jupiter should be in the 10th
house, the person born will follow the right course of
conduct, will be renowned for his virtues, will become
very rich and a friend of the king. When Jupiter is
posited in the 11th house, the person born will be
wealthy, fearless, will have a few children, will be longand will be going in vehicles. If Jupiter be in the
12th hous^, the person coacerned will be hated by
others, will be foul-mouthed, will have no children,
will be sinful; idle and a menial.

«;df?r i
??<TowfsnT Bra^
Sloka 17 .—^If Venus should occupy the Lagna at a
person's birth, he will have a healthy and beautiful
body; he will be happy and endowed with long life.
When Venus occupies the 2nd house, the person born
will become a poet and endowed with riches of
various kinds. Venus in the 3rd house at birth makes
the native wifeless, unhappy, poor, miserly and un¬
popular. If Venus should be in the 4th house at a
birth, the native will have good vehicles, good house
jewels, clothes, scents, etc.
gjrBnnrw^ ^ricinr
iiuii
Sloka 18. —li Venus be in the 5th house at a birth,
the person concerned will be the owner of immense
wealth, will protect others, will be very wise and bless¬
ed with children. When. Venus occupies the 6th
^ouse, the pers on born will have no enemies, no richer
will be corrupted by young Jemaile a . an d affanfor^ Ky
> jgriei If Venus should be p^ited in the 7th house at a
./birth, thec>erson concerned will have a good wife but
will have intrigues with bad women. He will lose a wife
and willbe wealthy. Venus in the 8th house makes
the native long-lived, rich, and a ruler of the earth.
«r5nair^?row*rK?r>r%«^^ <

“92 Adh. VIII
Sloka 19. —Venus occupy the 9thjt)puse at a birth,
the per son concerned will be bleMed witEr ir'w ife^,'~
friends and jphil^en, and will "Become prosperoi^
through~rdyal lavor.~i rVenusr8EouTd~Be~in the 10th
house, the person born will become widely renowned,
will have friends, and will be a lord happily employed.
Venus in the 11th house makes the person born rich,
fond of the company of other females and endowed
with many comforts. When Venus occupies the 12th
house, the person born will have sexual enjoyment,
wealth and splendour.
wfesrVsarwsr i p.*ii
Sloka 20.—li at a birth Saturn occupies his exalta¬
tion or own house identical with the Lagna, the person
Concerned will be on a par with the king, a chief or
mayor of a city. If Saturn should be rising in any other
Rasi, the person born will be afflicted with sorrow and
misery from his very childhood and will suffer from
indigence. He will be slovenly and indolent.
^ vsjtSloka 22.—If Saturn should occupy the 2n:d house
■at a person's birth, he will have an ugly face; he will
be without wealth, and following evil courses. At a
later age he will live in a foreign country endowed with
vehicles, wealth and other enjoyments. When Saturn
is posited in the 3rd house at a birth, the person
concerned will be very intelligent, liberal in gifts and
happy witl^ his wife. He will ho wever be inactive
and overcome with sorrow.

vriPcft tnrst 5^: 1
w|^ 3rf%orT^5Rft ^[i«r msft
Shka 22—If at a bir th Saturn s hould oc c up y the 4th
house, the person con s erned will be unhappy, housed
le ss, w ithout vehicles, deprived .pX_His_.nu}.th.ei._..a®3”
sic kly d uring his early years. If Saturn should be
posited in the 5th house, the person born will be
roaming about, will have lost his reason, will be
bereft of children, wealth and happiness, will be
perfidious and evil-minded. When Saturn occupies the
6th house, the person born will be a voracious eater,
will be wealthy, subdued by his enemies, will be
stubborn and possessed of self-respect. Saturn in the
^th house will cause the native to be wedded to a bad
wife, to be poor, roaming and be distressed.
iR^il
Sloka 23.—The person at whose birth Saturn is in
the 8th house will be unclean and without wealth. He
will suffer from piles, will be cruel-minded, will be
pinched with hunger and will be despised by
his friends.
«rr»5rf^^rJnr?rirr«r^^%?ft
Sloka 24.—The person at whose birth Saturn is in
ihe 9th house will be bereft of fortune, wealth children,
father and religious merit. He will be wicked. If

94 <irg^R i< i irai Adh. Vllt
Saturn should occupy the lOth house, the person born,
will be a king or his minister, will devote himself
to agriculture, will be brave, rich and renowned. The
person who has Saturn in the 11th house in his
nativity will have a long span of life, lasting wealth
and good income, will be brave, free from disease and
, moneyed. SatnTn in tiic 1 ^f h house mak es the native
i mpudent, ind igent , with out children, defective ot
som e limb, stupid and driven out by his enemies.
*Tnft
Sloka 25. —If at a birth Rahu occupy the Lagna, the
person concerned will have a short life, possess wealth
and strength, and will suffer from diseases in the higher
limbs of his body (head, face, etc). The person who
has at his bir t h Rahu in tjie 2nd house wiTT be du bious
or insincere in his speach, will suffer from disease ir^
or face, will be tender-hea^ wi ll get
weal th through his sovereign, jyilX be an3
happy^ Ra^u in the 3rd house makes the person born
sprou3^ hostile to his brothers, strong-willed, longlived and wealthy. If Rahu should occupy the 4th
house, the person born will be a fool, will cause sorrow,
will have friends, will be short-lived and happy at
some time or other.
iR^n
Sloka 26.—li at a person's birt h Rahu ahottld beposited in the 5th bouse, he will talk through the nose.-

-wi^] Ka wrill be hard-hearted and niiffar from
Jbellv-ache. IfRahal>ein the 6th house, the person
born will be troubled b/ his enemies, or oppressed by
malefic planets (demons). He will sufter from a
disease in the anus. He will be wealthy and longlived. When Rahu occupies the 7th house, the person
concerned will lose his wealth through intrigues with
women, suffer separation from his beloved, lose his
manhood, become self-willed and silly. If Rahu
occupy the 8th house, the person born will be short¬
lived, will do impure acts, will be defective of a limb,
will suffer from wind-disease and will have limited
issue.
Shka 27. — If Rahu happens to be in the 9th ho^se
at a birth, the person concerned will speak opposingly.
He will be the head of his clan, the headman of a
village or mayor of a city and will commit unrighteous
-deeds. Rahu in the 10th house makes the nativ.e
famous; the man will have a limited number of issue,
will engage himself in other's business, will not jdo any
good act and will b3 faarless. If Rahu be in the 11th
house; the person born will be prosperous, will not have
many children, will be long-lived and will suffer from
ear disease. If Rahu should occupy the 12th house, the
person concerned will be intent on committing sinful
acts secretly, will spend much and ]wlll suffer from a
water-disease
ftirc^lfeTJnsriTtRirg^ 'n?r: ii

Adh. VHP
Sloka 28. —The person at whose birth Ketu occupies
the Lagna will be ungrateful, unhappv and bearing tales
against others. He will be an outcast, fallen from his
position, will have a deformed body and associating
with the wicked. Ketu in the 2nd house makes the
native devoid of learning and riches. His speach will
be very vile in quality, and he will have a sinister
look. He will ever be eating at other's tables.
%rfr H^srsrorr^n^ i
Sloka 29. —Ketu in the 3rd house confers on the
native long life, strength, wealth and fame. The person
will live happily with his wife and eat good food. Hewill lose a brother. If Ketu be in the 4th house, the
person concerned will lose his lands, vehicles, mother
and happiness. He will leave his native country and
dwell in a foreign place and live at the bounty of
another.
3rsrd*Tf75rFr<ft^r 5f%JTrr*rfsr ^ d
Sloka 30.— Ketu in the 5th house at a person's
birth will cause loss of children, disease in the stomachr
and trouble from goblins. The native will become
evibminded and wicked. If Ketu should occupy the
6th house at a birth, the pezs on concerned will be very
magnanimous and possess the best qualities. He will
attain everlasting fame, firmness and high authority,
destroy his enemies and realise his wishes.
Sloka 31. —The person at whose birth Ketu is posited
in the 7th house will suffer disrespeot, seek the

company of bad women, will be afflicted by a disease
relating to the bowels and will suffer loss of wtfe and
vital power. If K etu be in the 8th house, the person
born will be shoH^ived, will suffer the separation of
his’dear triencts and e ngage in auaryel s. will meet wi th
injury lSbm~ a weapo n and d iaappoiiitinent.in all hu
^unds^alcings^"
gitrsiifwtigw Tt faqg wsw i 'TqTmg «rw i
Sloka 32.— 11 Ketu should occupy the 9th house at
a person's birth, he will follow a sinful course, will
do unrighteous things and be deprived of his father,
will be unlucky,- indigent and will slander the good.
When Ketu occupies the 10th house, the person born
will experience obstacles to the performance of good
acts, will be impure, and will be engaged in doing vile
acts. He will be energetic, bold and widely renowned.
Sloka 33. —If Ketu bs posited in the 11th house at a
birth, the person cuncem ed wijl^ hoard m oney , will"
have many good qualities, will enjo y him se lf well, wilL
ccff mand a ll the facililiesL^lar- get ting good mate riaLs^
and will be successful in obtaining all his requirements. If Ketu occupy the hbuse7fEe~^rs6n bSifS
mlTiecretly commit sinful acts, spend money on vile
things, will destroy wealth, will be of forbidden con¬
duct, and will suffer frotn gye-diseases.
tRSf^WT
ljUoka 34—A pla&et'produces the full effect of the
9h<ay« in which it is when its distance (in Navamsas,

Adh. IX
degree etc,) from the commencement of the Rasi occu¬
pied is equal to that traversed by the Lagna-point in the
Lagna Rasi. It is declared by the authorities that Rahu
is simlar to Saturn and Ketu to Mars in giving eiiects.
55inf^ jrnr^Rn^snnTej srw «reJTts«n«r:
Shka 35 .—Planets produce the full effects of the
Bhavas respectively occupied by them when they are
exactly posited in the (Bhavamsa=Semi-bhava=in the
middle or centre of the Bhava). If they shquld occupy
•a position less or greater than the semi-bhava, the
effects are declared to be correspondingly increasing
or decreasing as the case may be.
Thus ends the 8th Adhyaya on "The effects of the (Sun
and other planets in the 12 Bhavas frem the Lagna
onwards " in the work Phaladeepika composed
by Mantreswara.
il )|
snrm: iilii
ADHYAYA IX.
Shka 1 —The i^rson at whose birth the sigh Mesha
is the Lagna will hnve round eyes, will be Weak-kneed,
iierce, afraid of .wat^r, will eat sparingly, will' long for
women, will always be on his legs, Will‘ be fickle,
-will speak falsehoods and will have bruis^ddj^bs.

SI. ".i'S
5rn^ ^ iT[r^nr»r *rV*n^ ?^?!rn*3'sfg?ft fn*^: rii
Sloka 2. —If at the birth of a person, the sign.
Vrishabha be rising, he will have plumpy thighs andn
big face; he will be engaged in agriculture. He will be
happy in the middle and concluding portions of his
life. He will be fond of young women, will be liberal
in gifts, will be of a forgiving disposition, will endure
hardships, possess cattle, etc., and will have marks
or moles on the back, face and sides.
Shka 3. —^When the Ascendant is Mithuna, the
person born will possess black eyes, will have curled
hairs, will be intent on sporting with wcmen, will be
skilled in interpreting others' thoughts, will have an
elevated nose, will have a liking for music and dancing, and will always be home-keeping.
Sloka 4—The person at whose'birth Karkataka is
the Lagna will be henpecked, have a fleshy neck, will
be surrounded by friends and possess many houses. He
will have elevated buttocks, will be rich, short in
stature, crooked in his views, fast in walking, intelli¬
gent, fond of water and possess very few sons.
y<TOi>i<y ii'sii
Slpkct 5.—If a person be born, when the Ascedant is
Simha, he will have reddish eyes, large chin, and a

Adh. IX
broad face •• h® will be arrogant and powerful. He yrill
be angry at trifles; he would like to go to forests and
hills, will be obedient to his mother and lirm*minded.
S^oka 6.—If a person be born when Sign Kanya is
rising, his shoulders and arms will'be drooping; he
becomes respectable through others' houses and
wealth. He is truthful and will speak kindly. His look
is faint due to modesty. He is fond of sexual enjoy¬
ment. He knows the interpretation of Sastras and will
have a very limited number of children.
fsrsnm i
srtg» sK?f^^S m
Sioka 7.—The person at whose birth the Lagna is
Tula has a lean and freil body, will have a limited
number of children, will be'intent on worshipping Gods
and Brahmins, will be wandering, will have two names,
will be tall in stature, will be clever in trading, brave,
m 9 rcilGSS dnd impartidl in his ar^uniGnt.
sioka 8.-fll a person bo born whoa sign Vxischlka
is rising, he will have round thighs and baees, broad
and expansive eyes chest, sufier from diseases
at a very early age and will be Separated frPiai his
punt, and piocaplOM. H. wiU do cnnal acta, wm )»
ioiidiiiadby hUadWaign and hla hands and leat - .^
anitrVii df lotus (PadmarekhaT.

SI. 9-11 lOi
^KiihRr: i : ? *•
srnT5vqm<parW3?ftiftf^ iPvii
Sloka 9 .—If &e Lagna be Dhanus at a person's birth,
he will have a very long face and neck; his ears and.
and nose will be big; he will be intent on his business;
he will be dwarfish in stature ; he will be the favourite
of the King; he will be eloquent; he will be
libered in his gifts and will destroy'his enemies.'-He
can be won over only by kind treatment and will be
.endowed with great strength.
arsr; ^?r: ?!r^5?Ti i
Sloka 10. — The following will be the character¬
istics of a person who is born when -Makara is rising.
He will be weak in the lower limbs; he will have
exceeding strength or courage; he will carry out the
task he has undertaken; he will be indolent; he will
be attached to old women of the prohibited class. He
will be a religious hypocrite. He will be fortunate;
he will be always on his legs; he will suffer from
wind-disease and he will be devoid of all shame.
TOsiff I5rai%2^ ^nrlirsr: 5wiffsnnF«r5«i:s
Shka ii>-The person at whose birth sign Aquarius
is rising will secretly commit sinful deeds, will have a
bedy similar to a water-pot; will be clever in hitting
dr killing others ; will endure* long marches on
roads. His means will be very limited. He will be
covetous and freely utilise others* wealth and will have
pecuniary losses and gaius,. and will be found of
perfumes aiidi- flowers. ■ ^

‘ Adh. IX
Shka 12 .—If at a birth sign Meena be the Lagna, the
person born will drink water excessively, will have a
symmetrical and shining body, will be fond his wife,
will gain money by selling pearls and other produce
of the ocean. He will be learned, feel grateful for past
favours done to him.twill overcome his enemies, posMSS very good eyes and will be fortunate,
Sloka 13. —After examining the nature, place, form,
color, etc., of any particular Rasi. one ought to intelli¬
gently guess the effects thereof. Whatever have been
declared as the effects arrising out of a particular Rasi
being the Lagna, the same should also be said to come
to pass, if the sign happens to be occupied by the Moon.
ar^ firsrir ^ «KT5r5!i iilvii
Sioka 14.—M at a birth a planet be in its exaltation,
the person born will be the ruler of the earth,
will receive praises from Kings, will be the abode of
valuable treasures, will be endowed with excellent
virtues ; he will shine like King Vikramarka in all
his policy, fame, valour, liberality, courege andcleverness.

gsrs n^mi
Sloka IS. —If a planet should occupy his own sign
in a nativity, the person concerned will during the
Dasa period of the said planet attain power and strength
through the help of a wealthy personage or may him¬
self become a lord, will stick up to his residence with¬
out moving anywhere, will acquire a new house as
well as lands capable of yielding every kind of crop
and will be honoured by his people. He may get back
-even lost articles.
Sloka 16. —The effect of a planet occupying a
friends' house in a nativity will be to make the owner
ihereof gain success through his friends in all his
attempts, cultivate new friendships, possess good sons,
wife, wealth, corn and other fortunes and receive help
from all people.
^ fsr^nt ^rwrf fw i
etRge i g r r^ ^
SJoka 17. —^If a planet' should occupy an inimical
«ign, the person concerned will have a base disposition
of mind. He will live 'in ethers' houses eating
their food. He will be utterly destitute and will be
always teased by enemies. Even a person who was
originally his friend will prove inimical to him in the
Dasa of such a planet.
Sloka 26.—If a planet be in depression, the native

104 Adh. IX
coacerned will, during thc^^lanet's Dasa period, have a
degradation from his position, will suffer humiliation,
will do sinful deeds, will contract debts, will seek help
low people, dwell in insanitary'surrpundings, will
dp menial work, will walk long distances and commit
useless acts.
JT^r# I
5s# m 3Rn3r% 11 Wi
' ' Sloka J9.—If a planet be eclipsed by the Sun's rays,
the person born will, (during the said planet's Dasa
period) meet with his end within a short time. His
wife, children as well as his wealth will also be destroy'
ed. He will unnecessarily be drawn into quarrels, will
incur the odium of others and also suffer humliation,
A planet posited in a neutral's sign does not urge any
marked effect, but will only leave the hapiness or
misery unaffected.
q*rhrtrr?rf?sj?T%^tsfg
WTW srwifts«rws
Sloka 20.—-When a planet is retrograde in his motion^
he will produce effects similar to those that arise from
his occupying his exalatation sign, should be even
though the planet is posited in an inimiOal or depths'
^n sign. The effects produced by a planet situated
fn his Swakshetra-own house-should be ascribed to
him similarly when he'happsns to occupy a Vargottamamsa.
Thus ends thp 9th Adhyaya on " Effect of Mesha and
other signs happening to be the L;sgna"'jn‘the work,
Fhala^eepika composed by Mantraswara.

li II
5I*nf^cr3^f^ ^?PR5nr»r anraV
?mt5 g#T ^ i
^^sc?T«!T *sr sn^tq v sr; u?.ii
ADHYAYA X.
Sloka 1 .—'If the 5th and the 7th house reckoned
either from the Lagna or the Moon be occupied or aspected by the lord of the 9th house, or by benefics or
their own lords, then there is good for the two Bhavas:
otherwise n^t; /.e., the Bhavas will not bear fruit.
If malefic planets are posited (1) in the 12th, 4th and
8th houses counted from Venus or if Venus be
hemmed in between two malefics, or if Venus b&
aspected by or conjoined with malefics, there is loss
of wife.
s?TqT?a?T3»r:
S^oka 2. —If the lord of the 7th house be in the 5th,
the native will lose his wife or become sonless. The
loss of the wife is certain, if the lord of the 5th or the
8th house happens to be in the 7th. If the weak Moon
be in the 5th and malefics should occupy the 12th, 7th
a nd the Ist houses, the person will be bereft of wife
and children. If the Sun and Rahu be in the 7th house,
one ought to predict loss of wealth thjrough the associa¬
tion of women.

^K^^iTTOnrr
Adh. X
?5n«fi!jTff*rtr sft^ ?f«ii i
3^^?nwhS%^'«R|p5r?ft: ^?ft ii^ii
Sloka 3 .— When Venus occupies Vrischika identi¬
cal with the 7th house, the wife of the person born will
die. The same will be the effect when Mercury is in
Vrishabha identical with the 7th house or when Jupiter
occupies the 7th and is in depression, or when Saturn
or Mars is posited in Meena identical with the 7th
house. If Saturn and Mars are in the 7th house identi¬
cal with Karkataka, the wife of the person concerned
will be chaste, fortunate and beautiful.
^ 5rr sr3rn^jf?r%% ^ «n:?TiT?T: iwii
Sloka 4.—11 the 7th house or its lord be associated
with, aspected by or posited betwixt malefics or be in
depression cr inimical sign, or eclipsed by the Sun's
rays, loss of wife is certain. Venus in conjunction with
a malefic occupying the 7th, 5th or 9th house will make
the native bereft of wife or have a crippled wife. When
Venus is in a (Varga) of Mars or Saturn or has the
aspect of these planets, the person born will have
liaison with other people's wives.

Sloka 5 . If Venus and the Moon are in opposition to
Mars and Saturn in any nativity, the person concern¬
ed will be either wifeless or issueless; when there is
a hermaphrodite planet in the 7th house and the 11th
house is occupied by two planets, the person v/ill have
two vrives. If the lord of the 7th house and Venus be
each posited in a dual Rasi or Amsa, the person will
have two wives. Generally one ought to predict the
number of wives in such cases by the number of the
planets in conjunction with those two. vir., the lord of
the 7th and Venus.
grTf I
>T?r:
Sloka 6 .—It is through the (number of) planets in
the 7th house that one ought to divine the number of
women that a person may associate with. Of the^b the
number that will die (at an early age) will correspond
to the number (of planets in the 7th house) that are
malefic, while the number of benefics will denote the
number that will survive. If the lord of the 7th be
benefic and possessed of strength, the native will have
a good-natured woman as his partner and be endowed
with good children. Even a malefic will do good to the
wife, if he should be in the 7th owning that house.
Benefics in the 7th will be productive of good unless
they happen to be the lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th
houses.

Adh. X
Sloka 7 ,—When the 2nd and 7th houses are either
occupied or aspected by malefics there will be loss of
wife ; and the effect will invariably be untoward in the
case of malefic aspects. Similar predictions (about
husbands) may be made from the wife's nativity when
the 7th and 8th houses are likewise afflicted. But if
the concerned two houses be aspected or occupied by
benefics, the couple will be lucky and enjoy all
comforts.
^ ^ ll<iU
Sloka 8.—When the Moon along with Saturn occu¬
pies the 7th house in a woman's nativity, the woman
concerned will be remaried and in the case of a male,
he will be either wifeless or childless. If malefics in
their depression or inimical house be posited in the
7th, the 8th or the 2nd, the demise of the wife or the
husband should be predicted as the case may be.
Sloka 9. —When the 7th house is an even sign and
if the lord of that house and Venus be also similarly
situated (that is, in an even sign) and if the lords of the
^5th and 7th houses posessing strength are npt over¬
powered by the Sun's rays, the person concerned
will certainly be blessed with wife and children.
r: i
Sloka 70.—If the planets owning the 2nd, the 7th
and the 12th houses be aspected by Jupiter.and occupy
Trikona or Kendra positions, or if benefics be posited
in the 2nd, the 7fh and the 11th houses r^konad from
the planet owning the 7th house, the V^ife of the native

will command all happiness and be endowed with
children.
ii^Ji
Sloka 11 .—Find the Rasi and Navamsa occupied by
the lords of the 1st and the 7th houses in a person's
nativity. The Janma Rasi of the wife will be a sign
triangular to the aforesaid Rasi or Navamsa. or it may
be the exaltation or depression Rasi of the lords of the
1st and the 7th; or it will be that Rasi which contains
the largest number of benefic dots in the Moon's
Ashtakavarga table of the husband.
f^?rr i
crg^^mrar^Br^orJTWT^ ?t?t 1^155
Sloka 12 -The direction d the country of the wife will
be that signified by the Rasi owned by the strongest
of the three planets, vh, (1) occupying 7th house (2)
owning the 7th house and (3) Venus: The marriage
may be expected to come off when'Venus or the lord of
the 7th house in ^his* orbit passe; through a sign
which is triangular to the Rasi or Navamsa occupied by
the Lord of the Lagna.
5iFri^ wT«r i
5Pr^r srqrr^ «i*«r3r*T 11 l^ii
Sloka 23.—The acquisition of a'fwife 'may happen
during the Dasa period of the planet* (1) posited in the
7th house, (2) aspecting the 7th house or (3) owning
the 7th house. The same mayfalso happen, when the
lord of the Lagna in his orbit comes to the Rasi re¬
presenting the 7th house.
f grPT^ arff hi gpwf;

Adh.X
Sloka 14 .—Find which of the two in the following
two pairs is stronger : (1) the lords of the Basi and
Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 7th house; (2)
Venus and the Moon. During the Dasa*period of that
planet when Jupiter passes through a sign triangular
to the Rasi or Navamsa occupied by the lord of the
7th, the marraige may be declared to take place.
!n*r
Sloka.—15 If the lord of the 7ih house occupies an
inimical or depression sign, or be eclipsed or be
aspected by maleiics and irthe 7th house be associated
with or aspected by malefics, there wili be loss of wife;
so say the wise,
Thus ends the 10th Adhyaya on " the KedatraBhava or the 7th house" in the work Phaladeepika composed by Mautreswara.
«nr?gsr^ ^ jssftarf btt «r%-
ADHYAYA XJ. ]
5/oka 2 .~ Whatever effects axe * declared for!‘inenV
horescopes are entirely applicable to women too,
or to their husband. Her'prosperity and happiness

have to be deduced from the 8th place (from the
Lagna or the Moon whichever is stronger). Children
should be declared through the 9th house and matters
relating to her appearance beauty etc, should be
deter-mined from the Lagna. It is from the 7th place
that her welfare (power of influencing her husband)
and the (nature of the) husband should be ascertained
while her association and chastity should be predicted
from an examination of the 4th house. Benefics in
these houses produce good results while malefics in
theses in the above houses are productive of evil
unless they happen to own the houses, in which case
the effect will be good.
^S[T IRII
Sloka 2 .—If both the Ascendant and the Moon are
in even signs and be arpected by benefic planets, the
woman born will bear good sons, possess an excellent
husband and be well-ornamented. She will be very
prosperous and possess excellent qualities. If the
Lagna and the Moon are in odd signs and be aspected
by or associated with malefic planets, she will be
masculine in her bearing, insincere, ungovernable to
hex husband; and cruel beyond measure, and poor.
Sloka 3.—U the 7th house or setting Navamsa be a
eign ovv^ned by a benefic, the husband of the woman

Adb. XI
will be bright in appearance, famous, learned and
wealthy. If it be otherwise, he will be deformed, and
stupid or be a gambler for deceitful) and will have lost
all his wealth, and the couple will not live together.
If the Rasi and Amsa of the 7th bouse belong to Mars
or if Mars occupies it (the 7th), the female bom will,
become a widow; if the planets in the 7th house be of
a mixed sort, she will be remarried. If the 8th house
be occupied by malefics, she will cause the destruction
of her husband. If benefics should occupy the 2nd
house she would herself die.
%JT*rr
«rarf^ ir5ryT JT^r^irTt*
iiaii
Sloka 4 .—When the Moon is in Scorpio, Virgo,
Taurus or Leo identical with the 5th Bhava, the woman
concerned will have but a few childien. It the 7th
house or the setting Navamsa belongs to Saturn, Mars
or the Sun, the woman will have a diseased womb.
If malefic planets be in the 4th Bhava, the femede
born will become unchaste, posited in the Rasi or
Amsa of Mars or Saturn, she will be a concubine. If
the Lagna, the Moon and Venus.
^srtin: ini
Sloka 5, If the 7th Bheva or setting I Navdinsa be¬
longs to a benefic planet, the woman born will be
possesssed of handsome hips and very fortunate. If

vnnsi^nimr:
tli 0 Mooxi, tho LagiiA and the 4th house be connected
with benefics, the woman concerned will be chaste,
and be endowed with very good qualities. If beae>
fics axe posited in Txikona houses, she will be happy,
possessed of children, and wealth and be good-natured.
If the said houses be occupied by weak malefics, the
woman will become barren ox her children wfil all
die early.
Sloka 6.~When the Moon is in a Rasi belonging to
Mars, the woman born will be (1) ill-behaved (2) a men¬
ial or slave, unchaste (3) virtuous lofty-minded and
prosperous (4) deceitful and (5) frail according as the
Tximsamsa of the Moon belongs to (1) Mars. (2) Saturn
(3) Jupiter (4) Mercury and i5) Venus respectively.
When the Moon is in sign Vrishabha ox Tula the corres¬
ponding effects . are: (1) She will be very frail (2) she
will resort to a second husbaad (3) she will be highly
respected (4) very intelligent and (*i) famous. When
the Moon occupies a house of Mercury, the respec¬
tive effects axe: (1) she will be dishonest 12 she will
be a eunuch (3) Chaste (4) endowed with all good
qualities and (5) repining.
ti^iriirsn j
tnrfm n«9ii
Sloka 7 ,—If the Moon be posited, in Karkataka, the
effeots ift tiieir order are; (1) she wUl be eeU-willed and

Adh XI
vncontioUed (2) she will kill her husband (3) she will
be endowed with many good qualities (4) she will be
skilled in the Arts and (5) she will be virtuous. If the
Moon occupies a sign of Jupiter/ the effect will be to
make the woman born (1) endowed with many good
qualities (2) not to have much sexual activity (3) pos¬
sess many good qualities (4) skilled in the Arts and (5)
very chaste. When the Moon is in a sign owned by
Saturn, the several effects' will respectively be to
make the female born (1) a maid servant (2)'attached to
another man (3) have the husband under her control
(4) unchaste and (5) barren and indigent. If the Moon
be in Simha, the effects of the Moon being posited in
the several Trimsamsas will respectively be to make
the woman born (1) a wicked wife (2) a person of
despirable character ^3) the wife of a king (4) one of a
omasculine disposition and (5) attached to a man other
.than her husband.
h<2Ii
Sloka a.—The effects described above as due to .the
Trimsamsa or degree axe occupied by the Moon at
birth or those mentioned '.for the Trimsamsa rising at
the time wiU come to pass according as the one
Trimsamsa or the other is stronger.
irr^^i^nnrwr. ^nm fir^: i
Py wi fd^a i i f w 4 fT
5'olro 9.— Astrologers declare that (!) the eldest
Irrother (2) the mother (3) the father (4) the youngest
l>rother respectively of a person wilt die (soon dltez the
marriage) if his wife be born under the stars (D Jyeshta

SMO-U
Stabhishak, Moola, Krittika and Pualiya will be barren,
bave, become widows, mothers of children that are
dead, will have been cast away by their husbands
or be without wealth.
<Kv«rniT5ft55f ^
?rw?ri^ ^ i^on
Sloka 10. —If the lords of (1) the Lagna, (3) the 9th
house and 3 the sign occupied by the Moon be asso¬
ciated with benefics and are posited in good houses
and be of brilliant rays (be not be eclipsed), the woman
concerned will be held in high esteem by her rela¬
tions. She will do many good deeds, will be very hand¬
some and be prosperous. She will please her husband,
bear good sons and be virtuous in her disposition, the
period of this happy life with her husband depending
on the strength derived by the 8th house from benefics
througn association or aspect).
arnt iiar: ftwcsrn i
9ftinw^
tnn <c<M(^f5i^sv^ars
SJoka II.—U a woman's menses set in when the
Moon is in an (Anupachaya-lst, 2nd, 4th
5th, anp 7th, 8th. 9th and 12th place and aspected by
Mars, they be Gomf favourable to conception and not
otherwise. The husband should sow the seed when the

Adk. Xtl
Moon occupies an Upachaya (Srd, -Sth, lOtk and
11th) house in respect and to the female's nativity) is
espected by Tupiter. This is to be done at an uhezce^
tibnable Lagna with many good points in its favour and
unconnected with (Parva) and other objectionable
period of time.
Thus ends the 11th Adhyaya "on the Horoscopes
of women “ in the work Phaladeepika
composed by Mantreswara.
II ?n^s«pr: II
35fr ^ f*ro:
^ mil
ADHYAYA XIL f
Shka 1. If Jupiter and the lords of the 5th house
reckoned from the Lagna and the Moon be well-placed,
and 5th house has on it the aspect of a benefic planet
or of one owning an auspicious house (/. e., other ' than
6th, 6th and 12th), or if the lords of the Lagna and the
5th house or be posited together in a house or have
mutual benefic aspebt or occupy each other'a T)pleo»s»
ihe acquisition of children is assured*
Sloka 2.-— When the 5th pUbes counted froni the
Lagna, Jupiter and the Moon ate bi^er, asaboiated
'With or aspecfed by taaloficaand doybid of bonbfics

•or of their aspect, or, when these houses are surround*
ed by malefics on both sides and when the lords of the
above said houses are posited in Dusstthanas 0. e., 6th,
5th and 12th}, the person concerned can have no issue
vrhatever.
^ ig wt nt 3^ ?rsnr*n^
S?n: jvst i
ff?r«rr^S5T^?r!n^ ii^ii
Sloka 3.—If a malefic planet owning the 8th house
be in that house, the person concerned will have child¬
ren. When that ho jse is occupied by a malefic, the
person will have sons in plenty. It a benefic planet
should occupy the-5th house and at the same tim®
own that sign or be in exaltation, there, the result is
loss of children. The signs Vrischika, Kanya
-and Simha when they happen to represent the
Sth house are termed childless F arts and a person
born under such a condition will be of very limited
progeny and this too will be accomi lished only after a
long interval.
5rw«t%
^wrt: iwn
Sloka -t:.—When the Sun is posited in the Sth house
ideatial with childless Rasb Saturn is in the 8th and
Mars in the Lagna; or when Saturn, Jupiter and Mars
occupy respective'/the Lagna, the 8th and the. 12th
and the Sth house happens to be> a childless sign; or
when the Moon occupies the 11th, and the Sth house
reckoned from Jupiter is occupied by a malefic planet

118 Adh-XII
and there are many planets stationed in the Lagna; th»
person concerned will have a child late in life after «
great effort.
9^ 9f 9f 91gliw«>
Sloka 5.—<If the Sun should singly (without being
associated with any other planet) occupy the 5th houseidentical with Karktaka, there is possibility of the personconcemed having children by a second wife. Thesame should be predicted if Mars or Venus be similarly
situated. Saturn in such a position will give many child¬
ren. The Moon or Mercury similarly placed will not give
many while Jupiter in the Moon's sign identical with
the 5th house will make the person conoemed thefather of many daughters.
■Sloka 6, The following 4 yoga? lead to family ex¬
tinction: (}) The 4th, the 7th and the 10th houses in
my nativity being occupied respectively by a malefic
planet, Venus and the Moon; (2) the 12th, the 8th the
5th and the first houses being occupied by malefics;
(3) Venus and Mercury in the 7th, Jupiter in the Sth
and malefics in the 4ih houses; and (4) the Moon in
the Sth and tnalehcs in the 8lh, the 12th and the 1st.

Sloka 7.—The following two yogas lead to infliction
ihrougli chtl4r9n orl barrenness; (L) a malefic in the
Lagha, its lord in the §th. the lord of the 5th in the 3rd,
and the Moon in an odd Rasi or Amsa in the 5th and
aspected by the Sun.
Sloka 8 . If the 5th bhava be a sign owned by Saturn
or Mercury and is aspected by or associated with Mandi
or Saturn, the person concerned will have^ a son by
adoption, The same will be the result when the lord
of the 5th house is weak and is not connected in any
way with the lords of the 1st and the 7th houses.
!5?rer sn?r: iiMi
Sloka 9.—If the lord of the 5th house be in depreseion or in an inimical house' or be eclipsed, or be in
-conjunction with the lords of the 12th, the 6th and the
8th houses' the result will be the loss of children, say
the astrologers. The same will be the case when the
lord of the 5th is posited in the 5th and is not
■aspected by benefics.
gspft W5f?r<Tr ?fTT ii
Sloka JO.— If in any nativity the lord cf the 5th house,
Jupiter, Mars and the Sun are all posited in male
Navamsas, they lead to the possession of a good number
of children, so, the sages say, the nature-rgood or other¬
wise—of liiis children being ascertained from the
strength of &e lord of the 5fh house.

'KwvIhwIT
Adh. xri
9fKT^ «ftn%t^n^ 9ftarriFff nUH
SIoka3 11 .— If the house or its lord be posited in
a male sign or Amsa or be in conjunction with or aspected by male, planets, the children wil! be all males.
The birth will be of daughters if the said houaa or its^
lord be in a female Rasi or Amsa* or bs associated with
or aspected by female planets.
^ ?rTr »nf:
Sloka i2.—Conception (of a birth) may take place
when the Sun and Venus in the case of males, and Mars
and the Moon in the case of females, are possessed of
strength and pass'-through their Basis or Amsas identical
with an Apachaya (Ist, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th. 9th and
12th Rasi ( a PT WV^# )
Sloka — 13. The number of issues should be deter'
mined by a cdnsideration of (1) the planets in the 5th
house or these that are posited along with the lord of
the 5th house, as to how many of tham ate in friendly,
depression or inimical Navamsas. A similar*examination should also be made in respect of the Sth houseor its lord reckoned from the sign'oecupied by Jupiter
the sign representing the Navamsa occupied by the Sun.
sf 3»irfw%
ftrw s w f< n ? i; a r i^ i
t«f.4Hnr?s Bw g twi

SI J ^
Sloka J-^.--Add together the figures representing the
positions of Jupiter, the Moon and Mars in the case of
female horoscopes. If the result denotes an even Rasi
and an even Navamsa, the strength of fecundity in the
female for producing offspring is assured. If it is mixed
(i. Rasi male and Amsa female or r.ti versa), there
will be children only after a great effort. If the sum
total of the figures denoting the positions of the Sun,
Venus and Jupiter signify an odd Rasi and an odd
Navamsa, it denotes that the virility in the male to
produce offspring is very strong ; and in case one of
the two (Rasi and Navamsa) be even, one has to
predict a mixed result.
i; note below two boroseoiW'i.- -a Itu-i-.uu! ami his wi.fi?.
HUSBAND.
WIFE
Born, Tuesday the
Eoni. friday, tho 2 )!a!- li ti!;
•Iimo night 2-30 A. M
Sun.
Moon
Mars
Mercur:
Jupiter
Venus
Saturn
T^agna
Adding (1). (G) and (5) we
gel
yrisbifikii ilasi, Makartt Nil* Tula Rulsi, IVfoena Nava usu
vwna*. .Both Rasi and Na- Rasi odd. Navamsa even. J'!..-.
vamsa. are even. Sotheviri- result in this osw is
liiy Ita Ihtt msle to produce
oCfiiprirjg is uob strortg.
Tho couple are living and liavp so far u<> ishhoh.

Adh. XII
f«^srf^ ^ Brl^^TSi5r?ir?^f^«rcn^
.‘J/oA-a/5.— Substract five times the figures for the
Sun from five times the figures for the Moon. If the
Tithi represented by the result be an auspicious one
in the bright half of a month, progeny is assured to the
native (even) without much exertion. But if it be one
of the dark half of the month, there is no such possi¬
bility. It is by a close examination of the strength of
the Tithi—whether it is auspicious or otherwise-in both
the Pakshas—bright and dark—that one has to divine
the possibility of the native being blessed with issue.
During an (Amavasya), a (Chidra) Tithi,
the (Vishti) Karana or any one of the
fStthira-karanas), there will be no issue at all.
Tiio feSf (Ohidra) Tithis aie (1) ^"3^ {Ohaturthi), (2) H’ST
fShasliti), (3) (Ashfcami), fl) (Navami), (5)
(Dtvadasi) and (6) (Chaturd-.isi). These fi are- gcuoi'aUy
JtV'jidofl for any auspicious function.
There aro 11 Karanas distributed, ovoir the 30 Tithiw
-of tho lunar month at the rate of 2 Karanas for each Tithi, four
these, viz, (1) (Chatushpada.) (2) JITTO , (Nagava)^
•(3) f^€3SI(Kirn8t ughna) and (4) (Sakuna\ are called iVn:
(Stthira) Karanas and are so named as they.permanently hold away
over the four half Titliis commencing from the second ‘liiilf of
(Krishna PakshaChaturdaai), The other seven, vfz^
(1) (Bava), (2) (BaUva), (3) tKaulaya),
^Taitthila), (5) (Garaja), (6) (Vanija) and (7)
^Vishti) or (Bhixdra) are called (Chata) pr * .ni(>veable
Karanas and occur in 8 cycles to preside over the remaining 68
half-tithis of the lunar month liegining with the later half of
(Suklapakfiha prathamft)> ’

Taking the sample horoscoixt given under the previous Sloka,
HUSBAND. WIFE.
6 times the figures for o times the figures for
the Moon ‘24-26'’—23'-2o the Moon 51—24’- -ihi'- Oij”
5 times tlie 5 times tlu>
figures for figures for
Substraoting" ■ Subtracting ———————
18'l5"=llth Tithi - =218’ 45'45"=19th TithiEkadasi (Briglit half). Chat wthi (Dark half), wliiclt
is a (Ohidra) Tithi.
H II
^ wrg; ; i
*TS?rr g^r«nnnr shikiith: •il’iii
^crsrworw Jrwwf ^ i
^ ^3t ^5rT?ns i
a rnr c i g ^ sfrlTwr nun
Sloka 16-18 .—Should however the result happen to
be one of the fey (Chhidra) Tithis, the fefe (Vishti)
Karana, or a (Stthirakarana, alluded to in the
last sentence of the previous Sloka), one ought to wor¬
ship God Krishna by means of the iPurusha
Sukta) Mantras to ward off the barrenness threatening
the family. If the Tithi disclosed be (Shashti), he
ought to worship God Subrahmanya; if it be sgrgsft
•(Chaturthi, ho ought to propitiate the lord of serpents;
if it be (Navami), he ought to arrange for the
reading of ’nHPnr (Ramayana) and hear that story ; if
it be (Ashtami), he ought to obse^e the srw
<Sravana) Vrata (by fasting) ; if it be ygWl (Chatur-

Adh. XII
dasi), he must worship Gcd Rudra (Siva) by
(Rudraparayana); If it be (Dwadasi) he must
propitiate the Gods by^ liberal feeding; if it be
(Amavasya) or tflQTift (Pournami', he ought to
propitiate the Manes. These things he ought to do
all the more and v/ith greater care and effort when the
Tithi happens to be one among the last five oi the
month—I'L;, after (Krishna Paksha Dasami).
Generally, in the dark half of a month to which-so ever
of the three divisions a Tithi may belong, worship
ought to be resorted to : the particular deity to be
propitiated being (Nagaraja) in the first division,
viz., 1—5 Tithis), (Skanda) in the second (next 5
Tithis—j. e., 6—101 and (Hari) in the third (or last 5).
rTr%«rTHRiy?l«TSiokc 19 .—If at a birth the lord of the 5th house be
posited in its inimical or depression sign or be eclipsed
(by the Sun's rays) or occupy any of the (Dusstthanas, viz., the 6th, the 8th or the. 12th); or the planet
occupying the 5th house be similarly situated or happen
to be the lord of any one of the three houses, viz., the
6th, the 8th or the 12th one ought to declare childless¬
ness as an inevitable result. He ought to divine the
source of the same by an examination of the particular
<ieity, tree and animal represented by the signpccupi-
«d by that planet.

•SI. 20-22 grt^?ns*5m?r:
J2r,
?T«rr ?!#r 5cq-?^l?rwT’T'
^T>J^Wtf:^5ns=r?tTg^?ft ’T%*«n^.5Ei^?r m
iTf^s»ar«ra<^i3m ftnrr^: ar#5 piiCTi=arif^; iPv'Ii
■St
^r’TT'^siT
sfSronprMfTsj 3ip;% &rfVr<i5n»T i
’cr^ gr^Ttrtc^Wwr?: ^
qisST tp^'.lt
Sloka 20 — 22. If ths planet in question happens to
be the Sun, the person concerned becomes sonless
owing to injury done to God Siva and Garuda' and the
consequent curse of the Manes; if the Moon, it will be
due to the displeasure and anger of the mother, a
(Sumangali) or other venerable woman owing
to her feelings having been hurt; in the case of Mars,
it will be due to some fault done to the village deity,
to God (Kartikeya), to an enemy, or one's
Dayadins; if the planet be Mercury, the sonlessness
will be due to curses made by youngsters or to the
killing of spawns (eggs of fishes and similar creatures)
or to the wrath of God Vishnu; if Jupiter be such
planet, it will be due to some harm done to the
hereditary Brahmin family priest or the destruction of a
tree full of fruits: if the lord of 5th or the planet posited
therein be Venus, the cause of childlessness will be
due to the cutting off of ;a tree full of flowers, or an
injury caused to a virtuous lady or to the cow kind or
a sinful deed to people that ought to be revered ; if
Saturn be the planet under advertance, it will be
due to the destruction of an (Aswattha or

326 Adh. XII
Pi^l tree or on account of iv(Jt) Yama's ire or through
departed spirits, goblins andithe like; if Rahu should
occupy the 5th house or be associated with the lord of
that house it will be due to the curse of a serpent ; in
the case of Ketu, it will be owing to the curse of a
Brahmin. If it be Mandi, it will be due to a curse from
departed sprits, If Venus and the Moon in conjuncwith Mandi should be in such a position, the cause will
be attributed to the murder of a damsel or the killing
of a cow. If Jupiter or Ketu in conjunction with Mandi
be in the 5th house, the sonlessness will be on account
orthe'murder of a Brahmin.
is arKillioi* ro.}uiinf$ in Urn quarter of the
BioKa.
Sloka 23.— Thus have been detailed ths several sins
accrued by one's actions in his many previous births
and now revealed in his present nativity which lead tochildlessness and to ward off which and to secure a son.
persons versed in the Astrological science have recommended (appropriate) particular Japas, gifts and such
other good actions prescribed for the several planets.
% gT W ’laf eflnr^: i
Sloka.—24 A holy bath in Rameswaram. engaging
oneself in reciting the accounts of a venerable and a
revered personage, worship of God Siva, observance of
vows with reference to (propitiate) 6k>d Vishnu, gifts,
ceremonies in honor of departed spirits, installation of
the serpent deity—these are the various modes recom*
mended by which one can attain progeny. .

SI. 25-28 8rT3r9rrs«n«r:
3fr% TT^ rr;r^J^^«rT:[rJr m ii
Sloka 25 .—^The birth of a son should be expected
during the Dasa or Apahara of any one of the 6 planets,
viz., (1) the lord of the Lagna, (2) the lord of the 7th,
(3) the lord of the 5th. (4) Jupiter; (5) the planet aspecting the 5th. house or (6) the one occupying the
5th house or when Jupiter in his orbit transits the
sign or the Navamsa Rasi occupied by the lord of the
5th house or the (Upagraha) Yamakantaka.
^•enrr sra-jn^r; ^i?nf?r ’sfVsrTaw
Shka 26 .—Find when the lord of Lagna comes dur¬
ing his transit (1) in conjunction with the lord of tho
5th house (2) to bis exaltation sign (3) to his own Rasi
(4) to the 5th house and (5) to the sign occupied by
the lord of the 5th house. During any one of these
transits the birth of a son is possible.
Sloka 27. Add the figures of the following three
planets:—(1) The lord of the Lagna (23 the lord of the
7th house and (33 the lord of the 5th house. During the
course of the Maha Dasa represented by the ruler of
the asterism and in the Apaharas of any one of the
following, viz., (1) the planet in the 5th house, (2) the
planet aspecting the 5th house and (3) the planet
owning the 5th house, the-SirtlT of'a son"* may be
predicted. - ■

m
Adh. XI f
<?j55^ftr<Rnn
Sloka 28. —Find which of the following is strong
(1) The lord of the 5th house (2) Jupiter, (3), (4), (5)
and (6) the lords respectively of the Basis and Navamsas occupied by (1) and (2). During the Dasa or Apahara of this strong planet, birth of a-son is possible.
SJoka 29.— Men will generally have the birth of a
son when Jupiter in the course of his orbit passes
through a Basi trine to the sign representing the Basi
or Amsa occupied by the planet owning the 5th house
reckoned from Jupiter. According to other treatiseson the subject, one ought to investigate indications of
progeny from the positions of planets at the birth time
of the native,
m 3ri% m ii^oii
Slokct 30.— Note the ruler of the asterism occupied
by the Moon as also that of the 5th from it. Add the
figures of these two planets. When Jupiter in his orbit
passes through the sign represented by this result or
through one of its triangular ones, the birth of a son is
possible.
Sloka 32.— The birth (of a child) may also take place
when the Sun in his orbit passes through, the third
sign reckoned from the Basi representing thd
(Nisheka) Lagna or transits a Basi triangular to the
(Adhana) Lagna.

m gvq-^^ts- %T«?rFr, i
®rmr!T5rw if^^5?^:>ar^5<ft sr’c: ^^rrei; ii^siii
Sloka 32 .— If a birth takes place in a Lagna which
js the 5th or the 9th from the Adhana Lagna, it should
be declared as through the effects of the native's good
actions done in previous births. If benefics should
occupy or aspect the Adhana Lagna, the person born
will be endowed with long life, wealth and happiness.
O:oka 33. —Find the exact gff^psrfsT (Dwadasamsa) of
the Moon at the time of the sntinsf' (Adhana) and the
Rasi to which it belongs. Count from (Mesha or from)
this sign as many Basis as the number represented by
the STt^^TT^r (Dwadasamsa) in question. When the
Moon is in the Rasi thus found in tiie month of
delivery, the birth of the child in the womb may be
expected.
srrw arf^5««nar;
Sloka 34. —One ought to predict effects by a con¬
sideration of (the positions of the several planets with
respect to) the Moon and the Lagna at the time of a
query, adoption of a son. investiture of sacred thread,
the gift of a girl, the first maturity, or the time of
impregnation, as he would if a birth had taken place at
the time.
Thus ends the 12th Adhyaya on "Issue or Children'^
in the work Phaladeepika composed by Mantreswara.

Adh. XllI
liJO
n II
^iTi^ scrfw % era’s i
<T^r: ?TJTrais »sT^ sr^nr#: \\\\\
ADHYAYA XIII.
..s’/oAa The first thing that ought to be done by
the elders when a son is born is the determining of the
1 onge vity or otherwise, and then only of the other
effects. If the nativity be found to possess also some
merits, they ought to be investigated with the help of
persons proficient in the science of Astrology.
Sloka 2. —As regards the correct determining of the
Lagna of birth, some opine that it is the time of ar ps nif
(Adhana) or impregnation; others say that it is the
time when the head (of the infant) emerges; some
others say that it is the time when the child (falls to)
touches the ground; while other experts in Astrology
hold that it is the time when the child gets itself com¬
pletely separated from the mother's womb.
^ ^5rw»: ii?ii
Shka 5—In the case of viviparous creatures, it is
not possible to determine the period of life within the
first twelve years. In consequence of the sinful acts of
the parents (whether in this or in a previous birth)/the
child meets with destruction being seized by demons
called '
5arg«l: i
^!5rr?g Ji^ii

Sloka 4.—li the child dies in the first four years, it
is because of the mother's sins. If in the middle four
years, it is owing to the accumulated sins of the father.
If it comes by its death in the last four years, it must
be due to its own sins (in a previous birth).
?n?Tt «n5r ii’'.ii
SJoka 5. In order to ward oH tVie evil effects enun
dated above, the father should arrange for the perform¬
ance of religious rites preceded by the incantations of
Mantras and offerings of oblations by the pouring o{
ghee into consecrated fire on every birthday of the
child till its 12th year; supplementing these with
suitable medical treatments and the like, the life of the
child must be promoted and the child protected.
srtioTT i
JT^nri^srifm^rr: 'jjiiJTiss 5r?rifcrJi^ ii^jt
Sloka 6.-*The first eight years in men's lives is the
period of (Balarishta) —ills that afflict children
Till the 20th year, they say, it is the (Yogarishta) period (evil brought on by planetary conjunc¬
tions). It is called (Alpayus) or short life when'
the period extends to 32. It is called
(Madhyamayus) or middle age when the period of life
extends to 70 years. It is (Purnayus) when the
period of life extends to 100 years.
Hvjh
Sloka 7.---A hundred years, are generally reckoned
as the period of life for human beings. The division of

i'^2 Adh* XIII
this period into three portions constitute respectively
the life period of a short-lived, middle-aged and longlived person and is recognised universally.
?Trrn»^n’^in35nftrT^5nTme ^ i
5^?rT^?f *r Rrsst ll<ill
Sioka 8. —If a birth occurs in any of the evil Yogas
(Dinamrityu), (Dinaroga) or
(Vishaghatikala), the child will die very soon. If there
be a birth when the Moon is in the asterisms
(Pushya), ^fgigT (Purvashadha), and f^T^f (Chitra), the
death of the father, the mother, the child or the maternal
uncle respectively should be predicted according as
the Moon is stationed in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd or 4th quartet
of any of these stars at the time. If a birth occurs when
the Moon is in (Moola) and if the Lagna should
also have no connection with any of the benefic
planets either by occupation or by aspect, the destruc¬
tion respectively of the father, the mother or of the
family itself should be expected according as the Moon
is in the 1st, 2nd or the 3rd quarter. But if the birth
«.be when the Moon is in the 4th quarter of Moola
there will be prosperity and wealth. In the case of
Aslesha the result will be reverse.
(Diiiami ityu) and (Dinaroga) are tln:s dermod in (Kalaprakasika)

SI. 9
Srr?5ftS«IT!Is
The first quart**i‘ .•! *<3r?5rjf (Dh-uiishfca) and (Hasta);
Mio second quarter "f* BiCTnsrr (Visakha) aud '=insff (Ardra . the
'ird quarter of ^^gr^riTrSrTTr (THtarahhadi-apada) iin^^r%'TT
(Asloslui); and the 41 h iua,rt«n- of (Bharaiii) and
(Moola) are termed (i>j‘i;‘j]u)‘ityu), and evil Yoga, p owerful
only if it occurs during day tinh\
The lirst ijuarte;- »;i STPW'TT (Aslcsha.) and ^^nvnST^f
(Uttarahhadrapacla); ihe second quarter of (Rharani) and
(Moola'^; the thir l (i‘.;;»/rter of (FttaraphaJguni)
and ^^nir (Sravana): ,5nd tlie fourth piartor of (S'.vatii) an I
(Mrigasiras) rue iuiown as frJTdir (Dinaroga), the evil
influence of which exists only if It occurs during day tiuw. Tho«o
two (t’i;s , Dinanirityu :tn I Din ii'.igii) are iiowovor devoid evil
if they occur during niglit.
>'■<11' (Visliiiyha.iika), soe Sfr. »Tt. V—112. p.
'TfqTO%?iTT%^f?sTjw% «5r?rt fwsrm
'sr m ^ iiMi
Sloka 9 .—If a birth- happens at the extreme end of
a Rasi which is (occupied by) associated with or aspected by a malefic planet, the child will surely meet with
its death at once. If the birth be at a (Gandantha
vide 1-4 supra), the father, the mother, or the child itself
' will die. Should however the child survive, he will
become a king. If born at the junction of any one of
the four corners identical with the conjunction of or
-aspect by a malefic, the death of the child will soon
happen. The same result will occur if the Moon £t
birth attains the fateful degree in any sign (vide next
«loka in/ra) and is at the same time posited in a Kend:.a
or the 8th house.

Adh. Xllf
^FST ^ f ^ I
^[rf«n5n: xrf^i iKoii
SJoka 10. —If the degrees attained by the Moon in
Mesha and the other signs be respectively 26, 12, 13,
death. (\''t(if also Sfi. gi. p. 38).
TW ^srV ^ 5%5T »Trg»fr5r 3rr?rr sr%!T i
55 ft fjT^r ^cfwrm: su^w 5n?ft *Tmi: iiUii
Sloka II .—The following are (also) respectively
deemed (by some others) as Wc!!r«T(»TT! (Mrityubhagas
or fateful degrees) in the several signs from Mesha on¬
#?rvTt^ 1
HrgJr ?r3*r?r!X^^»nf^ T:?arr?tiift5rWW' ^ gwiirm: err ii?.^it
.?/ol-o 12 .—One may predict the death of the child
to occur very soon in the following case : x'lu, (1) when
malefics occupy (by themselves) the 8th and the
Kendra houses, (2) when malefics are all placed in the
1st and the 8th houses (3) when they occupy the 1st
and the 7th, (4) when the Moon or the Lagna is betwixt
two malefics, (5) if the Moon being devoid of strength
occupy the 6th, the 8th or the 12th, (6) if the waning
Moon in conjunction with a malefic, is in the 1st, 5th,
7th, or 9th house (7) if the malefics be in the 8th and
7th and (8) when no benefic planets occupy or aspect
a Kendra house.
g !^%irftt%«r 1TTr?TW rr*=1TT^€mtTTl^«T: I

f^€r^?rir!crr ^Ft
sr^%refTlW*T^: %5ft: II? ^11
Slok.i 13 . .When the lorri of the Lagna or of the siga
occupied by the Moon at birth is weak and badly
placed (/. e., in the 6th, 8th or 12th house), the
child will die within as many years as are represented
by the said sign (when counted from Mesha). If the
planet owning the Lagna-decanate or the decanate
occupied by the Moon be weak and badly placed, the
period of exit of the child will be as many months as
are represented by the sign owning the decanate in
question. The period of life will be so many days from
birth as are signified by the Rasi owning the Navamsa
Lagna or Chandra Navamsa when the planet owning
this is weak and similarly badly-placed. After a care¬
ful examination as to which among the two or three
possibilities predominates and what malefics are posiled in the 5th and the 8th houses, one ought to divirx«i»
about the ills of the child.
Sloka 24.—Consider the iollowing 3 pairs * (A) the
•decanate Basis of the Lagna and the Moon; (B) the
liMgua drekkana Rasi
3W5r«T9rT?r
Lagnesa Navamsa R;i«i
*A
t[/handra dmlckana Ba.si
tlfw
Ohalivi iwa Navamsa Ra^i

136 Adh. Xllf
5W5r5iT5Tt5r Trftr
Lagiiesa Dwadasaiitsib
(^liaiidrosa Dwadasamsa
Baai
Uiisi
(CliiU'a)
q-?: (Oiiara)
(Dirgliii)
qX (Cliara)
fitn: (Stthira)
VSff (Madhya)
^ (Cliara)
3?fnT (l-'hiiaya)
STvg (Alpi)
(Stthira)
31iT«T (I'Miaya)
(Dirgha)
(Stthira)
?S|T (Ohara)
JTEin (Madhya)
(Stthira)
fifOT (Stthira)
«T5g (Ali«i)
(Uhhaya)
(Stthira)
^ (Dirgha)
3^?^ (n>hiiya)
(Ohir.yu)
rpstr (Madhya)
3VnT (rhliiiya)
(Ch-ua)
3T5<T (AIjhx)
Navamsa Basis of the lord of the Lagna and the lord of
the sign occupied by the Moon and (C) the Dwadasamsa
Basis of the lord of the Lagna and of the lord of the 8th
house. The life of the child may be pronounced as
(Deergha), rpar (Madhya) and 3T5 <t (Alpa) according as
{a} when one of the Basis in the said 3 pairs is a ^
(Chara; sign the other is a ^ (Charal, ftssp: (Stthira) and
(Ubhaya) sign, (b) when one of the Basis is a f^«nc
(Stthira) sign, the other is a jfsgc (Dwandwa), ^ (Chara)
and (Stthira) sign and (c) when one of the Basis isa (Dwandwa) sign the other is in a (Stthira
7^ (Dwandwa) and (Charaj sign respectively.
5r?rrdhr^: iKin5i:?rin5«n^
?7Hsrhr«r*n«rt!rT •irarjj i
Ill'll)

Shka IS .—The life of the native may be pronounced
as long, medium and short according as the benefics
and the lord of the Lagna are all posited in Kendra,
Panaphara and Apoklima houses respectively. If the
lord of the 8th house and the malefics occupy similar
positions, the reverse should be predicted. Ascertain
the friendship or otherwise of the following pairs; (1)
the lord of the house occupied by the Moon and that
of the 8th house from the Moon (2) lord of the Lagna
and that of the 8th house from the Lagna and (3) the
Sun and the lord of the Lagna. If they are friendly,
the native will be long-lived; if inimical, he will be
short-lived; if neutral, he will have medium life.
Shka 16 .—If the lord of the Lagna Rasi and the lord
of the Lagna Navamsa be stronger ] than the lords
of the 8th house reckoned from each, the native
will be long-lived. The same remark holds good with
respect to the lord of the Rasi occupied by the Moon or
the lord of the Moon's Navamsa. If otherwise, the
reverse will be the result.
iranngSloka 17.—li the lord of the 8th house possessing
greater strength than that of; the,-lord of the Lagna
occupy a Kendra, and if malefics be posited in the 8th
and 12th bouses, the life of the native will be short, or
he maybe of mediumlliie, or even prolong his life to
the full period with the vicissitudes of happiness and
misery.

Adh. xili
irw^nrSi ^^
«rgr^ 5 et% i
3% wJTftr 51^?^ firfersi na
Sloka 18. —In the case of an 3T5’^5’^^*^ (Alpayuryoga), the person meets with his death when Saturn
during his transit reaches in his first cycle the parti¬
cular portion of the zodiac signified by the sum-total
of the figures (representing the position at nativity) of
Saturn, Jupiter, the Sun and the Moon. If the native
is found to be of medium life, the event will come off
in the 2nd cycle. It will happen in the 3rd, if the native
is pronounced to be a long lived one. A clever
astrologer will predict the event after also satisfying
that the Dasa and Bhukti at the time is untoward.
5J?r5ft ?:Brc?r^fejfn5rft:2’Tt
?T5fr m
!Tsrf5nV^n»nf«is%^«FT5r?n3rftf
Sloka 19. —If the lord of the Lagna be associated
with a malefic and be eclipsed by the Sun's rays or be
in depression or an inimical sign, the demise of the
native will have to be predicted, when the same lord in
his transit happens to occupy one of the Dusstthanas
(6th, 8th or 12th) or the Lagna or be somehow connect¬
ed with it. The same event may also be predicted
from the Navamsa Lagna, the decanate Lagna or the
Lagna Rasi occupied by the Moon.

Sloka 20. —^If the following three planets, viz., the
Moon, the lord of the sign occupied by the same and
the lord of the Lagna be all well-placed by being
associated with or aspected by good planets and pos¬
sess many points of strength, that time must be
declared as very auspicious and favourable to the
native concerned.
Sloka 21. —The lord of the rising sign being possess¬
ed of great strength and unaspecled by malefic planets
but aspected by benefic ones and occupying a Kendra
position, wards off death and secures to the child long¬
life graced with numerous virtues and an illustrious
or powerful sovereignty.
art =g'srvi>: srorm: irrii
Sloka 22.-U Jupiter, the minister of the Gods, endow¬
ed with all surpassing strength and glittering with his
full collection of rays, is posited in the Lagna, he can
singly ward off many of the evils which would other¬
wise be difficult tcTbe got over, just as a humble saluta¬
tion placed with all sincerity before the lord Vishnu.
: IR^II
Sloka 23.—The waxing Moon if posited in a Trikona,

Adh. XIV
the 11th house or a Kendra position with respect to the
Lagna and at the same time in a sign or Navamsa
belonging to the Sun, Moon or Jupiter, will conduce
to the performance of meritorious deeds every day*
And ward off completely all ills.
^ IR«II
Sloka 24.~li, in a nativity, there be no malefics in
the 1st, 4th, 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th houses, and if
the lord of the Lagna and Jupiter occupy Kendra post*
tions, the person concerned will perform many good
acts, enjoy all kinds of comforts, and live for a hundred
years free from disease.
Sloka P5.~Through the Dasas enunciated by Sripati,
through Ashtakavarga, through Kalachakra Dasa and
through the Ududasa system, a wise man ought to
predict the Ayus of the native by the application of
suitable rules after a correct calculation of the several
planetary positions, careful working, and a minute
scrutiny.
Thus ends the 12th Adhyaya on "the Length of Life"
in the work Phaladeepika composed by Mantreswara.

ADHYAYA XIV.
f^rfm»rfv ^tmTT5rf^«r^!S•%w^ 5«nT^r^5^%; i
r^g
Sloka 1. —Anything about diseases ought to be
divined through (1) the planets posited in the 6th house
(2) those posited in the 8th and 12th houses (3) the
planet owning the 6th house or (4) those in conjunc¬
tion with that planet. The particular disease may be
predicted if the same happens to be signified by two,
three or more independent Yogas.
sqrefiRwfk i
Sloka 2 .—High fever dominatefl by viliated bile,
burning of the whole body, epilepsy, heart-disease,
eye-trouble, danger from enemies, skin-disease, lucaria
(arf^«reT%-Astthisruti), danger from wood, fire, weapon,
and poison, trouble to one's wife, children and
fear of quadruped, thief, the sovereign, the God Yama,
serpent and God Siva,—all these may be caused by
the Sun.
ii^ii
Shka 3 .—Excessive sleep. Laziness, phlegmatic
affection, (^qf;^4r ~ Kapharoga), diarrhoea, carbuncle,

142 AdH. XIV
malarial-fever (typhoid) danger from horned and water
animals, indigestion srflriTT^^ - Agnimandya\ tasteless¬
ness (9iP5%-Aruchi - Anorexia), trouble from or to
women, jaundice, mental aberration, impurity of blood,
danger from water, Balagrahas, Goddess Ourga, Kinnaras, God Yama, serpents and from female Yaksha may
be expected through the Moon.
Sloka 4 .—The disease and untoward events origi¬
nated by Mars are : excessive thirst, morbid irritation
of blood bilious fever, danger from fire, poison,
weapons, leprosy, eye-diseases, appendictis, epilepsy,
injury to the marrow, roughness of the body, psoriasis
(giir - Pama), bodily deformities, trouble from the
sovereign, enemies and thieves, fighting with brothers,
sons, and foes, frieiftls fear from evil spirits, Gandharvas, and frightful demons and diseases affecting the
upper limbs of the body (such as lungs, throat, teeth,
tongue, ear, nose, etc.).
(Pamika) is synonymous with
(V icharchika* Ps oriasis).
5#^ ^*mm*T555noftf<!rct»r v«rt
?ft
Sloka 5.-Mercury brings on mental disease, trouble
to the vocal organs, eye-disease, diseases of throat
and nose^ fever, diseases arising from the three

SI. 6-7 ^gWtswrnr:
humours sn?T (Vata), (Pittha) and ^ (Kapha),
poison, skin diseases, anaemia, bad dreams, itches and
scab (Psoriasis^ falling into the fire, roughness or dry¬
ness of the body imprisonment and exhaustion, and
harm from evil demons moving in the abodes of
Gandharvas, and in fiery pits (where these evil spirits
usually dwell) [or Gandharvas, the Earth, mansions
and horses, etc., as well as evil spirits.]
sftsTs ii^^ii
Sloka 6.—Appendicitis (intestinal disorders), fever
arising out of disorder in the entrails, diseases arising
from sorrow, fainting or swoon, and phlegmatic dis¬
order ear trouble, giddiness, trouble in connection with
temple matters, torture for knocking off hoarded wealth,
harm resulting from the curses of Brahmins and Gods,
diseases engendered by Kinnaras, Yakshas, Gods,
serpents, and Vidyadharas, etc., (class of demi-gods)
and troubles arising from serious offences done to
wise men and elders, all these are indicated by
Jupiter.
gnr^isji»T^fsr^;nriT5?rpTcST^Km?«5!:
SJoka 7. —Venus signifies the following: anaemia,
diseases caused by the irritation of phlegmatic and
windy humours, trouble to the eyes, urinary diseases,
diseases in the generative organ, strangury, trouble in

I4i Adh. XIV
cohabitation, exudation of semen, loss (fading away)
of bodily splendour as a result of intercourse with
courtezans, rickets, fear from witches, female ghosts
and female deities and break of friendship with a dear
friend.
Sloka S.— Saturn brings on diseases caused by wind
and phlegm, paralysis of the leg, misfortune, weariness,
mental aberration belly-ache, internal or heart pain
heat, desertion of servants, injury to the ribs, danger to
wife and children, injury to some limb, menial anguish,
would as a result of a blow from a piece of wood or
stone and trouble or harm from (foul) ignominious
goblins and the like.
¥rTfH^*Tf¥S?llT^ Bt'T
qrr?n^ ^ fq-^n^TTsnnT^f «TnncT¥3rrT?r*^. i
w ^ ^ 5%^ ^wmsft^snrw i IM i
Sloka 9. —Rahu causes palpitation of the heart,
leprosy, aberration of mind,- danger from artificial
poisoning, pain in the legs, trouble from goblins and
serpents and ills to wife and children. Ketu indicates
trouble through dispute with Brahmins and Kshatriyas,
or from enemies. Mandi (Gulika) causes fear from (see¬
ing) corpses, poison, bodily pain and impurity (arising
from the demise of one's near relations).
¥S?^IT#tqFr W 5«W«rJ 11 ioH

si. ii 145
Sloka W.-^ll the 12th and the 2nd houses be occu¬
pied by the Moon and the Sun, being conjoined with
or aspected by Saturn and Mars, the person born will
suffer from eye-disease. The 3rd and the 11th houses
and Jupiter if associated with or aspected by Saturn
and Mars will cause ear-disease to the native. Mars
(a malefic) in the 5th house in conjunction with the
lord of the 6th or the 8th house will make the native
suffer from belly-ache. Similarly the lords of the 8th
and the 6th houses if posited in the 7th and the 8th
along with malefics will bring about rectal disease.
Venus under the above conditions will make the per¬
son born suffer from a disease in the private parts
(venereal disease.)
^ anrf
Sloka 11. —If the 6th or the 8th house be occupied
by the Sun, there would be fear of fever; if by Mars
or Ketu, the danger will be from ulcer; if by Venus, it
will be through a disease in the private parts. If
Jupiter should occupy the 6th or the 8th house, the
native will be seized with consumption. If Saturn be
in such a position, the native will suffer from nervous
diseases. If Rahu aspected by Mars be in the 6th or
the 8th, the person concerned will suffer from carbun¬
cle. If Saturn in conjunction with the Moon occupy
any of the above two houses, the native will suffer
from the enlargement of spleen. If the waning Moon
occupy any of the above houses identical with watery
signs, in conjunction with a malefic, the person will
suffer from a watery disease or consumption.
Note:—all these oases great care should be used in making
prediotions. Oomsioa souse and osporieuco are to bo used as guides.

A«Jh. xiV
T5Tar^^53n«r9rr ^tr%mH^af4^ ^
^w^JT J5ncBrw*nTf?r5n ^ iil^iii
SJoka 12. -I now proceed to explain the manner in
which a person meets with his death, and the cause of
the same. If there are planets occupying or aspecting
th? 8th house, death is caused through diseases
pertaining to the strongest of them; or (if there be no
planets occupying or aspecting the 8th house) through
diseases declared for that house or lor the house in
which the lord of the 8th is placed; and (where the
foregoing tests do not apply) it may be predicted with
certainty that death will be caused either by the lord
of the 8th house or by the lord of the 22nd decanate
(counted from the Lagna decanate).
?r5r iiUil
Sioka J3.— When the 8th house is occupied by a
planet or aspected by one, death should be declared to
be caused by diseases pertaining to that planet. When
there are no planets occupying or aspecting the 8th
house, death is caused through diseases declared as
arising from the nature (or characteristics) of the Rasi
representing the 8th house.
^5581 ^ trrfir: »^«ii
S/oAj The Sun causes death through fire, high
fever, bile or weapon. The Moon brings on death
through cholera, watery diseases (such as

Jalodara-asc^tis) or pulmonary disease in general. The
troubles caused by Mars for bringing about death are
(accidental) fire, the employment of magical spells,
witchcraft and weapons. The agency used
by Mercury for the same purpose is anaemia, blood*
lessness and similar diseases and giddiness. Jupiter
will bring about death without much trouble or through
phlegm, while Venus will do it through venereal
complaints or similar ones caused by association with
women. Saturn will bring it about by wind.disease
or a dangerous fever like typhoid.
5rTTnrf
SJoka J5.—Rahu will bring about death by leprosy,
by eating food mixed with poison, by venomous bites,
or by small-pox and the like. Ketu will cause unnatu¬
ral deaths such as suicide, or assassination as a result
of the hatred of enemies or through worms etc.
. 5yoita i6.-r~One ought to predict death through the
bad (detrimental) effect arising from- the 8th house
reckoned from the Lagna or through the evil effect of
the Rasi representing 'the Navamsa occupied by the
lord of the 8th house.
Sloka 17.—li Mesha should happen to be such a
Rasi (see previous Sloka), death will be due to bilious
fever, heat, and liver or gastric disease. If it be Vrishabha, ^bath will be due to vitiation ot derangen^ent of

148 Adb.XlV
the three humours of the body, through fire, or
weapon; if Mithuna, by catarrah, asthma, or sharp pain
such as colic; if Karkataka, by insanity windy'disease
or loss of appetite anorexia).
ftnrf ftwr jjiresrr i
g5yr^ al^i(^qiM|irt qft^ gi f gP r \\K<\\
Sloka 18.—li Simha be the Rasi under consideration,
death should be declared to be due to wild beasts,
fever, boils, or enemies; if Kanya, it will be through
women, venereal disease, or by a fall (from a height);
if Tula, by brain fever and typhoid; and if Vrischika,
by disease of the spleen, jaundice, and sprue.
Sloka 19 .—If Dhanus be the Rasi under reference,
death will be due to a tree, water, wood or weapon. If
the Rasi be Makara, death will be by stomach-ache,
want of appetite or aberration of mind, etc.. If
Kumbha, it will be by cough, fever and consumption;
lastly, if Meena be the Rasi concerned, death will be
by drowning or by some watery diseases such as
ascitis (sr^^^-Jalodara).
5i9n!r^wnfn33nrift¥i i
^hirsnTt; irob
Sloka 30.—When the 8th house happens to be own¬
ed by a malefic planet (and is also malefic) and be
occupied also by a malefic, or a malefic asterism be
there, death will be due to weapon, fire, tiger or snake.
If two malefics being in Kendras aspect each other, the
native will meet with his death through the displeasure
of his sovereign or through a weapon, jioison ot'by fire.

3%5nn?f TtK^ sronrf s^r# ;r?rT {r\\\
Sloka 2 /.— If at a person's birth, the 12th house or
its lord be in a house or Navamsa owned by a benefic
or be associated with a benefic, his death will be a
happy one being free from any anguish or suffering. If
otherwise, it will be painful.
Sloka 22.—If the lord of the 12th house occupy his
exaltation, a friendly house or a Varga of a benefic
planet or be associated with a benefic planet, the (life
of the) person concerned will be going upwards to
heaven. If it be otherwise, he will be going to perdi¬
tion or hell. Some interpret this as a result of the
the nature of the Rasi (of the 12th house); J.e., heaven
if a (Sirshodaya) one and hell if a
(Prishtodaya) one.
5r%3ft wjt 3^: i
Sloka 23.-*The refuge of the departed is signfied by
the planet associated with the lord of the 12th, by one
posited in the 12th house or by the one occupying the
Navamsa of the 12th Bhava. If the Sun and the Moon
be such planets, the future world indicated is Kailasa;
if the planet in question be Venus, it is Swarga (Heav¬
en, or Indra's Paradise); if Mars be such planet, it is
the Earth; if it be Mercury, the native goes to
Veikuntba ; if Seturn, the future abode will be Yama's

150 Adh. XIV
woxld; if it be Jupiter, the native goes to Bxahmaloka;
if it be Rahu, he goes to other islands; and if it be
Ketu, the native's next abode will be Hell.
rrf^wi«r!T«r \
Sloka 24—It is the lord of the 9th house that gives
all about the native's past birth, while all information
about his future birth is revealed by the planet owning
the 5th. The particular caste, the country and the quar*
ter or direction of the individual in his past and future
births should be guessed from the two respective
plane,^ referred to above.
Sloka 25.—li the planets referred to above be in
their exaltation, the particular world indicated should
be declared to be the one occupied by the Gods. If they
occupy depression or inimical houses, it indicates
foreign islands. If the planets be in their own, friend's
or neutral's houses, then the abode in question should
be guessed as India alone.
arwm yRTsm; i
Shka 26.— The country pertaining to Jupiter is
Aryavarta (name of the tract extending from the Eastern
to the Western ocean and bounded on the North and
South by the Himalaya and Vindhya respectively).
Venus and the Moon indicate tracts watered by the
sacred rivers. Mercury represents all sacred places.
Saturn signifies prohibited tracts like those oggispied

by foreigners, while the Sun indicates mountain and
forest regions, and Mars, the country of Behar.
g- ?tfw: i
fi^r?wn^3Fjr iiju^ii
Sloka 27 .— If the planets (referred to in sloka 24
Supra i.e., lords of the 9th and 5th) occupy a fixed Rasi
or Amsa identical with a Prishtodaya and an
(Adhomukha) Rasi (vide I-~-8 supra) along with malefics,
the past and the future births of the native should be
declared as trees, plants and the like. If otherwise, /. e.,
if the lords of the 9th and 5th houses occupy a Sirshodaya and an (Urdhvamukha) Rasi identical
with a ^ (Chara) or moveable Rasi or Amsa with
benefics, the birth should be of an animal kind.
Sloka 28.—li the lord of the 9th or the 5th house
occupy exaltation, or Swakshetra or the house of a
friend of the lord of the Lagna, then it should be
declared that the native's previous or the future
birth (as the case may be) must be that of a
human being. If the Rasi occupied be that of
a neutral (^m-Sama) to the lord of the Lagna, the
birth concerned will be that of a beast. It will be that
of a bird, if the Rasi be that of an inimical or depression
one. All these may also be declared with reference to
the appearance of the decanates occupied by the pla.
nets owning the 9th or the 5th.
iTiR ^ i
^RT
wn wg^s«iwrj

152 Adh. XV
Sloka 29.—If the said two planets be together in one
house, the native should have had his birth in his own
place. If they be of equal strength, the births (past and
future) will be in the same caste. The colour and quali¬
ty will also be similar to those belonging to the lords
of the 9th and the 5th houses. Predictions regarding
all the rest, should be similarly made by a reference to
what has been stated in the (Samgnadhyaya
Thus ends the 14th Adhyaya on "Diseases, Death,
Past and Future Births" in the work Phaladeepika
composed by Mantreswara.
m g*rlrmu
ADHYAYA XV.
Sloka 1. —All Bhavas will produce completely their
good results if they are occupied or aspected by
benefics or their own lords, or planets owning benefic Bhavas and are free from association or aspect
of malefics. The same will be the result in the case of
malefics if they happen to be the owners of the Bhavas
concerned. This good effect will be ensured in the
case of all the planets when they are not occupying
depression signs, when they are not eclipsed and when
they are not posited in inimical signs.

vn^rwf : ^^^g«rf»6:iT5'q’«n %csrqrT5r
^r^arwf^ cr«n iRii
Sloka 2.—Astrologers pronounce the strength of a
Bhava such as the Lagna to be ample and the Bhava
thoroughly beneficent, when a Trikona, the 2nd, the
4th, the 7th and the 10th places therefrom are occupied
by auspicious planets or the (the lord of the Bhava)
and are unoccupied and unaspected by malefic planetsA Bhava suffers decay when the positions referred to
above are differently occupied and aspected. The
effect of a Bhava will be mixed when positions noted
above are occupied or aspected by benefic and malefic
planets promiscuously.
STf^TOTW^Tcft «I?rraTt
i%«?r5Tif
S/o’fj 3 .—Of tha Ligaa and other Bhavas examined
in succession, whichever Bhava has its lord occupying
the 8th place or obscured by the solar rays or in depres¬
sion or in an inimical house while no benefic planets
aspect or are associated with it, the result is the total
destruction of such a Bhava. The bhava will be incap¬
able of producing any good effect even if a benefic
other than its lord similarly circumstanced occupy the
Bhava; if a malefic should be in that position, the total
destruction of the Bhava would be the result.
Sloka 4 .—Malffics posited in the 6th, 8th and 12th
places counted from the Lagna or other Bhava under

•KS^WW^IT
Adh. XV
consideration cause the destruction of the said Bhava.
Benefics in such a position are not capable of producing
good effects for the Bhava. So say the astrologers with
respect to the several Bhavas.
5:WT5r«Tt «IT I
««raf»cr ii'^ii
Sloka 5 .—When a Bhava has its lord in the 6th, the
8th or the 12th, or is occupied by the lord of any of
these three, it su:'fer3 annihilation, say those that know
the properties of a Bhava. If such a Bhava be aspected
by a benefic planet, it will be in a flourishing condition.
SJoka 6.—A Bhava suffer annihilation when the
Bhava itself, its lord and its Karaka are devoid of
.strength and are hemmed in betwixt malefics, or are
associated with or aspected by malefic or inimical
planets and not by others; or if the 4th, the 8th and
the 12th houses or the 5th and the 9th houses from
them be occupied by malefics. This will be edl the
more clear and evident when any two or are three of
the conditions specified above synchronise.
»rt?rt^OT«m*ir i^3rT5Twf wsrsn^rar^r: i
Tnn Brirs^r^nn: gwr?
sflwiwr; 3015 yragr faf^swrr: iivjii
Sloka 7.~In the case of any Bhava, the following
planets 9 a,use the destruction of the Bhava during their

’T35T5TTS«ntr:
Dasa periods: (1) the lord of the 8th house reckoned
from the Bhava (fi) the lord of the 22nd Drekkana
counted from the bhava, (3, 4 and 5) planets posited
in the 6th. the 8th and the 7th houses counted from
the- Bhava, if they are waak. Malefics occupying
the 3rd, the 6th and the 11th houses and benefics
in houses which happen to ba Kendra and Trikona ones'
all reckoned from the concerned Ehiva, as also the
planets which are friendly to the planet owning the
Bhava, are declared to bring success to the bhava
(during their respective Dasas) if they are possessed of
strength.
^ «n5riST*fref?«irr:
mr5ft.%rr?T3?ft m^^rrafidicn
Sloka 8.—The lords of the 3rd house from the Lagna
as well as the Moon, the planet occupying, as well as
the one aspecting the 8th house, Saturn, the lord of the
22nd decanate, the planet owning the sign occupied
by Mandi, the planets owning the Basis and Amseis
occupied by the several aforesaid planets, Rahu when
weak by being posited in untoward houses (the 6tl.*
the 8th or the 12th) or in conjunction with or aspected
by malefics; each one of these-'is declared as causing
the destruction of the Bhava in its respective Dasaperiod.
#rT5tRn srfsTm n^ii
Sloka 9.—Whighever Bhava is occupied by the losd

ci the Lagna, the prosperity or well-being of that fihava
is assured. Note the houses owned by the planet asso¬
ciated with or aspecting the lord of the Lagna. It is
only the effects of these Bhavas that will be pushed on
by the lord of the Lagna. If the lord of a Bhava occupy
e (Dusstthana—6th, 8th or 12th) the effect will
be reverse; i. e, if the planet be weak, the effect will
be immensely harmful • if strong, the injury will be
slight.
rrstV; sTnr5?nTw?5r ?r i
cTrsnift nV4!
ShkalO.—The lord of the Lagna though malefic
will only promote the growth of the Bhava it occupies.
If he should also happen to own a.p.y of the (Dusstthanas6th, 8th, 12th}, the effect of his ownership of
the Lagna alone will predominate and not that of the
other .one. For example, if Mars owning the Lagna,
T occupy Simha or Meena identical with the 5th house
. and be aspected by a benefic, astrologers declare that
1 the person concerned will beget sons very soon.
trasTif Rfwf
Slokc ll.—ln the case of a planet owning two houses,
that house which happens to be the Moolatrikona one
will predominate and its effects alone will be felt in
full while the effects of his own house will be half. The
effects of both the Bhavas will come to pass in the Dasa
“' of the planet, the first half of the Dasa-period being

monpppli^ed by the effects of the BHava that comes
first in order. This is the opinion of some. There are
others who hold that a planet posited in an odd house
will have the effect of that house felt first while the one
that occupies an even house will have its effect in the
first half of the Dasa.
m m gi i
«rfrr«TT%
Shka 12 .—The destruction cf each of the Bhavas
from the Lagna onwards should be predicted by the
astrologer to a querist during the Dasa-periods of planets
which are very inimical to tho planet owning the parti¬
cular Bhava, or which occupy houses where there ate
no benefic dots in their Ashtakavargas.
Slloka 13 .—A planet may be in his exaltation or may
occupy a friendly house and may be endowed with the
6 kinds of strength. Notwithstanding all this, if he
should happen to be in a Bhavasandhi, he becomes
ineffective. This should first be noted before predicting*
the effects of the Dasas and Bhuktis of planets.
^ jnf^cT ^ h
Shka 14 .—In the several Bhavas, the planets that
occupy the exact degrees, etc., signified by any parti¬
cular Bhava produce the full effect of that Bhava. When
a planet is in a Bhavasandhi, it produces no effect. In
the case of planets occupying intermediate positions,
tho effect must be ascertained by a rule-of-three
pxocese.

Adh. XV
q?ifym fi > gg> T raP>^3 t 51% ftw
%^*Tsr?nT3rsrjft^T^?575sif^: i
5r?w 5t»T}iarTfin5f^3?rfrftf«in?i3;n
%rr5s^& %j K mg g;^agsCT^g^^; ill'll!
Sloka 25.—A person ought to divine about his own
self, father, influence, health, vigour and fortune from
the Sun. It is the Moon that determines the character
of one's heart, understanding, royal favour, mother and
affluence. It is through Mars that a person cau
ascertain his own courage, disease, characteristic
qualities, ypunger brothers, lands, foes and blood-
(paternal) relations. It is Mercury that influenoes one's
learning, relatives in general, discrimination, maternal
uncle, friends, speech and action.
g wrmw?
Sloka 26 .— One ought to conjecture about one's
own genius, wealth, physical development, sons and
knowledge by referring to Jupiter. Information regard¬
ing one's wife, vehicles, ornaments, love affairs and
pleasures is to be sought through Venus. It is Saturn
that settles a person's period of life, livelihood, the
cause of death, his adversity and his servants. One
ought to guess about one's paternal grand-father
through Rahu, and about the maternal grand-father
through Ketu. ,

Sloka 17 .—The Karakas of the Bhavas beginning
with the Lagna or the rising sign are (1) the Sun (2)
Jupiter (3) Mars (4) the Moon and Mercury (5) Jupiter
(6) Saturn and Mars (7) Venus (8) Saturn (9) the Sun
and Jupiter (10) Jupiter, the Sun, Mercury and Saturn
(11) Jupiter and (12) Saturn.
ohka /e5.—The fullness or otherwise of the effects
of planets occupying the 12 houses, viz., Lagna,
2nd, 3rd, e.'c., must be judged by a consideration of the
exact nature of the sign occupied by the planet, y.e-,
whether it is a friendly or an inimical sign or the
house of a neutral planet, or whether the planet in
question is occupying his own, or his exaltation Rasi.
Satyacharya, however, says that benefics posited in
any house generally promote the advancement or
prosperity of that house while malefics in any house
work. only its decay. This is reversed in the case of
the 6th. the 8th and the 12th houses.
^ 1^4 % ?rw«35wif^TiT^f«jf;^sron5T; itlMi
Sloka 29.—Malefics posited in the 6th, the 8th and
the 12th houses promote the evil effects of the Bhavas,
while benefics in the same houses cause the destruc*
tion of the said< Bhavas. Hence the destruction of the
evil effects arising out of these three houses, should be
declared
Notes:—The author opines that the general principal to bu
observed is that benefics in good houses promote their good effects

Adh. XV
and in inauspicious houses spoil their evil effects, while malefics
in ijood houses spoil thorn and in had houses create untold
sufferings.
^ cf sr«B5«r i
cr^trvpnf^ifir ii-.oit
SJoka 20.~Whenever the effects of any Bhava are
to be determined in the case of a nativity, that Bhava
should be considered as the Lagna and the effects of the
12 houses reckoned (herefrom such as 1st (form), 2nd
(wealth), etc., should be examined and declared.
ff JTigaj I
Siaka 22.-—In the same way should the effects of the
father, the mother, the brother, the maternal uncle, the
son, the husband and the servant be determined by
treating the signs occupied.by their respective Karakas,
viz., the Sun, the Moon, and other planets, in the
nativity as the Lagna (Ascandant).
^^r€?l?r?TT^JTT.^^'T f3 ^TfI
jrgc.m sr^q- 3or 3 ftqrifT'flrmi:
Sloka 22,—Find the house occupied by the Sun. Il
is from this that one ought to conjecture all about the
appearance of the father of the person concerned. The
father's prospority and renown should be divined from
the 2nd house counted from that occupied by the Sun.
His brothers, character, etc., must be ascertained from
the 3rd house reckoned from the Sun. All about his
father's mother, father's happiness, etc., should be
sought for from the 4th house (from the Sun).
wff RT Rw g g:# ir^ii
Sloka 23. —The father's intelligence and tranquillity

of mind should be deduced from the 5th house (from
the Sun); his sufferings, injury, enemies and disease
should be guessed from the 6th house; his love and
passion from the 7th house, his misery, death and his
longevity should be determined from the 8th house
(from the Sun).
5«f g«T 5TfcT?rt i
Shka 24, —All aboiit the iathet's religious merit,
auspicious works and his father should be sought for
from the 9th house (from the Sun;; his occupation from
the 10th house; his gains or income irom tho llth
and his expen^ture or loss from tho 12th house (from
the Sun). The effects of the 12 Bhavas counted from
the Moon, Mars, etc, (for the mother, brother oic }
should be similarly deduced.
jtFIits!: »Tf% i;'-*’ii
Sloka 25 —All details about the mother, brother,
father, son, etc,, of a Bhava should thus be divined bv
a reference to the particular Bhava and its Karaka
When any Bhava, its lord and its Karaka are all
strong, one ought to predict good effects (happiness)
for that Bhava.
mvt: %5riT?^i i
S!oka 26. —But dthers say that the Sun in the 9th,
the Moon in the 4th, Mars in the 3rd, Jupiter in tlse
5th Venus in the 7th and Saturn in the 8th, will cause
distress to the Bhavas concerned.

Adh. XV
^ «n%JT iR^ii
Sloka 27 .—The lord of the Lagna produces the
effects pertaining to the Bhava with whose lord he is
conjoined, or the one occupied by him. If the Bhava
or its lord be strong, good will result from that Bhava;
if weak, one has to expect only untoward things.
g^riprft 55?rTgw w i
f^swufwntf ^
SJoKo -Whatever Bhavas con!&in a number oi
benefic dots in the Ashtakavarga of the lord of the
Lagna, the effects derived from these houses will be
happy if the respective owners thereof are strong and
are associated with the lord of the Lagna. Wherever
there axe a less number of such dots, the lord of the
Lagna causes adverse effects if he be associated with
the owners of these houses and if they are also weak.
In the same way should all the Bhavas be judged.^
git
w snw sr-'Aw
Sl'jka 29 .—If the lord of a (Dussthana) ihould
occupy another house of his own, be will produce (in
his Dasa) the effects of only that house occupied by
him as (Swakshetra) and not the effects due to
the (Dussthana). For example, if Saturn should
occupy Makara idantical with the 5th Bhava, there will

be the acquisition of sons, and the untoward effects
due as owner of the 6th house will not happen.
wr fftrr: ii?oii
rflt
3rr g r g< T>ggT?:^3;5nrf?%?gT snn: ii
Sloka 30. —When two planets mutually occupy each
the other's sign; when two planets are together in one
and the same house ; when two planets are mutually
aspecting each other; when two planets are occupying
mutually Kendra positions, i. e., when they are 90''
apart; when two planets are so situated that one is in
Trikona position to the other, /. e., when they are trine
or 120 ’ apart; the above are the 5 kinds of connections
recognised between the said two planets.
Thus ends the 15th Adhyaya on the "Method of
studying the effects of the Bhavas" in the work
Phaladeepika, composed by Mantreswara.
ADHYAYA XVI.
Sloka L*~The native will correspond in mein to the
lord of the rising Navamsa, or his appearance will be
like that of the planet that has the greatest strength.
His hue will be like that of the lord of the Navamsa
occupied by the Moon. His body and limbs will be
commeosuirate in their proportions with the rising sign

Adh. XVI
1 n i
and other Basis which aie described as forming the
head and other portions of (Kalapursha).
f^vT;r«rgsr^ i
tytfjftsnssc ^s-^T^rvnrV vrim^: ^r?f irii
S!oka 2.—If the lord of the Lagna occupy a Kendra
or a Kona with clear rays (uneclipsed) in exaltation or
Swakshetra, when the lord of the 8th house is posited
in a house other than a Kendra and when the Lagna is
occupied a benefic, the person born will be longlived, rich, honoured, endowed with good qualities,
will be praised by kings, fortunate, possess beauti¬
ful limbs, be of good physique, fearless, virtuously
disposed and will have a good and happy family.
sTT^srtor i^’^H‘»|5r«rer: i
R’sHtT:
:Phk--j 3 .—If the lord of the Lagna be well asso¬
ciated, the person born will live in a good village or
amidst good associations. When the associated planet
is strong, he will be under the patronage of a renown¬
ed king. When the said planet is in his exaltation,
the person will become a king. If the planet should be
in his own house, the person will live in his own
native place. He will always be on his legs if the
planet be in a moveable house. He will be stationary
in one place if the planet be in a fixed sign. The effect
will be mixed if in a dual sign.

^figRr 5Tfeji?^r^?T^lr sri^^ig^^^itsV
5ft iiyii
Sloka 4 .— If at the birth of a person, the lord of the
Lagna be of brilliant rays, he will become famous;
if the planet be well-placed, the person will be
happy and prosperous. But if he should occupy a
5'^^!n5T (Dusstthana), be in the house of a malefic or
an enemy or occupy his depression sign, the native
will be miserable and will live in a despicable place.
Reside amidst outcasts or vile people. If the Lagna is
strong, the person concerned will live happy, thrive
well and will come to power and prominence. But
if the Lagna be without strength, the man will con¬
stantly be overcome by calamities, be sad and will
suffer from disease.
5rt«Rt'nF.K5nwt
5t%; imn
Shha 5.—If the lord of the 2nd house be posited
in the Lagna and benefics occupy the 2nd house, the
person concerned will be endowed with the best
qualities, have a prosperous family, will be rich,
affable, and far-sighted. If the planet owning the 2nd
Bhava be connected with the Sun (v/da XV-30, supra),
the native will utilize his for the good of humanity.
Knowledge and wealth. If the association of the said
Lord is with Saturn? tha parson's learning will be very
insignificant and of a low order-

Adh. XVI
>T|FiT^Rf>ti5^iTyfc*i^; t
^T-^.5rrT^ Trft srtf w;
q-iW i^^sviqr: ii^ii
Shka 6. —If the planet associated be Jupiter, the
person concerned will become proficient in the
sacred scriptures and code of laws; if it be Mercury, he
will be clever in politics ; if Venus, he will be an expert
in amorous topics; if the Moon, he will know some¬
thing of the arts; if Mars, he will be an adept in works
involving hard labour and will be a back-biter; if
Rahu, he will be lisping or stammering (will speak
indistnctly); if Ketu, he will stammer and utter false¬
hoods. If malefics occupy the 2nd house, the person
concerned will be a fool and without wealth.
^ srfg^fTT snrft^q ii\sii
Sloka 7.—If the lords of the 3rd house and of the
Lagna be connected (videXV-SO, supra) by their mutual
exchange of places and be also strong, the native will
be brave, valorous, and helpful to his brothers; he
will also be capable of accomplishing daring acts.
sftqRr^% ? ^ ? ? : q rrgr; ii^iii
SJoka 8.- If the lord of the 3rd house be strong and
be associated with a benefic and if the Karaka of the
Bhava Mars) be strong and also posited in a benefic
house, the prosperity of the brothers is indicated. But
should he be weak or badly placed, there will be loss
of brothers,
3 T 5 »im^r i
ftnRiTiqir: 5 wr?r?:^?qtjqtirT?r^s iiMi

Sloka 9.— If both the Karaka and the lord of the
3rd Bhava be posited in odd Basis and be aspected
by Jupiter, the Sun and Mars, and if the 3rd house also
happen to be an odd sign, the native will have as many
brothers as are revealed by the Navamsa.
wfg: Bnilsr i!»oii
Siok:: 10—1{ at a birth, the lord of the 4th house as
well as the Moon occupy a (Dusstthaiia-Sfh,
8th or 12th) and be devoid of conjunction or aspect
(>f b^nefics, or, be hemmed in between malefics, be
also aspected by or conjoined a malefic, the result will,
be the death of the mother. But, should the above two
planets be strong and be associated with or aspected
by benefics, and if benefics be posited in the 4th
house, the Yoga will conduce to the mother's happi¬
ness. The happiness ol the mother should be de¬
clared by a reference to the benefics occupying
favourable places reckoned from the Moon or if they
aspect each other or are conjoined.
5rf wr
mgsnqr?Raf^ sr iiUii
Shka 77.—If the lord of the Lagna occa^>y the 4th
house or the lord of the latter be in the Lagna if the
Moon should have the aspect either of these, the
person born will certainly perform the mother's funeral
rites But if these two planets be posited in the inimi
cal or depression signs of each otheror the 6th and
the.8th houses and are not in any way connected (Vida

Adh. XVI
XV-cO, sjpra) with each other (either by association or
aspect), the person will not be able to do the last
funeral rites for the mother at the tipie of her demise.
Sloka 12 .—Just as what has been said about the
mother from the 4th Bhava, similar remarks should be
made in the case of the father, brothers and sons from a
reference to the respective Bhavas, Karakas of the
Bhavas concerned, the planet owning the Bhava, the
Lagna and its lord.
SRljft'TVrlTT^^uilffr ^ 11'^ I
Sloka /.?.—The lord of the 4th house and Venus,
if well placed, in the Lagna and the 4th house, will
confer on the native the honor of using a palanquin
as his vehicle, lordship and kingship; they will
also lead to the acquisition to the native of gold
and the like, silk, costly jewels, orname^tsi bed,
and such other appendages as will facilitate sexual
gratification, cows, elephants and horses.
^ sr?r»«r*^ i
sftiir iiv^ii
Sloka 14.—\l the lord of the 4th house be in a
Dusstthana 6th, 8th or 12 th) or conjoined with the Sun
and Mars, or if the 4th house be occupied by Mars and
the Sun, the house where the native was born or
conjoined with will be burnt. If Rahu or Saturn be
in the 4th with its lord the house will be old and
dilapidated. If fhe 4th or its lord occupied by an
inimical planet, the native's belongings such as the

cows, lands, vehicles, etc., will be usurped by his
enemies.
tr5j& cHFifwit i
'6ftwifiir’:^€t vr%q^ iiimi
Sloka IS.—li the 5th Bhava be identical with a Rasi
ox Amsa owned by Mercury (a benefic) or occupied by
that planet, the person born will be intelligent and
open-hearted. The same will be the case if the lord of
the 5th house is well posited and has attained a
(Vaiseshikamsa).
trnnsrr far^=T
fcft m ^ ^ m i
srCtw: %% 5rr5»^g;iTJ?r*r?T^%5ri?ft
Sloka 16. —(1) Malefics in the 6th, (2) the lord of the
Lagna in conjunction with or aspected by the lord of
the 6th possessed of strength, (3) the same lord posited
in the 6th, (4) the lord of the 6th in a Kendra house
and (5) in conjunction with or aspected by malefics,
will subject the native to constant and intense annoy¬
ance from enemies, which cannot be easily remedied.
^c»Ti'!rg«er: ii>.vsi|
Sloka 17 .— If the lord of the Lagna be stronger than
the lord of the 6th house and be posited in the (Rasi or)
Amsa of a benefic and also be aspected by a benefic
and if the lord of the 4th endowed with strength
occupy a Kendra or a Kona, the person born will be
hale and healthy being endowed with a strong con¬
stitution and will enjoy all comforts and happiness.
qc^Sr—22

Aah. XV!
?rei!?r®iw 5r:;;?WT ^ II Uii
Sloka 18 .—If at a birth the lord of the 6th house be
in a ^:^«rnf' (busstthana), identical with its depression
or inimical sign or be eclipsed by the Sun's rays and if
the lord of the Lagna be stronger than him and if the
Sun be in the 9th house, the destruction of the
enemies of the native may be declared.
is another reading.
The translation will Ix: “and if the 6th house 1x5 occupied hy
ii heiiulic, the destruction of the enemies of the native.”
«nWT: WWrTT lll^tll
Sloka i9.— The following Bhavas : viz., (1) that own¬
ed by the planet associated with the lord of the 6th
house (2) that occupied by the lord of the 6th and (3)
that owned by the planet in the 6th—these Bhavas will
prove inimical to the native concerned.
Some books read for in the second line.
iRoii
Sl^ka 20.—li the 7th house be connected (vide XV30, supra) with a benefic (either by association or
aspect) and its lord be endowed with strength, the wife
of the person born will be virtuously disposed, and
will live happily with her husband, being blessed with
children and endowed with all good qualities.
5rif5n^% i
!ff iR^n

Sloka 52.—Persons in whose nativities the lord of
the 8th house is posited in a house other than a Kendra
and is also weaker than the lord of the Lagna should be
declared to be long-lived and free from anxieties,
obstacles and miseries.
Sloka 22 .— If Mars or the Sun occupy the 9th house
and the lord of the latter be in a (Dusstthana) or
betwixt two malefics, the effect will be the demise of
the father of the native soon after his birthNote:— If the death does not take place immediately, if. may
take place in the Dasa of the Sim or Mura.
«r^ iftgrRT iRlii
Sloka 23. —If the Sun in the case of a day-birth or
Saturn in the case of a night-birth be well placed and
aspected by benefics, and if the lord of the 9th be also
strong, the father of the native will live for a long time.
^ ?T5R5ftfq?iwn^ I
Sloka 24.—U the two luminaries (the Sun and the
Moon) be in trine to Saturn and Mars, the child will be
abandoned by both the parents. But if they be
aspected by Tupiter, the child will be long-lived and
happy.
Shka 25 .— If Saturn owning the 9th house occupy
a itioyeable sign and b© unaspected by beneficSf if

Adh. XVI
the Sun be in a Dusstthana, the child concerned lives
under the care of a foster-father.
m ’art ^ i
sTRfV ^ iR^ii
Sloka 26 .— ^If the 9th house or its lord being in a
moveable sign is conjoined with or aspected by Saturn
and if the lord of the 12th house be strong, the child
born is sure to be adopted by another.
jwfe ^ ?rr«T^
snri^ gr i
Sloka 27.—li a benefic planet occupy the 10th house
and the lord of the latter in full strength be in a Kendra
or Kona position identical with its Swakshetra or
exaltation sign, or if the lord of the Lagna be in the
10th, the person concerned will be revered by all,
widely renowned, and disposed to do always virtuous
deeds. His affluence will be similar to that of a king
and he will be long-lived.
sRmr^w %?nw i
iR<sii
Sloka 28. —If the Sun or Mars occupy the 10th
house, the native concerned will be a great and mighty
personage and liked by the people. If the lord of the
10th house should also be well-placed, he will be able
to accomplish great undertakings involving much
valour and heroism. He will perform some benefical
acts conimended by the ^ood if the lOth hcufche

S'- ns
occupied by benefics. But if Rahu, Saturn and Ketu be
posited in the 10th house, the result will be that the
person concerned will do sinful and wicked acts.
Sloka 29—Note the following two Bhavas : (1) the
Bhava owned by the planet associated with the lord of
the 11th house and (2) the Bhava occupied by the lord
of the 11th. The (gain) acquisition of things (or objects)
connected by the Bhavas concerned may be predictedA similar guess may be made also through planets
occupying the 11th house.
Sloka 30 .—Note the following two Bhavas; (1) the
Bhava owned by the planet if any occupying the 12th
house; (2) the Bhava occupied by the lord of the 12th.
The loss of things connected by these two Bhavas
should be predicted.
II ii
Sloka 31 .—One ought to predict the success or
acquisition of a Bhava (1) when the lord of the Lagna
during his transit arrives at a sign which happens to
be a Trikona sign to the Rasi or Amsa occupied by the
lord of the Bhava in question; or (2) when he comes
to the Bhava itself, or (3) when the lord of the Bhava
transits a sign which is triangular to the sign or Amsa
QQCUpied by the lord of the Lagna, or (4) whep he

Adh. XVI
comes to the Lagna itself, or (5) when the two lords (i.e.,
of the Bhava and the Lagna) come in conjunction or
aspect each other. The same event may likewise be
predicted when the Karaka of the Bhava in question
comes during transit in conjunction with the lord of the
Rasi containing the Lagna or the Moon.
Shka 32 .—^Find out the Rasi and Amsa occupied
by the lord of the Bhava under cosideration. When
Jupiter in his transit comes in trine to this Rasi or
Amsa, the realisation of the (good) effect of the Bhava
may.be expected.
Sloka 33.—Whenever the lords of the Lagna and the
6th house come in conjunction, (while in transit) the
enemy of the native will come under his control, if the
lord of the 6th house is weedcer than the lord of the
Lagna. Otherwise, the contrary will be the result.
Shka 34.—If'there should be enmity between the
lord of a Bhava and that of the Lagna due to natural or
temporal causes, or their being posited in the 6th and
8th places with respect to each other, envy, rivalry or
jealousy will arise to the native with the person denoted
by the Bhava during the transit of these planets. But if
there should be friendship-natural or tempoxarybetween the aforesaid two planets, one ought to predict
new friendship being formed when the planets also
conjoin in their transit.
?rTr ?rjrar*r:

lls
f% 4> g ^P^<bw i
snrrf^afTOwnsrf irm
Sloka 35.— Whenever the lord of the Lagna comes
in conjunction (while in transit) with the lord of any
particular Bhava under consideration, the success (or
gain) of the Bhava may be expected, if the lord of the
Bhava be strong. Otherwise, the effect will be different.
Similar scrutiny may also be made by reckoning from
the Moon instead of from the Lagna.
Thus ends the 16th Adhyaya on "the general effects
of the 12 Bhavas" in the work Phaladeepika
composed by Mantreswara.
II It
II II
?rT ll^ll
ADHYAYA XVII.
Sloka i.— With respect to any Bhava, when Saturn
in his transit should arrive at the Rasi and Navamsa
occupied by the lord of the 8th or the 12th hotuie
reckoned from that Bhava, the total destruction of that
Bhava should be expected. The same will be the case
if Saturn transits houses that are triangular to these two
houses.
II H

Adb. xvii
lieShka 2 .—Ascertain the Rasi and Navamsa occupied
by (1) the lord of this 8th house (2) Gulika (3) Saturn or
(4) the lord of the 22nd decanate (counted from that
of the Lagna). When Saturn transits that Rasi or
Navamsa or its triangular position, death may happen.
Sloka 3 ,—Find the lord of the decanate that is rising.
Find also the lord of the 8th house as also that of the
22nd decanate. When Jupiter transits the Rasi or
Amsa occupied by any of these 3 planets, or its
triangular position, death may take place.
Sioka 4.—When the Sun transits (1) the Rasi that
represents his own Dwadasamsa (2) the Navamsa Rasi
occupied by the lord of the 8th house, or (3) the
Navamsa Rasi occupied by the lord of the Lagna or
their Trikona positions, death may be expected.
snff^rai is another reading in the 2nd lino. According to tliat
Jupiter takes the place of the Sun.
Shka 5 .—When the Moon transits the Rasi or
Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 8th house or the
Sun or their triangular house, death may take place.
All these (the above stated) should be considered
with reference to the Lagna or the Moon.
TOWorwr*.

Sloia 6 .—Subtract the figures of Yamakantaka from
those of the lord of tbe rising sign. Subtract the figures
of the Maon from those of Saturn. Find out the Rasi
and its Navamsa indicated by each of these differencesWhen Jupiter transits.tbe Rasi or Navamsa indicated
in either of these results or their Trikona position, the
native's death will take place Subtract the figures for
Mars from those of Rahu. When Jupiter comes to
occupy the Navamsa or the Rasi thus indicated by the
difference, the death of a brother may happen.
3rsT«n ii'««
f
Sloka 7.—.Subtract the figures for Yamakantka from
those of the Sun. ^Vhen Jupiter transits the Rasi or
its Navamsa thus found or its triangular position, the
death of the father may happen. Subtract the figures
for Mandi from those of Yamakantaka. When Saturn
transits the Rasi or Navamsa thus found or its
triangular position, the same event may happen. Sub¬
tract the figures of the Moon from those of the Sun;
during Jupiter's transit through the Rasi or Navamsa
thus indicated or its triangular position, the death of
the mother may come to pass. The same event may
also happen when Saturn passes th rough the Rasi or
Navamsa indicated by subtracting the figures of Mandi
from those of the Moon, or its triangular position.
(in. tn* xn-so).
9WPc«rr
SJoka S.—Subtract the figures of Yamakantaka from

Adh. XVII
those of the planet ruling the 5th star reckoned from
the natal one. When Jupiter tiansits the house indicat*
ed by the result or its Trikona position, the son's death
may be expected.
II ii
rTf^tOTTr ^ STTcTJ It^ll
Sloka 9. —Find the house occupied by the lord of
the sign indicated by the aggregate of the figures for
the Lagna, the Sun and Mandi. When Jupiter arrives in
his progress through the orbit at the Rasi found as
above or in a triangular sign thereof, the native meets
with his death.
wrgg# i
^m^<T2ffsrf?Tl'JTrT%sr^f«iT?n^s4g^ *gr ii^oii
Sloka iO.—Subtract the figures for Saturn from
those of Mandi and find out the Rasi and its Navamsa
indicated by the difference. When Saturn arrives at
this Navamsa or the Rasi thus found or their triangular
position, death will take place The same event may
also happen when Saturn arrives at the particular
Drekkana of the particular Rasi indicated by the
aggregate of the figuroe of the five Upagrahas reckoned
from Dhuma.
IIUH
Sloka 2i.—Find out the Rasi and its Navamsa indi*
cated by the sum-total of the figures for the Lagna and
Mandi. The Rasi and its Navamsa, say the Astrologers,
will give the clue to the particular month and the por-

tion thereof in a year in which a person's death may be
expected to happen; (/. e., when the Sun arrives at this
particular Rasi and the particular Navamsa thereof, the
person will die). The Moon at the time of the decease
will occupy the Rasi indicated by the total of the figures
for Mandi and the Moon; and the rising sign will be
that denoted by the total of the figures for the Lagna
Mandi and the Moon.
Sloka 12. —’Ascertain the Navamsa, the Dwadasamsa
and the Drekkana indicated by the figures lor Mandi.
When Jupiter arrives .at the Navamsa, Saturn at the
Dwadasamsa and the Sun at a triangular sign from the
Drekkana in question, and when the Lagna is the Rasi
occupied by the lord of the sign denoted by the
aggregate of the figures for the Lagna, the Moon and
Mandi, death will take place.
another reading in the 4th
(Pada). The translation will he “or when the Sun transits
the Basi and Amsa denoted by the aggregate of the figures.•••”
Sloka 23.— Multiply by 9 the figures for Mandi and
Saturn. Add the two products and find out the partiouleuc Rasi and its Navamsa which the total indicates.
When Saturn passes through this, death will happen.

180 Adh. XVri
Shka Subtract the figures of Yamalcantaka from
tljiose of the lord of the rUing sign and find out the Rasi
and its Navamsa indicated by the difference. When
Jupiter comes to occupy this Navamsa in the Rasi thus
found, death will take place without doubt.
?nj[fsr«^oftnTr grrifV ill’ll!
Shka 15. —Find out the sign of the zodiac indicated
by the sum-total of the figures for the fords of the 6th,
the 12th and the 8th Bhavas. When Saturn is in this
house or in a triangular sign from it, death has to be
apprehenied.
Shka /6.~Find the Rasi, etc., occup’ed by the lord
of the decanate that is rising. When Jupiter transits
this position or its Trikona, the native meets with death.
When Saturn transits the house owned by the lord of
the decanate of the 8th house, or its Trikona, the same
event may be predicted.
BRyif3FITreJITT%!rT«PTV: I
Shka 27.— Find the weakest of the three sets of
planets, viz., (1) the lord of (1) the 8th house and (2)
the 22nd decanate, both counted from the Lagna and
the Moon, and (3) the Moon and Mandi. When Saturn
transits a Trikona position to the Navamsa of any of
the above planets, death may happen.

TPVnf^TW ^?TTT«Tf^ I
Sloka 18 .— Find the Ra«i representing the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the Lagna. See how far it is
removed from Mesha. When Saturn transits a Rasi so
far removed from the Rasi occupied by the lord of the
8th house, death may happen, say those conversant
with the various schools of astrology.
BreWJr ^ n?:nr ^(rPtorf 5Tr5T??T«r iK^ii
Sloka 19. —Death may also happen when the Moon
in her transit passes through the house occupied by
the lord of the 22nd decanate counted from that of the
Moon at the time of birth, or its Trikona posi*
tion or through the Lagna Rasi, the 8th house or
the 12th house.
iRoii
Sloka 20 .—^When the Sun passes through the Rasi
occupied by the lord of the 8th house and the Moon,
through •the Rasi occupied by the Sun or through
the asterism occupied by the lord of the 8th house,
demise will happen.
iTW firfwarrmsrf fl.f^RT iir^ii
Sloka 21.—When Saturn transits (1) the Rasi that is
triangular to the one occupied by Gulika in the case of
those born in the night or (2) the 7th Rasi therefrom in
the ease of those born in the day, death may happen.

Adb. XVII
Tim I
^ g fir«R ft[^rRrgfw«^«r»Tfft5«raT
Sloka 22. —When Jupiter in hi.; transit passes through
the Rasi indicated by the sum of the figures for
Jupiter and Rahu or through its trines, death may be
apprehended.
?T#?rsr5rm»r^ ^ wr^ ii’^^il
Sloka 23. —When Saturn goes to the house occupied
by the lord of the decanate of the 8th house from the
Lagna, death may happen. The same event may bo
expected when Saturn passes through the Rasi owning
the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 8th house.
trnfl i
gfir: ip.«ii
Cr
Sloka 24. —When Saturn in his transit passes through
the Rasi and Amsa occupied by' him at birth or its
trines, death may be expected. The same event may
be apprehended when Saturn transits the Rasi and
Amsa occupied by the lord of the sign occupied by
the Moon at birth or of the 8th house or its trines.
Sloka 25.— li the birth be .at night, death will happen
when Saturn transits through the Rasi and Amsa occu¬
pied by the Moon or Mandi; if the birth be at day,
death may be expected when Saturn transits the Rasi
and Amsa occupied by the sign or which is the 7th, the
5th or the 9th from that occupied by the Sun.

Sloka 26.—Ascertain how far Mandi is removed
from the lord of the 8th house. When Saturn in his
transit arrives at a Rasi so far removed from Mandi,
death may happen; so say the eminent astrologers.
IRvSIl
Sloka 27. —When the Sun transits the 6th, the 7th
or 12th place reckoned from Venus at birth, death is
sure to happen; so say the eminent astrologers*
^ri ^?:w5Tifir?nf^. % qg-r
cT^Br^otsfq qi iR<:ii
• qm ^Hgr5Tts«n?r; ii
Sloka 26.— Find ou. where the following planets are
posited at a birth : (1) :he lord of the 8th (2) the lord of
the 12th <3) the lord of the 6th, (4) the lord of the 8th
house decanate, /. e., tl e 22nd decanate and (5) Mandi.
When Saturn, Jupiter, .;he Sun and the Moon in their
transit pass through these houses, death may take
place. The same may also happen when these transit
the Navamsas of the five Grahas stated above or their
Trikona positions.
Thus ends the ITtl. Adhyaya on "Exit from the
World" in the wo: k Phaladeepika composed
by !.4antreswara.

Adb. XVIll
II 375T^IS«?T??: II
li II
f^fffgsrwff>5r5Tf^ ?rs^Rii?BTt sri:
fc g%or tift^-
«rig^5r5j vti^ji^5 ikii
ADHYAYA XVIII.
Shka 7.—If, at the birth of any person, the Sun be
in conjunction with the Moon, he v^ill be skilled in
machinery and stone work; if the Sun be in conjunc¬
tion with Mars, the person born will be intent on doing
sinful deeds; if he be associated with Mercury, the
person will be clever, intelligent, famous and happy.
If the Sun be in conjunction with Jupiter, the person
born in the Yoga will be cruel and interested in help
ing others. If the Sun and Venus be together at a
birth, the person concerned will earn money as an
actor or by the use of weapons If the Sun be aslhociated with Saturn, the person born will be clever in work¬
ing in metals or in various sorts of pottery.
Wig:
irfwWWl^W^jfwyiT I
gsr4,gw^
Sloka 2.—If the Moon be in conjunction with Mars,
the person born will be a dealer in hammers, ploughs
or other rough instruments, women, spirituous drinks
and earthen jars ; he will be disobedient to his mother.
If the Moon be associated with Mercury, the man born
in the Yoga will speak sweetly and modestly, be
clever in interpreting, and endowed with good

iSo
Si.
luck and fame. When the Moon is in conjunc
tion with Jupiter, the person born will be over*
powering (his enemies), but fickleminded; he will
be a chief of his family and wealthy. When Venus
is associated with the Moon, the person born will be an
adept in weaving, tailoring and dyeing of cloths. If
the Moon be in conjunction with Saturn, the person
born will be the son of a widow remarried.
wwRr snnf^ firsrt i
:f:«sn?rri^T^?i!:vr5 fsr^fTai ir^ii
Sloka 3 —It Mars and Mercury be together, the
person born in the Yocja will he a dealer in herbs,
plants, barks, oils and drugs. He will be clever in
boxing. When Mars is in conjunction with Jupiter, the
person born will be a leader of a city, or a king or a
wealthy Brahmin. The effect of Venus and Mars being
together at a birth will be that the person born will be
a shepherd, a wrestler, skilful, Addicted to other
people's wives, or a gambler. If Mars be in conjunction
with Saturn at the birth of a person, he will be misera'
ble, untruthful and despised by all.
srf gw; g^
ttT! m ii«ii
Shkc ‘^.--When Mercury and Jupiter are in conjunc¬
tion, the person born will be an actor, fond of music
and veif ed in the art of dancing. If Venus be in con¬
junction with Mercury, the person born will be
eloquen*, possess lands, and will become a head of an

Adb. XVIll
assembly. If Saturn be associated with Mercury, the
person born will be clever in cheating others and
addicted ta licentious pleasures. The man at whose
birth Jupiter and Venus occupy one house will have
good learning, possess wealth and wife, and have many
good qualities If Jupiter and Saturn be together at a
birth, the person affected by the Yoga will be a barber,
a potter or a cook.
is aiioLhor reauiug fur 377?* tlic 2iid liiio.
Shka 5.---U Venus and Saturn be together at a birth,
the person affected by the Yoga will be short-sighted,
will get his wealth augmented through a young woman,
(His marriage will be a keynote to financial success).
He will be skilled in writing and painting. If more than
two planets occupy a house, prediction should be made
by combining the effects described for the several
possible pairs of planets constituting the Yoga.
II II
?Tfi5i5 ^ fan#: ii
S/oka 6.—If the Moon in Mesha be aspected by
Mats, the person born will be a king; if by Mercury,
he will be learned; if by Jupiter, he will be a king, if
by Venus, he will be equal to a king; if by Saturn, he
will be a thief; and if by the Sun, he will be poox. The
Moon in (Taurus) Vrishabha, aspected by Mars and
other planets in. order v/ill make the person born (1)
poor, (2 thievish, (.?.) respected by other men, (4) a
king, (b) weaitLiy and (6)a servant respectively.

SI. 7-0 'jT^T^rtsv^rnr: 187
^ ?T5gwi?fV3:visft gr i
?Tt«rsnsr?|ft:%?fT?[rT spiN- insii
Sloka 7.— If the Moon occupy Mithuna and be
aspected by Mars'and other planets, the person con¬
cerned will be (1) transacting business in iron instru¬
ments, (2) a king, (3) learned, (4) fearless, i 5) a weaver
and (6) poor respectively. The Moon in Kataka if
aspected by Mars and other planets will make the
person born (1) a warrior, (2) learned, (3) a wise man,
(4) a king, (5) a dealer in iron, copper, etc., and (6) a
sufferer from eye-disease.
?:i3TT snf^rrT: I
f^tnrT?T: w’t; ii
Sloka -{?. -If the Moon occupies Simha and is aspect¬
ed by Mars and other planets, the person born will be
(1) a king, (2) an astrologer (3) wealthy, (4) a king, >'5)
a barber and (6) a king respectively. If at a birth the
Moon be in Kanya and be aspected by Mars and other
planets, the person born will be (1) clever, (2) a king,
(3) head of an army, (4) skilful in all matters, (5) a king,
and (6) a king respectively.
qrst wif?trgsr; i
^ Trfr5T: iiMi
Sloka .9. -The effect of the Moon in Tula being
aspected by Mars and other planets will in their order
make the person born (1) a rogue, (2 1 a king, (3) a man
working in gold (gold-smith), (4) a trader, (5,i a tale¬
bearer, and (6) wicked respectively. If the Moon be in
Vrischika and is aspected by Mars and other planets
taken in'order, the person born will be (Da king, (2' a
father of twins, (3) a king (4) a washerman (5) one
defective of some limb, and (6) moneyless respectively,

IBs Adh. XVI II
are two otlior vearlings for
in the fourth quarter of tlie Sloha.
f?Tiw ^«r3{?r ir%5f ?rr?: «g[g[»>TJ i
^ 5f^! f|rf^«Tt Brrf^^sr^fir ^Rrgft %iTf^ iiloii
Sloka 10.~- li, at the time of birth, the Moon occupies
Dhanus and be aspected by Mars, the person concern¬
ed will be a cheat; if aspected by Mercury, he will
protect his kinsmen; if aspected by Jupiter, he will
be a ruler of the earth ; if by Venus, he will be a sup¬
port to many people; if by Saturn, he will be a rogue;
and if by the Sun, he will be an arrogant fellow. If at the
time of birth the Moon occupies Makara and is aspect¬
ed by Mars and other planets in their order, the person
born will be (1) a king (2) a king (3) a king (4) a learned
or wise man (5) wealthy and (6) poor respectively.
iiuii
Sloka 11 .—If at the time of birth the Moon occupies
Kumbha and is aspected by Mars and other planets
taken in order, the person concerned will be (1) addict¬
ed to other people's wives, (2) a king, (3) lord of men,
(4) one fond of women not his own, (5) best of kings
and (6) respected by men, respectively. If the Moon
occupies Meena and is aspected by Mars and other
planets taken in order, the person born will be (1) a
sinner, (2) witty, (3) a king, (4) a learned man, (5).one
intent on doing what is sinful and (6) a sinner reB|pgtively.

II II
JU0Ss«ITT^f^?T:
?Tr«Ri5«i^l|^nr^Sf?i5K5:5r»Taer iil^^ii
Sloka 12 .—If at a person's birth the Moon occupy
a Navamsa of Mars and be aspected by the Sun, the
person will be a watchman of a city; if the Moon in the
above position be aspected by Mars, he will be fond of
killing; if by Mercury, he will be skilled in close fight¬
ing; if by Jupiter, he will be a king; if by Venus, he
will be rich ; and if by Saturn, he will promote quarrels.
If at the time of birth, the Moon be in a Navamsa of
Venus and be aspected by the Sun, the person con¬
cerned will be a fool; if by Mars, he will be addicted
to other people's wives; if by Mercury, he will be a
good poet; if by Jupiter, he will be the author of good
literary works; if by Venus, he will be intent on having
all comforts; and if by Saturn, he will unite with
other people's wives.
BrCt«pT»Ti3r II \\\\
Shka I?. —If at the time of birth the Moon occupy
a Navamsa of Mercury and be aspected by the Sun, the
person concerned will be an actor; if by Mars, he will
be a thief; if by Mercury, he will be the chief of poets;
if by Jupiter, he will b^ a minister; if by Venus, he
will be skilled in music; and if by Saturn, he will be
skilled in m|phanical arts. If at the time of birth, the
Moon occupies his own Navamsa and b© aspected by

1S*0 Adh- XVIII
the Sun, the person concerned will be lean in person;
if by.Mars,-he will be avaricious; if by Mercury, he
will be practising penance; if by Jupiter, he will be¬
come an important personage; if by Venus, he will be
a servant under a woman; and if by Saturn, he will be
devoted to his duties.
Sloka 14.—11 at the time of birth, the Moon be in a
Navamsa of Simha and be aspecfed by the Sun, the
person concerned will of an angry temper; if by
Mars, he will be a friend of the king; if by Mercury,
he will become the lord of a bidden treasure; if by
Jupiter, he will b^ome a great lord; if by Venus, he
will be childless; and if by Saturn, he will do cruel
acts. If at the time of birth the Moon be in a Navamsa
of Jupiter and be aspected by the Sun, he will be a
man of reputed valour ; if by Mars, he will be versed
infighting; if by Mercury, he will be witty; if by
Jupiter, he will be a minister; if by Venus, he will be
without lust; and if by Saturn, he will be virtuously
disposed.
3n5<TrT^ msrmw. i
Sloka J5.— If at the time of birth the Moon sho dd
occupy a Navamsa of Saturn and be aspected by the
Sun, the person concerned will have a very limited
number of children; if by Mars, he will lead a misera¬
ble life even though wealthy ; it by Mercury, he will
be haughty; if by Jupiter, he will be devoted to his
duty; if by Venus, he will be fond of wicked women;
And if by Saturn, he will be irasgible. Ir^ the saia9

xuannet should be predicted the eifects resulting from
the Sun in the several Navamsas being aspected by
the Moon and other planets.
ir^ m i
Sloka 16. —What has been declared here (in Slokas
12*15) as (Amsaphala) duo to the Moon being
posited in the Amsas of the Sun and other planets
should be understood to be the eifects derived from
the Navamsa division. The effects that have been de¬
clared as resulting from the Moon in the several signs
being aspected by the various planets should be stat¬
ed as applying in the case of the Dlvadasamsas also.
Sloka 17. —The good effects described above will be
full, middling and little according as the Moon occu¬
pies a Vargottama, his own Navar® i or the Navamsa of
another plapet. In the case of bacteffects, it will be the
reverse. Again, if the lord of th||. Navamsa occupied
by the Mogii be strong, the effects described for the
Moon in th^ several signs and aspected by the several
planets will be nullified, and only those effects due to
the Moon's occupying the particular Navamsa subject
to the particular planetary aspect will come to pass.
Thus ends the 18th Adhyaya on "Conjunctions
of two planets" in the work Phaladeepika
composed by Mantreswara.

1^2 Adh. XlX
II II
^sT snJT^i «r|;Ri%Trnf^f# ^
??fesTs <i:5s^t«i%gjr^^f5TT3?Tt f5rtji«rn \
^?mrf %«T TO5i^
mt >i ft<T d^< rTfgqf>^crf ••^•i
ADHYAYA XIX.
Sioka 2.—The nine planets who were worshipped
in many ways with devotion for a long time by sage
Parasara, having been pleased, bestowed upon him the
knowledge of accurately determining their effects (on
births in.this world). Being convinced after many tests
that they are unfailing, I take out only the essence from
the astrological scriptures containing his famous say¬
ings and set forth the famous 'Maha Dasa.'
«T»«n^?n?wrt
fTq[ffl^^?rRr^?ir^%g5;5F:T: i
srsj wRrwt ^gt3ri«r«i wsnsTT Rr*rf^.?rT: iiRii
sioka 2 .—Count the stars from Krittika in groups of
nine* The planets presiding over the Dasas belonging
to the nine stars con^lK^sing each group are respective'
ly the Sun, the Moon, Mars, Rahu, Jupiter, Saturn,
Mercury, Ketu and Venus, and their respective years
. STSTHT t
Shka 3 .—At the time of birth, find out the number
of Ghatikas, etc., still to be traversed (by the Moon) in
the star he is in. Multiply this by the number of years
allotted to the ruler of the star and divide the product

by 60. The quotient will be the period in years still to
elapse. Any remainder remaining may be converted
into months by multiplying by 12 and dividing by 60
and the remainder again into days by multiplying by
30 and dividing by 60 and so on.
J!rsiirRr<si^csr%^'TiT%: i
WmsCTTtrrff ll«il
Sloka 4 .— Note the exact position of the Sun in the
zodiac at the time of birth. When the Sun in his next
round arrives at the same position, it is considered as
one solar year, which is also the year taken for the
Ududasa system. By sub-dividing the same, days are
also calculated.
II II
*rnF.^iT<« ^ i
ii*^ii
Sloka 5. —If at a birth the Sun be badly placed, he
will during his Dasa promote quarrel, sudden dis¬
pleasure of the sovereign, mckness among relatives,
wandering, with others, intolerable mental anguish,
and danger from fire to concealed wealth, grain,
sons and wife.
^ h?.ii
Sloka 6 .— 'If at a birth the Suu be posited in a good
house/he will during his Dasa bring on acquisition of
wealth through cruel deeds, journeys, kings and quarrelSf. roaming through forests and mountains, wide
qcjft—26

Adh. XIX
fame, success in business, severity, attachment (devo¬
tion) for ever to one's duty and happiness.
*r^5sr<Ent ^ \
»Tt^5r^#T ^ n'sii
Sloka 7. —During the Moon's Dasa, there will be
tranquillity of the mind, success in all business, good
food, acquisition of wife, children, ornaments, clothes,
gems, cows and lands. The person will honour
Brahmins.
Sloka 8. —Everything ought to be declared after
examination of the Moon's strength. In the first period
of ten days of the lunar month, the Moon is of moderate
strength. During the middle period of ten days, his
strength is full, and he is therefore very auspicious.
During the third period of ten days, his strength is on
the wane and the effect also will be gradually de*
dining.
Sloka Q.—During the Dasa of Mars, the person con¬
cerned gets wealth through fire, the king, fighting and
the like. There will be influx of money by administering
medicines, falsehood, cheating and various, cruel
actions. He will be always bothered (afflicted) by
bilious complaints, impurity of blood and fever; he
will have intrigues with low females; he will quarrel
with his wife, children, relations and elders, and
thereby suffer misery; and he will take delight in
(enjoying) other's fortune.

i^3C?sr5r®Rnr^ fj^sr^rnpi;«
sn»r5«TgRi>%T^5ftr
sniricinn^gs^ ^5Ry hIoII
Sloka 20.—When Mercury's Dasa is operating, there
will be meeting of friends, personal comforts, fame
through the applause of the learned, favour from eldetS'
cleverness in (one's) speech, doing good to others,
happiness to one's wife, children, friends, etc, an
exalted position.
^TcrRw%7?r!ft»Tf?ni5R ^ i
^r^fwg?r?r3r^ inrTs^^nsnnrlr
Shka H .—During Jupiter's Dasa, the person con¬
cerned will perform some virtuous deed, acquire
children, will be honoured by the sovereign and will receive praises from great men; there will be acquisition
of elephants, horses and vehicles, meeting of wife,
children and friends, and accomplishment (fulfilment)
of one's desires.
Sloka 12.—During the Dasa of Venus, the person
concerned will obtain materials and facilities for his
sport and happiness, good vehicles, cows, gems, orna¬
ments, treasure, enjoyment in the company of young
damsels, intellectual pursuits, voyage, auspicious
deeds and acceptance of presents from the sovereign,

19^5 Adh. XlX
s'm?fV^if^f^Rr5n5TJT^fsi5nw. i
^5ftdir snrr^-
^3R-wfirw^r^5TT5T^ lll^ll
Sloka 13. —During the Dasa of Saturn, the person
concerned may expect his wife and children
to be troubled by gout, rheumatism or similar windy
diseases, loss in agriculture, evil talk, intercourse with
wicked women, desertion of servants, absence from his
residence and destruction or loss all on a sudden of his
relations, lands, happiness and wealth.
^RriTf?T^«»T«rr^ffr5T*r i
^^qf*TR5riTf^ipw5rls<i5n^
t W Rgg iff q?gfg iil«ii
Sloka During Rahu's Dasa, the person may
expect trouble from the sovereign, thieves, poison,
fire and weapons, sickness to children, ruffled mind,
loss of relations, insult from base people, scandal due
jo a breach of decorum, ejection or dismissal from ati
office, wounding of the leg (or kicks) and failure, of the
business undertaken.
g^TSTTT i
SJoka IS. —If Rahu be associated with a benefic
and occupy good houses {i.e., houses other than the
6th, the 8th or the 12th), his Dasa period will be bene¬
fic and fully auspicious, and will lift (raise) the native
to afflhence on a par with the king. The native wiU
have all his desires fulfilled and will stay at hotte
enjoying happiness- There will be steady aebumuIttion ef wejdth and he will become widely renowated.

Tr qV< r 4 t *n(^n< i w n^ ^ ii l^ > n % iT%ff ^
%5rrRrt^ 5n:9Tf5nfaT^n«w!% srm: ii wi
Shka 16 .—Astrologers say that Raha in Kenya,
Meena or Vrischika, gives to the person concerned,
during his Dasa honor and happiness, lordship of lands,
carriages and servants All these, however, are
liable to be lost at the conclusion of the Dasa.
Shka /7.-—Duting Ketu's Dasa, the peiwon concern¬
ed will have troubles from enemies, uieves, the
sovereign, wounds from weapons, wounds, disease due
to excessive heat, false calumny, a stigma to his family,
danger from fire and absence from his own country.
s I
Shka /d.—When the Dasa of the Sun is in progress,
the general effects to be noted will be money-making
by cruel acts, through kings and fighting, trouble from
fire and beasts, inflammation of the eyes, illness affect¬
ing the stomach and teeth, severe trouble to wife and
children, separation from revered seniors and parents,
destruction of servants and loss of property.
Shka /9.—During the Moon's Dase, the person con¬
cerned will got money through sabred |>rayers, Gods,

Adh. XIX
Brahmins and royal favour. He will secure to himself
women, wealth and lands. He will further have a
profusion of flowers, clothes, ornaments, perfumes and
various valuable juicy objects of enjoyment. There will
be misunderstandings with the wicked and loss of
money and he will suffer from wind disease.
iR®n
Shka 20 .—During the ripening.of Mats' Mahadasa,
there may be attempts of money*making through lands,
litigation and the sovereign. He will also acquire more
cattle and lands. There will be quarrels with his
brothers and sons. He will resort continuously to the
society of wicked men and women and suffer diseases
arising from bile, blood, as well as through fire. He
will also have loss of wealth.
Shka the time when Rahu’s Dasa is in pro¬
gress, the person concerned will become wicked in
(his) disposition, or will suffer from a terrible disease:
which cannot be diagnosed he will lose his wife
and children. There will be danger from poison
and trouble from enemies and he will suffer
from diseases relating to the eyes and the head.
There will also arise misunderstandings with friends
and cultivators, and displeasure from the sovereign.

5iT^% «CTnf^: \R?M
Sloka 22.—During the Dasa of Jupiter, the person
concerned wiU get new cloths and such other objects
will have attendants, retinue and similar grandeur, and
will command intense respect and dignity. There will
be acquisition of children, wealth and friends. He will
further receive adoration for sanity of his speech
which has won general approbation. He will suffer
separation from his elders, have ear disease and phleg¬
matic troubles.
<T5WW5^5 IR?II
SJoka 23 .— At the time when Saturn's Dasa is in
progress, the native will acquire wealth on account of
some trouble in the country and fighting; he will get
servants and old women; will have aquisition of cows
buffaloes and bulls; and trouble to children and wife.
He will suffer from windy and phlegmatic diseases,
and piles, and a burning sensation in the legs, hands
and other limbs.
diRI \RW
Sloka 24 .— During the Dasa of Mercury, the person
concerned will get always the benefit of spiritual

^ A<lk XlX
preceptors. He w|ll get taoney through Brahmins, and
will acquire new l^ds, cows and horses. He will wor¬
ship great men and Gods and acquire immense wealth.
Diseases resulting from wind, heat, and phlegm will
also torment him.
RnwrtsraT^n^
?r3«n3rr sfWor f?dt«i%5rTSloka 25.—During Ketu's Dasa the person will have
sorrow and confusion caused by females, trouble
from the rich and loss of wealth; he will do impro¬
per acts to others. He will suffer banishment from his
country. There will be suffering from tooth-ache,
leg pain, and phlegmatic troubles.
qrarflft^inTf
srw «?^5n1r5rt5«^?r:
Sloka 26. —During the Dasa of Venus there will
be acquisition of wife, jewels, clothes, brilliance
treasure, wealth, ornaments, horses, comforts of the
ccuch, and seats. There will also be augmenta¬
tion of wealth by trade, agriculture and .vcyages,
and anxiety, mental anguish separation (or cemise)
of parents and elders and misery to one's relatives.
l^as ends the 19th Adhyaya oq “Dasas aud thctir IDffsotfi"
in the work Phaladeepika composed by Mantreewarn..

Tlr?ftswrwj
tl II
vTr%>ar>flT jrT%ar i|R ^ i
«TTr5*Tt^5?iwsr'*rw*«nF#^Rr'^9r#r ^n%nr u»ji
ADHYAYA XX.
Sloka 1. —^What the effects are that are derivable
from a planet which is strong and which owns a certain
Bhava and what they will be when the lord is weak,
and when they have actually to be experienced by the
native all these are indicated briefly in this chapter.
cw 3r>rf^ i
sriffVRr ^trt! irii
Sloka 2. —When the Lagna possesses maximum
strength, the native will, during the Dasa of the lord of
of the Lagna, rise to a place of eminence in the world,
will be happily placed in life, will be physically strong,
will have a brilliant appearance; and his prosperity
will be on the increase as his life progresses'just as the
Moon's digits in the bright half of a month.
*3r i
srr^.% vTirrlslr ii^ii
Sloka 3. —During the ripening of the Dasa of the
lord of the 2nd house, one ought to predict success or
acquisition to family, .acquisition of good daughters,
good meals, earning money by lectures, eloquence
in speech and the consequent approbation of the
audience in the assembly.
3T5nwd ^TsroTvmnTrTO ii«n
qR.l^-26

202 Adh. Xk
Shka •#.—During the Dasa of a planet that is strong
and owns the 3rd house one ought to expect friendship
with and help from brothers, hearing of agreeable
news which please the mind, (opportunity for) the exhi¬
bition of one's valour, leadership in an army, attain¬
ment of some honour, help from people and a praise by
others of his various good qualities.
^?r!pJT i
Sloka 5 . -Help to relations, success in agriculture,
'liendship with females, acquisition of vehicles, new
land, new house, wealth, higher status (promotion in
one's appointment), all these may be expected during
the ripening of the Dasa of the planet owning the 4th
house.
jsrinnir
^ ii^di
Shka 6. -During the Dasa of the lord of the 5th
house, the native may expect the birth of a son, respect
and merriment with relations, or the post of a oounvillor under kings. He will (command), feed others
a ad enjoy all kinds of (cooked dishes) dainties in
plenty. He will accomplish acts meritorious winning
the approbation of the virtuous.
Sloka /.—In the ripening of the Dasa of the lord of
>.e 6th house, the native will be able to subdue all his
remies by doing daring acts. He will enjoy perfect

SI. 8' 11 firtrftswTw: 20?^
hejdth, will be highly liberal-minded, will be very
powerful and will live in all splendour and prosperity.
sETwi^ ^rirran i
wi5?mnnftr?RT#): ^Tf?TW«Ti?rr ^ u\\
Sloka 8 .—During the Dasa-period of the lord of the
7th house, the person born acquires new clothes,
jewels, new bed, etc.. He will be contented will fully
enjoy all pleasures in the company of his beloved. He
will be very powerful or virile and perform marriages
or similar auspicious festivities in his family and
undertake pleasure-trips.
JT%«r7«rir^9r3nTFriT ii^ii
Shka 9 .—During the Dasa-period of the lord of the
8th house, if the planet is strong, one ought to expect
the complete discharge of debts, his own elevation,
cessation of quarrels, and acquisition of buffaloes,
cows, goats and servants.
5/oitaJO.—During the Dasa-period of the lord of the
9th house, the person born will, in the company of his
wife, sons, grand children and relations, enjoy continu¬
ous prosperity, happiness and wealth, will perform
meritorious deeds, receive royal favor and an opportu¬
nity to show reverence to Brahmins and Gods.
wsnfHr# ^ i
Shka ii.—During the Dasa of the lord of the 10th
house, the person concerned will bring to a successful
termination any business or undertaking originated by

Adh. XX
him ; he will lead a happy life; he will become widely
reaow&ed; settle himself on a permanent position;
will do cleverly what is good and proper, or he will
get happy news and will command great respect.
Sloka 22.—During the period when the Dasa of the
lord of the 11th house is in progress, the person con¬
cerned will have an uninterrupted influx of wealth,
will meet with his kith and kin, will be served by
servants and slaves, and there will be domestic
happiness and great prosperity.
Shka 13.—When the Dasa of the lord of the 12th
house is in progress, there will be much spending of
money by the native for the cause of the good. He will
do meritorious acts, and thus ward off the several sins
already committed. He will also get royal honours.
Sloka 14. —The effects of the Dasa periods of planets
that are retrograde or that occupy their own,
exaltation or friendly houses or are placed in good
houses (position other than the 6th, the 8th or
the 12th) will be as those described so far I shal^
now set forth the effects of the Dasas of planets occupy,
ing inimical or depression houses, or that have been
eclipsed f become invisible) or that happen to be in the
6ih, the 8th or the 12th house.

Sloka 15. —^When the lord of the Lagna is badly
placed, the person concerned will during the Dasa of
that planet be imprisoned. He will lead the life
incognito, will suffer from fear, disease and mental
anxiety, will participate in a funeral rite, or will leave
his work and take up an others task, will suffer loss
of position and other misfortunes. If the lord of
the 2nd house be in a similar position, the person will
during the said planet's Dasa behave stupidly in a
public assembly, will not be true to his word or to his
family, will receive evil tidings, or write bad letters
suffer eye-trouble, will be fouhtongued, spend heavily
and fear the sovereign.
tTsa-wfe.f^wrarsr srenw iK^ii
Sloka 16.—li the lord of the 3rd house be posited in
a 5J?«nir (Dusstthana), the person concerned may ex¬
pect the demise of his brother during the planet's
Dasa; evil counsel will prevail in his undertakings,
and there will be trouble through secret machinations
of internal enemies, humiliation, discomfiture and loss
of pride thereby. If the lord of the 4th house be similar¬
ly weak, he will during his Dasa cause distress to the
native's mother, sickness to his dear friends, danger
to his lands and house, trouble from planets destruc¬
tion of cattle, etc., and danger from water.
irf^RTTwl^ wtt-

Adh. XX
ar«T^5’TJrR*T«r5r: 9%sr^ zrorw lUvjii
Shka 17 .—When the lord of the 5th house is defi¬
cient in strength, the person concerned will during
the planet's Dasa lose a son. He will have aberra
tion of mind, deception, a wearisome wandering,
trouble in the stomach, displeasure of the sovereign
and bodily weakness During the Dasa of the planet
that is weak and owning the 6th house, the native
will be troubled by thieves, suffer reverses, defeat
(subjugation and various diseases. He will do wicked
acts and servile duties. He will be despised and
scandalised and will suffer from wounds.
Sloka 18 .—During the Dasa of the lord of the 7th
house who js weak, there will be distress to the
native's son-in-law; there will be separation from his
beloved. Something untoward will happen to him
through the opposite sex. He will have intrigues with
wicked women, suffer from diseases in his private
parts, and will be wandering- When the ^asa of the
lord of the 8th house is in progress (and when Jie is
weak), the person concerned will suffer from exces¬
sive sorrow, want of sense, carnal appetite, jealousy,
unconsciousness, poverty, fruitless rambling, calumny,
sickness, humiliation and death.
wgd? ftgw Bwf i
swtfjqr t tt iil^ii

SJoka 19Ai the lord of the 9th house whose Dasa is in
progress be weak, the person will have to incur the
wrath (severe displeasure) of the deity that had been
worshipped formerly and suffer something untoward;
there will be trouble to his wife and children; he
will do wicked acts; one of his elders and his father
may die, and he may suffer from penury. When the
lord'of the 10th house whose Dasa is in progress is not
strong, anything done by the native becomes fruit*
less; he will further suffer loss of honour, will be
wicked in his behaviour will be absent in foreign
places. There will be inauspicious happenings. He
will lead a bad life and suffer troubles.
iiRoii
Sloka 20 .—'During the Dasa of the planet that is
weak and owning the 11th house the native will have
to hear evil tidings. There will be trouble to a brother
or sickness to children; he will suffer misery, decep¬
tion and ear disease. When the Dasa of the planet
that is weak emd owning the 12th house is in progress,
the person concerned will suffer from various diseases,
dishonour and bondage. All his wealth will disappear
like the (waning) Moon in the dark half of a month
or like the Moon that is at the western horizon.
Sloka 2/.— Whatever has been stated in the chapter

2QB
Adh. XX
on Definitions (Adh. I), whatever has been mentioned
as belonging to the presiding planets (Adh. II),
whatever calling is declared appropriate in the Chapter
on profession (Adh. V), whatever diseases have been
described as due to the several planets (Adh. XIV),
whatever has been spoken of as the effect of the aspect
or association with the planets (Adh. XVIII), or of the
presence of planets in Bhavas or of the lords of the
several Bhavas or the lords being associated with
others, (Adh. XV, XVI, XVII,) all this, must be duly
assigned to the planets concerned in their respective
Dasas.
tin ^ i
Sloka 22 .—The Dasa of a planet occupying a
(Vargottamamsa) will give favourable results. It
will be mixed when the said planet'is eclipsed or is in
depression. When the Dasa and Apahara belonging to
two planets both of whom own or occupy the 8th, the
12th or the 6th house are in progress, the effect will be
unfavourable.
3Finvnsn«T3^ ir^ii
Sloka 23.—During the Dasa period of a malefic pla¬
net when the sub-period of a planet ruling the 3rd, the
5th or the 7th star (reckoned from the natal star) is in
progress or the Bhukti of the lord owning the Janma
Rasi or the 8th houjie therefrom is passing, the person
concerned will have troubles from thieves and enemies
and will suffer much misery.
TO iR«ii

Shka 24 .—If in the order of main Dasas, the fourth
happens to belong to Saturn, the sixth to Jupiter, the
fifth to Mars or Rahu, eyery one of these will prove
dangerous. So also will be the Dasa period of a planet
occupying the end of a sign or owning a (Dusstthana 6th, 8th or 12th).
% ?5rT i
Shka 25,- -If Mars be posited in an (Urdh vamukha) Rasi {vide 1-8 s -pra*, or the exaltation sign
identical with the 10th or the 11th house. Ins Dasaperiod will secure to the native concerned a kingdom.
After subduing his enemies, he will become a renown¬
ed king endowed with a large number of vehicles and
a huge army and he will feed many people.
Sloka 26.- If Venus, unecUpsed and free from asso¬
ciation with a malefic planet, be in his own or exalta¬
tion Rasi identical with the j2th, the 10th or the 11th
house, the person concerned will, during the said
planet's Dasa-period, get many gems and precious
stones, have his intellect expanded, will become
immensely affluent and praised by many people.

210 Adh. Xk
Sloka 27.-^ All benefics, if placed in depression,
inimical, the 6th or the 12th houses, will only produce
untoward results, while malefics similarly placed will
give in their Dasa - periods incalculable (intense)
miseries.
msv 1
?9!n5rw ?rTrei
S/oka 28. —During a planet's Dasa-period, when a
Bhukti of a planet inimical to the Dasanatha, or of a
planet occupying the 6th house (or an inimical house)
ur of a planet inimical to the lord of the Lagna is in
progress, the native concerned will have to apprehend
danger from his enemies, and loss or change of posi*
tion; even the person who has all along been friendly
will turn out hositile to him.
Sloka 29. —Whichever Bhava counted from the
(Dasanatha) is occupied by the
(Bhuktinatha), it is only the effects arising from that
Bhava that will come to pass in that Bhukti. When the
Bhuktinatha occupies the 6th, the 8th or the 12th house
reckoned from the Dasanatha, the effect will be’ un*
happy. At other houses, it will be good.
wnj ii^oii
Sloka 30.—The good influence of planets is at its
maximum, three quarters, a half, a quartf r, at its mini¬
mum or ail according as the planets are in the exalta¬
tion sign, Moolatrikona, Swakshetra, friendly sign,
inimical sign or depression sign respectively. The

propoitions given above are with respect to benefics
or lords of benefic houses. In the case of malefics, or
lords of malefic houses, it will be reverse. When h
planet is in combustion (conjunction with the Sun),
its effect will be similar to that in depression.
C/. ITT. «n. VII-58).
Sloka 31. —Out of the planets Saturn, Mandi, Rahu,
the lord of the 22nd decanate and the lord of the 8th
house and the lords of the Navamsa Basis occupied by
these planets, find which is the weakest. It is only the
Dasa of that planet that will prove fatal, and the demise
will happen (occur) when Saturn during his transit
passes through an untoward house (Wz., 6th, 8th
or 12th).
Sloka 32, —Out of the two sets of planets, Wz , (l)
the lord of the house occupied by the lord of the 8th
house, and the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the
lord of the 8th house and (2) the lord of the 22nd de:
canate and the lord of the rising decanate, find which
planet in each pair is stronger. When the Dasa of this
stronger planet is in progress, and when Jupiter during
his transit passes through the Rasi and Navamsa
occupied by the lord of the 8th house or its triangular
position, the death of the person concerned may come
to pass.
Sfoio 33.—VL Jupiter, the lord of the house occupied
by the Moon and the ruler of the Lagna, be in Kendras

^12 Adh. XX
at a birth, the middle portion of the life is good. Planets
in ^ 15 ^^ (Prishlodaya'i signs give good results in the
Snd ; those in (Ubhayodaya) signs, in the mid*
die; and those in the (Sirshodaya) signs, in the
beginning. (C/. XXII-5).
Slok : 31. —When a planet whose Dasa is in progress
happens to pass through tin transit) his Swakshetra,
exaltation or a Iriendly house, he will promote the
prosperity of the Bhava it represents when counted
from the Lagna, provided the said planet is endowed
with full strength at the birth time as well.
Rjnftfc sii i
.^l.'ok i 31.- When a planet whose Dasa is in progress
be weak, eclipsed by the Sun's rays, in depression
or inimical house at birth, he will during his transit
through any house cause the total destruction of that
Bhava.
<rTT ii
Sloka 36.— When the Moon in her progress is in a
Rasi which happens to be the exaltation sign of the
lord of the Dasa, or a friendly house, the 3rd, the 6th,
the 10th, the 11th, a Trikona or the 7th house with
respect to the lord of the Dasa, the effects will be
happy. If the Moon's place (during transit) be different,
the effects will be far from happy.
Bn«ff3»nB8nc?r: «rf i
5r*p nw:

w^ftsvirnr:
Sloka 37 .—the planet whose Bhukti is in progress
should during the course of his transit at the time pass
through his depression or inimical house or become
eclipsed, there will be much misery. Should he pass
through his own, or exaltation house or be retrograde,
^he effects will then be good.
mg srvrir vi aisnT
Sloka 38 .—In the case of a planet whose Bhukti is
auspicious, the good effect will be manifested Vhen
the Sun enters the planet's exaltation sign. The same
effect will be felt when Jupiter transits the place. As
regards the planet whose Bhukti is inauspicious (i.e.,
capable of yielding bad or evil effects), the evil effects
will be felt when the Sun in his transit passes through
the Bhukti-lord's depression or inimical sign.
^ 3 wvn ?pT?!>5Rr
Sloka 39 —Rahu will give effects—good or bad as
the case may be—according to the nature of the planet
he associates with. That planet though good and
auspicious by himself will, on account of his associa¬
tion with Rahu, specially cause evil at the concluding
portion of his Dasa.
g T g 4<KnnRif mft wws 1
fRg ^(rm% m 5>T?r?ar^

Adh. XX
Sloka 40. —The 2nd and the 7th (houses) are termed
the two death-producing houses. If the lords of these
or the planets posited therein, are powerful they cause
death during their Dasas. Should the lord of the 8th or
the 12th house be very weak, the demise may be
expected during the Bhukti of either of the two.
Shka 41.—The Dasa of a planet owning a Kendra
will be inauspicious if he is a (Subha), and auspici¬
ous if he is an STSryr 'Asubha). The Dasas of all planets
who own Trikona houses (1, 5, 9) will be auspicious.
The lords of the 3rd, the 6th and the 11th houses even
if they be ^^VTT: (Subhas) will cause only evil. The lord
of the 8th house, if he should also happen to be the lord
of the Lagna will prove auspicious. The Sun or the
Moon even if he should happen to own the 8th house
will give only good effects. These are the effects o^
the several Dasas according to Parasara's opinion.
n^^ii
Sloka 42. —The lord of a Trikona house (5th and
9th) posited in a Kendra or the lord of a Kendra in a
Trikona house will prove auspicious to the native.
These two planets during their Bhuktis in each other's
Dasas will help each the other and thus co-operate
to make the period auspicious.

Sloka 43.— All planet do not produce good or bad
eitects to the native befitting the Bhavas they own,
during the ripening of their own Bhuktis in their res¬
pective Dasas.
Shka 44. —Find what all planets are related {vide
XV-30 supra) to the particular planet whose Dasa is
under consideration- Note also the planets if any which
are similarly circumstanced (whether for good or bad),
/. e., holding a position co-ordinate to the one under
reference. It is only in the Antardasas or Bhuktis of
these planets that this original planet will in his main
Dasa manifest his effect.
r^raiOR?rfffi i
ii«mi
' S/oita 45.—The lords of a Kendra house and a Trikona house even if they should by themselves be capa¬
ble of causing evil (owing to their happening to be
owners of other bad houses) become powerful, by their
mere relationship (vile XV-30 supra), to produce Yoga
and make the native prosperous.
SJoka 46- —If out of the lords of the 5th and 9th, one
of them happen to be related (vide XV-30 supra) to a
strong planet owning a Kendra, he becomes a Togakaraka, i.e., powerful in promoting the prosperity of the
native.

^16 Adh. Xk
Sloka 47. -U the lord of a Kendra be (in conjunc*
tion) associated with the lord of a Trikona, both of
them become powerful in promoting the prosperity of
the native. Should a lord of another Trikona also be
related (vide XV*30 supra), where is the doubt about
the native's prosperity being still further advanced ?
jtkt: \
SJoka 48. —If planets though by themselves bad,
are related (vida XV-30, supra) to a Yogakaraka (planet
producing prosperity), they will produce during their
Bhuktis good effects leading to affluence and happi¬
ness.
?r'<rr jft ii's^ii
Sloka 4D.—Th.e lord of a Trikona house will during
his Dasa and in a Bhukti of the lord of a Kendra house,
and viceversa produce good effects. Even if the said
two planate are not in any way connected (wJe XV-30,
supra', they will not cause harm.
JTTCffr^sfr *i3r ii’aoh
Sloka SO. —Jupiterand Venus if they should happen
to be owners of Kendras become powerful to cause
evil. If they should also ocupy (or own) Makara houses
(2nd and 7th), they become powerful to cause death.
gfqn^c%!^(T?T«r5
Sloki 5i.— Mercury (if he should happen to own
Kendra houses) is less powerful (than Tupiter and

Venus in doing evil). The Moon in such a condition
comes next to Mercury. Malefics when they happen
to own Kendras will become more and more auspicious
in their effects.
Sloka 52 .— If Rahu~and Ketu should be posited in a
Kendra or Trikona they and become Yogakatakas, i.e ,
instrumental in (doing) bringing about good to the
native if they are connected (vide XV*30, suprc) with
the lord of one of these ^Kendra and Trikona'.
vr%?rf im?ii
Sioxa 5jr.—If Rahu and Ketu occupy ^houses owned
by benefics and are connected (vide XV-30, suprc) with
any planet, they become auspicious and produce good
results at their Bhuktis in the main Dasa of the said
planet.
^ is another reading in the first
line.
jr«ivB?r »TiiT^?f7?r! imyii
Sloka 54. —During the Dasa of a Yogakaraka planet,
the Rajayoga begins when the Bhuktis of the Karaka
planets are in progress. The Bhuktis of malefics which
succeed them in their turn increase the same.
Sloka 55 .—The following will engender misery to

Adh/XX
the native : (1) the planet occupying the 8th house;
(2) the one aspecting it; (3) the one owning it; (4) the
one owning the decanate oi the 8th house; and (5) the
planet owning the sign occupied by Mandi (miyfC).
Even among these, the one that is the weakest will be
the killer of the native and this may happen in his
Dasa or (Apahara).
wIcht i
sTTClfW iih^h
Sloka 56 .—The Dasa of a planet fallen from exalta¬
tion is termed (Avarohini) or descending;
while that of a planet in a friend's or exaltation house
is named (Madhya) or middling. The Dasa of a
planet proceeding from his depression is called
(Arohini) or rising. The Dasa of a planet that
is actually in his depression or inimical Rasi or in his
depression or 'inimiced Amsa is termed ensflTT
(Adhama) or worst.
S/oia 57 .— When a planet even if eclipsed or posited
in its depression or inimical house occupies an
auspicious sign or Amsa (sltn'li his Dasa should be
pronounced as of mixed effect * Misra phala)
and is capable of giving good effect in the latter half of
the Dasa. ^
S/oka 58 .—Death (of th^ > relative signified by the
particular Bhava) will take j lace in the main Dasa oi

the planet in the 12th house (reckoned from that
Bhava) or of the one owning it whichever is weakerwnc*PBiT :—
?r?jgFrggs«qr«i jrfgcsrr ^ gr ii'^» ii
Shka 59 .—If the lord of the Dasa in his transit comes
to the Lagna or if the 3rd, the 6th, the 10th or the
11th house from it, or if the lord of the Dasa comes to
the (9(tgiT) Sapthavarga places of the Lagna or when
a friendly planet or a benefic comes to the Lagna, the
Dasa will prove auspicious at that time.
ggtfJr gtgr ^ frr g g igTTgrHi g rg T^ngflr: h: i
* nr sr^g iivn
Shka GO. —During the several periods over which a
Dasa may extend, the good or evil effect is to be deter*
mined with reference to the particular house counted
from the Moon which the lord of the Dasa may occupy
for the time being in its progress through its orbit.
grig rr^nf^^ngr^ i
^fg^^ofygg^ggasr ^
Shka 61. —The Moon produces beneficial effects
when in the house of a friend of the lord of the Dasa;
or in the exaltation house of the latter or in the 7th
house, a Trikona house or in any one of the gggg
(Upachaya) houses with reference to the ^gngrg
(Dasanatha) lord of the Dasa.
tT%5 gg^g ftvfts fr
ggiwgrqjf^griJSggff^gTg; i
ggrftcfgjRiwl sf^nrrt

Adh XX
Shka 62. —In the favourable positions mentioned in
the previous Sloka, the Rasi occupied by the Moon
should represent some one of the 12 Bhavas, Lagna,
wealth, etc., at the time of birth. The Moon in one of
these favourable positions promotes prosperity in
respect of the Bhava represented by the Rasi occupied.
In the unfavourable positions, the Bhava represented
by the Rasi (occupied by the Moon) suffers damage.
*T!TT^^gf^5rr ^
Tni*Trf^!n .
rRr g»srf^fqr?Bm tpfTrnrniqT#
srw mfysvgpT!
^!oka 63. —In the case of a nativity, one ought to
guess the effects after a reference to Saravali, Varahamihira's Hora Sastra and the Nakshatra Dasa. While
so guessing, one must refer also to the positions of the
planets with reference to the Lagna at the time of the
query or the (Janma Rasi) or Lagna at birth
and then attempt his predictions. There will not be
any material difference between the Prasna Lagna and
the Janma Lagna. (in the matter of the predictions.)
Thus ends the 20th Adhyaya on the "Dasas of the
several Bhava lords and their Bhuktis" in the
work Phaladeepika composed by
Mantreswara

II q^ra?iis«qra: ii
n ii
arTfT^^hTr*Ry^ ?r? iCTrsr: sraf«ir l
?rr?ro?ci ^«r^?^Tsnf?TTFcr^^ ii^n
ADHYAYA XXL
Nature of Bhuktis and Antaras.
Sloka I.—l shall now clearly explain how to appor>
tion the Bhukti periods in a Dasa and their further subdivisons as also their effects in their order. Whatever
has been here described as effect in the case of any
planet, all that should be stated to occur in the planet's
Dasa, in his Bhukti and in his Antara.
TilisnsTf^n ^nn:
few mm i
sn«nwr
Sloka 2 .—Multiply the years of a Mahadasa by the
years of the planet whose Antardasa is required. Divide
the product by 120. The quotient will represent the
years of the Antardasa. Multiply the remainder b^ 12
and divide the result by 120. The quotient will repre
sent the months—multiply the remainder by 30 and
divide by 120. The quotient will give the days, and
so on. The same process should be adopted for calcu¬
lating the sub-periqds in an Antardasa, or their further
sub-divisions. In anv Dasa, the order of the Bhuktis is
similar to that in the Dasas the first Bhukti commenc¬
ing wi& that of its lord.

Adh. XXI
fsnrf Twf srfg^ ii^ii
SMa3.—During the Dasa and Bhukti of the Sun,
the person concerned will obtain fame through royal
favor, lead a wandering life through a wild and hilly
country and will acquire wealth. He will suffer from
fever, illness caused by excessive heat and may also
lose his father.
1^5^ crsrnrsr: i
Sloka 4. —When the Moon has her Bhukti during the
progress of the Sun's Dasa, the person will destroy hie
enemies; his miseries will come to an end and there
will be accession of wealth. He will be engaged
in agriculture, house building and will be joined with
friends. If the Moon be malefic, he will suffer from
consumption, have fire accident and diseases arising
from water.
!^oka 5 .—When Mars has his Apahara in the Sun's
Dasa, the person concerned will suffer from diseases
and wounds; there will be loss of position and trouble
from enemies, misunderstandings with his relations,
danger from the authorities and loss of wealth.
is another reading in (he first line.

Sloka 6, —^During Rahu's Bhukti in the Sun's Dasa,
fresh enemies will spring up, wealth will be destroyed
or stolen, troubles will arise and there will be danger
from poison and a desire to please the senses (sensual
pleasures). The native will suffer from severe head¬
ache and eye-complaints.
Sloka 7.—Destruction of enemies, acquisition of
money through various means, worshipping the Gods
every day, adoration of the Brahmins, elders and rela¬
tions, disease in the ear, and pulmonary consumption
will distinguish the Antardasa of Jupiter during the
Sun's Mahadasa.
f^nn I
««Rsnft^5r iicii
Sloka 8 .— During the Bhukti of Saturn in the Sun's
Dasa, a person should be prepared for loss of wealth,
separation from his children, diseases of women, or
loss of elders, abnormal expenditure, sudden loss of
cloths, utensils and other goods, or servants, excessive
filth and suffering from phelgmatic troubles.
filths m\
Shka 9 .— At the time when Mercury's Bhukti
in the Sun's Dasa is ih progress, the- person will suffer
from cutaneous eruption (itches), boil (ulcer), leprosy,
jaundice, passing wind (^u/r«nu»tt/ •9S’;s«>), pain in the
b^lly, hips, etc., destruction of land, ancl disease
arising from the vitiation of the three humours.
gCWifS I

Adh. Xxl
S!oka /O.— Loss of friends, misunderstandings with
one's relations and family, trouble from enemies, loss
of wealth and position, sickness to elders, severe
pain in the leg as well as the head—all these may be
expected in Ketu's Bhukti in the Sun's Mahadasa.
^%5rf
Sloka 11 .—Pain in the head, belly-ache, trouble
in the anus, doing agricultural operations, loss of
house, wealth and corn, sickness to children and wife
in an intense form—all these will occur when the
Bhukti of Venus in the Sun's Mahadasa is in progress.
j^ftsrinftrcJTsrrg^irrJTt vr^ i
Sloka 12 .—When the Moon's Bhukti in his own
Dasa is in progress, a new daughter will be born; there
will be acquisition of a new and clean cloth, and meet¬
ing with good Brahmins. The native will be able to
satisfy his mother's desires [i.e , mother will be happy,)
and will enjoy the happiness of the couch (woman's
company)
Sloka 13 .— -During the Bhukti of Mars in the Moon's
Dasa, the person will suffer from diseases arising from
bile, fire and (impurity of) blood, from anxiety, and
misery and there will be trouble from enemieemid
thieves. There will further be loss of wealth and
honour.

Sloka 14. —During the advent of Rahu's Bhukti i®
the Moon's Dasa, there will occur a severe reproach
or fault, increase of enemies, diseases to relations,
danger from thunder-storm lightning and illness and
fever caused by bad food and drink.
3^ ill'll!
Sloka 15. —During Jupiter's Bhukti in the Moon's
Dasa, the person concerned will take great delight in
making gifts and other beneficent actions. He will
begin to feel happy, wear new cloths and ornaments.
He will meet with friends and be highly honoured by
the king.
snor^rffT^rsiT^T \\\\\\
Sloka 16. —Trouble through various kinds of
diseases, sickness to friends, children and wife, the
happening of a great calamity or loss of life will mark
the Apahara of Saturn during the progress of the
Moon's Mahadasa.
5 is anotliur ruadiiig i'ur in tl>o
first line. TIio translation will las “A iniiltitiulo of bilious alTocjlions”
«r!r*nrr>sr»rtf:^arim?:T¥r^wr^^^^?«T^: i
srf^^rilr niiJii
Sloka 17. —During the Bhukti of Mercury in the
Moon's Dana, there will be acquisition at all times ot
wealth, elephants, horses, cattle and ornan^ents and
much happ:.ness will be felt. Clearness of conception
will aUd arise

Adh. xxi
Sloka i&.—During Ketu's interved in the Moon's
Dasa will crop up loss of mental balance, wealth and
relations, danger from water and trouble to dependants
and servants.
55rl^^<Tg«n«T^3fe«rf3f^?T5^oft?5% ^ iil^ii
Sloka 19. —During the period of time allotted to
Venus in the Moon's Dasa, activities relating to the
following will take place chased or sold away: viz.,
water, carriage, gold, jewels, women, trade agricultural
operations etc., he will acquire children, friends, cattle,
and corn.
?13T»T?r5I»T?ftq I
»r^ ?rTT iroh
Sloka 20. —During the Sun's Bhukti in the Moon's
Mahadasa, honor from the sovereign, excessive
valour, cessation of diseases, downfall or decline of
the enemy's side and diseases caused by bile and wind
may be expected.
n^lii
Sloka 22.—During Mars' own interval in the planet's

Mahadaaa, there will be suffering from diseases arising
out of excess of bile and heat, trouble from wounds,
separation from brothers, influx of money etc., due on
account of lands and litigations and trouble from
cousins, fire, enemies, the sovereign and thieves.
!rT«r«nTts«r m
iR^ii
Sloka 22 .—During Rahu's Bbukti in Mars' Dasa
there will be danger from weapons, fire, thieves
enemies and rulers, injury from poison, disease in the
belly, eyes, the head, loss of elders and relations, peril
to one's own life or big calamities.
Sloka 23.—During Jupiter's interval in Mars' Mahadasa, the person will worship the Brahmanas and Gods,
will resort to sacred places and shrines, and do
meritorious deeds, will show hospitality to guests at
all times, will acquire new children and friends, will
suffer from ear disease in a severe form or from
phlegmatic complaint.
»Tfi:f^sn5r:

2*28 Adh. XXI
Sloka 24. —Trouble after trouble to one's children,
wife and elders, calamities beyond number, grief, loss
of wealth, robbing of wealth through enemies, fear and
sickness through heat and wind, will mark Saturn's
Bhukti in the Mahadasa of Mars.
trg»T1T3r?TTnTf I
;pr^5TTn:'if\*3'r err
flrj^vn’sftwcn^J
Shka 25. —Fear of enemies, much trouble from
thieves, loss of wealth, destruction of cattle, elephants
and horses, association with enemies, harassment by
kings or enmity with Sudras mark the interval of
Mercury in Mars' Mahadasa.
%5rTf|[^r;n5fts«sraT i
sr^f^ l;g:
Sloka 26. —When Ketu has his interval in Mars'
Dasa, there will be danger from thunder, bolt, sudden
trouble from fire and weapon, going out of one's own
country or loss of wealth, and exit from the world
either of his own self or of his wife.
gBr 3r%?TRrJiTJi
msrqrsn*
JTTftRr qgif^TJ=nr H^'^n
Sloka 27. —Defeat in battle, residence in a foreign
country, theft of property by thieves, trouble in the left

eye and loss of servants will be what a person may
expect in the Bhukti of Venus in Mars' Dasa.
Sloka 28. —Honour from the sovereign, fame and
power got in war, acquisition of servants, wealth,
corn, women and harem and the widening of the scope
for liverihood and wealth got through daring deeds
or force are what may be expected in the Sun's
Apahara in Mars' Dasa,
Shka 29, —Acquisition of various kinds of wealth
and children, severance from enemies, acquisition
of cloths, bed, ornaments, jewels and wealth,
trouble to elders, and pain owing to enlargement of
spleen or excess of bile may mark the Moon's Bhukti
in Mars' Mahadasa.
Sloka 30. —Illness through poison and water, com¬
ing in sight of a venomous serpent, intercourse with
another's Wife, separation from or loss of one's near
and dear ones, bad words and mental anguish through

Adh. XXI
wicked people will be the characteristic features of
Rahu's Bhukti in Rahu's Dasa.
9T*i^5rt ?nmm: i
Sloka 31. —Advent of happiness, worship of Gods
and Brahmins freedom from diseases, association with
charming ladies and discussion of the meanings of
sacred texts will mark Jupiter's Bhukti in Rahu's Dasa.
Slokj 32. —During Saturn's interval in Rahu's Dasa,
a disease due to the vitiation of wind and bile, wounds
in the bod 7 , misunderstandings with one's children,
wife or brothers, destruction of servants, and loss of
position are what may crop up.
if|5rf WJTTJTITt I
'Ti%?rr^onRf^r^T^
Shka 33.—-Acquisition of children and wealth,
meeting of friends, gross cntemptibleness of the mind,
cleverness in doing any intelligent business, adorn¬
ment and skill in general will mark Mercury's Bhukti
in Rahu's Dasa.
irsr^f^ppT i
^8r«riw:
Sloka 34 .—During Ketu's Bhukti in Rahu's Dasa,
one has to apprehend fever, trouble from fire, weapon
and enemies, head-ache, trembling of the body, injury
to one's friends and elders, suffering’ caused by poison
and wounds and quarrel with one's friends.
5T?Rt<rsrr«:?n grgimriFwft^iTnmt i

«CT^*tiwn«r{
Sloka 35 .—Acquisition of a wife, comfoits of the
couch, horses, elephants, lands, and phlegmatic and
windy disorders, and quarrel with one's own rela*
tions, will mark the Bhukti of Venus in Rahu's
Mahadasa.
Sloka 36.—During the Sun's Bhukti in Rahu's Maha*
dasa, there will be trouble from enemies, intense pain
in the eyes, danger from poison, fire and hit by wea¬
pons, and the springing up of fresh troubles. The wife
and children will suffer from diseases and there will be
great trouble from the king.
fffftcqrfw: fsrnqwft
Sloka 37 .—Loss of the wife, quarrels, mental anguish,
agricultural operations, loss of wealth, cattle and chil¬
dren, disaster to friends, and danger from water will
mark the Moon's Bhukti in Rahu's Mahadasa.
srdftnrf srdTSTIwV qr I
Sloka 38 .—^During Mars' interval in Rahu's Dasa,
one has to apprehend danger from the sovereign, fire,
thieves and weapons, or one's own death through a
terrible disease, disturbance to one's position, heart
and eye-troubles.

232 Adh. Xx*
Sloka 3d.— Good luck, splendour, high esteem,
development of good qualities, acquisition of a good
son, honour from the sovereign, coming in contact
with one’s preceptor, good men and realisation of one's
desires are what a person may expect in Jupiter's Dasa
and Bhukti.
srTTon*^ ii«oii
Sloka 40. —During Saturn's Bhukti in Jupiter's Dasa,
association with courtezans, taking to intoxicating
drinks and such other evil deeds, rising to eminence
.happiness, sickness to one's family and cattle heavy
expenses, excessive fear, eye complaints and sickness
to children are what a person has to be prepared for.
Sloka 42,—When Mercury's Bhukti is in progress in
Jupiter's Mahadasa, one will come to grief through
women gambling, and drinking, and will suffer from
diseases caused by the vitiation of the three humours.
This is the opinion of some. Others consider that the
effect will be solely beneficial by the worship of Gods
and Brahmins and by the acquisition of or association
with sons, wealth and happiness.
IlijRII
Sloka 42.—During Ketu's interval in Jupiter's Maha¬
dasa, one has to suffer from wounds caused by a
weapon. There will arise misunderstandings with the
servants, mental anguish, trouble to wife and chiidren,

danger to life and loss ol (oi separation from) elders or
friends.
?-T% iiy^ii
Sloka 43. —Acquisition oi various materials^ cattle,
corn, clothes, utensils, woman, children, food, drink,
couch (bed) and ornaments, worshipping of Gods and
Brahmins and entire devotion to them are to be looked
for in Sukra's interval in Jupiter's Mahadasa.
;TT3»’wwgrTir5TTm: i
Sloka 44. —Victory, honour from the sovereign,
acquisition of fame, warmth of temper, men, horses
and other vehicles and an extremely prosperous life in
a street (consisting of rows of houses), a town or coun¬
try will mark the Sun^s Bhukti in Jupiter's Mahadasa.
Sloka 41'. — Acquisition of many damsels, destruc¬
tion of enemies, gain of money, profit in agriculture,
saleable commodities, high fame and intence devotion
in the worship of Gods and Brahmins will mark Moon's
interval in Jupiter's Mahadasa.
«r»?|;«T?ftd‘ariTR:3ir?fts«l9nwr:

Adh. XXI
Sloka Satisfying the relations, addition of
wealth from a host of enemies, acquisition of good
lands, doing beneficent acts, celebrity of power, a
little injury to a preceptor or elder, or a severe hurt to
the eye, are what a person may look for in Mar's inter¬
val in Jupiter's Mahadasa.
m i
^rer:
57oAa 7/. -Distress through relations, excessive
mental anguish, sickness, danger from thieves, disease
to one's elders or to youngsters of his family, trouble
from the sovereign, misfortune through enemies, and
loss of wealth will mark Rahu's Bhukti in Jupiter's
Mahadasa.
Sloka 45.~lncrease in agriculture, servants and
buffaloes, windy disease, acquisition of much money
through a person of the Sudra caste, friendship with an
old woman, laziness and sinful action are what Saturn
can bring on in his own Dasa and Bhukti.
!3VTJTfqflrf^ 5rR5n i
Sloka 49. —During Mercury's interval in Saturn's
Dasa a person will have prosperity, happiness, female
society, honour from the sovereign, success and com¬
pany of friends; he will suffer from diseases arising

from the three humours. His brothers and children
will be troubled with sickness.
j?Rr; i
srgvnsrsft^jifriT^^ «pr %gT^
Sloka 50.—During Ketu's interval in Saturn's Mahadasa, the person becomes liable to disease caused by
wind and fire, trouble from enemies, a tendency to
always quarrel with his sons and wife, meeting with
something inauspicious, and danger from serpents.
Slpka 51. —During Sukra's Bhukti in Saturn's Mahadasa, the person will be happy with his friends, wife
and children, and there will be increase of wealth due
to agriculture and sea voyage and he will become
widely renowned.
inw g ^ i ^ ^
Sloka 52. —Death or danger at all times from ene¬
mies, sickness to elders, disease in the belly and eyes,
loss of wealth and corn, a person has to experience
during the Sun's Bhukti in Saturn's Mahadasa.
gorr r^?!i i
Sloka S3. —Loss of wife or danger to one's own life,
trouble to friends, danger from diseases, and intense
fear from water and wind may be expected during Ihe
Moon's Bhukti in the Dasa of Saturn.

2'*^® Adh. XX!
Sloka 54. —Loss of one's position, quarrel with one's
relations, serious illness, trouble from fever, fire, wea¬
pon or poison, increase of enemies, hernia and trouble
to the eyes will mark the interval of Mars in Saturn's
Mahadasa.
^T5T?T?r?T 53r»inTrfe<TT57T#- ll'^HII
Slokt 55. —Going in crooked ways, loss of life or
danger from diabetes or gonorrhoea, severe enlarge¬
ment of the spleen, a continuous fever, or wound are
what a person may have to suffer from during Rahu's
Bhukti in the Dasa of Saturn.
aTiTn€sr fg 3r > r u TTfvTrfen^|sr?iTf%g:ferfg 51%?!; i
fr ^nrf
Shka 56 .-— Delight in worshipping Gods and Brah¬
mins, pleasure in living in one's own house in the
company of his wife and children, and phenomenal
increase cf wealth and corn are what a person will
have during Jupiter's Bhukti in Saturn's Dasa.
^q?r: ii'*'5ii
Slola .0/.-Devotion to virtue, association with the
learned, a clear intellect (an unbiassed mind), acquisi¬
tion of money through Brahmins, great fame through
learning and continuous happiness may be looked for
in Mercury's Bhukti in his own Mahadasa.
n?rj mh<ii

Sloka 58. —Misery, sorrow, quarrel, perplexity, shak¬
ing in the body, association with unfriendly people,
and loss of lands and vehicles are to be expected dur¬
ing Ketu's interval in Mercury's Dasa.
Sloka 59. —Adoration of Gods, Brahmanas and
reverend seniors, offering of acceptable presents, devo¬
tion to duty conformable to religion and morality,
addition of clothes and ornaments and meeting of
friends will mark Sukra's interval in the Dasa of
Mercury.
’St n^oii
Sloka 60. —Gold, coral, horses, and elephants will
be got and secured in a house; there will be good
food and drink and honour from the sovereign. All
these may be expected in the Sun's Bhukti in
Mercury's Mahadasa.
Sloka 6i.-Head ache, eye-complaint, trouble
through leprosy, ringworm, severe pain in the neck,
and even danger to life dog the footstep's of a person
during the Moons'interval in Mercury's Mahadasa.
^TJTd^RTT
Sloka 62.—Danger from fire, trouble to the eye,
fear of thieves, excessive misery, loss of position and

Adh. XXI
windy disease are what a person may expect during
Kuja's Bhukti in Mercury's Mahadasa.
Sloka 63. —Loss of honour or a fall from one's
position, destruction to one's own self (or loss of
wealth ?). danger from fire, poison or through water,
head-ache, eye-complaint or trouble in the belly, mark
Rahu's Bhukti in Mercury's Mahadasa.
Sloka 64. —Freedom from sickness, destruction of
enemies, cessation of fear, success in religious devo¬
tion, honour from the sovereign, success in moral duty,
and wealth of penance mark Jupiter's Bhukti in Mer*
cury's Mahadasa.
Sloka 65.™ Heavy loss of wealth and religious merit,
failure in all business, diseases arising through (dis¬
orders of) phlegm and wind will mark Saturn's Bhukti
in Mercury's Mahadasa.
»msigr«n% ^sn^i f5ft
Sloka 66.—When Ketu ihas his interval in his pwn
Mahadasa, a person has to apprehend quarrel with ene¬
mies, misunderstanding with friends, hearing of bad
words, burning sensation in the limb^ due to fever,
intrusioQ to other's houses and dastruptfop of waalthi

^rwsw^: i
'Tfer^wsR ir^t^!n<Tt %%«ir5rn5?n:T% ii^'^ii
Sloka 67 .—Quarrel with a great Brahmin, misunder*
standing with one's wife and even with his own rela¬
tions, birth of a daughter, humiliation, and annoyance
from others are what one should be prepared for in
Sukra's Bhukti in Ketu's Mahadasa.
5^3rST*T^ ?^5wMt«rf^5T?TR55W. I
Sloka 68 .— ^Death of a reverend elder, fever, mis¬
understanding with one's relation, gain through foreign
travel, fighting a rebellion for the king, diseases caus¬
ed by phlegm and wind are likely to crop up during
the Sun's interal in Ketu's Dasa.
Sloka 69. —^Windfalls and unexpected loss of wealth,
separation from one's son, a laboured delivery that
engenders much sorrow, acquisition of servants and
female children, all these are to be looked for in the
Moon's Bhukti in Ketu's Dasa.
Sloka 70 .~- Quarrel with the members of one's own
family, destruction of one's relations, danger from ser¬
pents, thieves and fire, and trouble from enemies are
what a person has to incur during Kuja's Bhukti in
Ketu's Dasa.
!rsiri: i
Sloka 7i.-—Quarrel caused by enemies, danger from
the sovereign, fire, thieves and serpents, remarks from

!^4U Adh. XXi
wicked people, working spells for the injury of another
persoQ (©afriuti) are to be Expected in Rahu's Bhukti in
Ketu's Mahadasa.
Sloka 72. —Birth of a very good son, adoration of
the chief of Gods, income through lands or finding of a
treasure, money through acceptance of presents, influx
of a large sum of money, and honour from the sovereign
may be looked for in Jupiter's Bhukti in Ketu's Dasa.
Sloka 73. —Trouble to, or from, servants, annoyance
to or from, others, quarrel with enemies and the break*
ing of some limb thereby, loss of money ;and loss of
position are, say the wise, to be expected in Saturn's
interval in Ketu's Mahadasa.
|r?r^or5r# srgir5rft?T: i
Sloka 7■^.— Birth of a very good son, appreciation
from a big wealthy lord, monetary gain from lands,
trouble from the chief of the enemies loss in cattle and
loss in agricultural operations are to be expected in
Mercury's Bhukti in Ketu's Mahadasa.
srsffi
Sloka 75.—Clothing, ornaments, vehicle perfumes
and the like and comforts of the couch will a person
have in plenty besides bodily splendour and wealth
from the sovereign in Sukra's Bhukti in Sukra's Maha*
dasa.

W<Tf vWff{^?T 5Tftftonn I
Sloka 76 .—In the Sun's Bhukti in the Dasa oi Venus,
a person becomes liable to diseases affecting the eyes,
the belly and the cheeks, danger from the sovereign
and trouble from elders, members of his family and
other relations.
Sioka 77 .—When the Moon has her interval in the ,
Dasa of Venus, a person suffers much pain from a
disease due to an inflammation in the nails, head and
teeth, sickness arising from wind and bile, or loss of
wealth or trouble through diarrhoea, disease of the
spleen or consumption.
«K5Tw:cTJ5r^*ii5rSt^i«r?r; i.
Sloka 78 .— Trouble through flow of blood and bile,
acquisition of gold and copper, acquisition of lands,
seduction of a young female and loss of one's appoint
ment are what may be expected in Kuja's Bhukti in the
Dasa of Venus.
T?»T’5ft|d^rTt3rw’fl55r iivsMi
Sloka 79.- Acquisition of a treasure, birth of a son,
good news, honour to or from relatives, imprisonment
of enemies and injury from fire, thieves and poison
may be expected in Rahu's Bhukti in the MaHadasa of
Venus.
^TfH3r^m«*n»rir51
^ 5Tftftnrf H<«>||

2 Adh. XXII
SIpka Performance of. one's various religious
duties, worshipping of Gods, enjoying the company of
his wife and children, and enjoyments derivable from
his position of authority will mark the Bhukti of Jupiter
in the Mahadasa of Venus.
Sloku 62. - Honour from the city fathers, the military
or police or from the sovereign, acquisition of an
excellent damsel, influx of wealth and various materi*
dis, utensils and comforts requisite for enjoyment
will mark Saturn's Bhukti in the Mahadasa of Venus.
Siokj if.2. During Mercury's interval in the Dasa of
Venus, a person secures the comfort of his sons, will
have happiness on a large scale, great power and fame
and destruction of enemies; but he will be troubled
by sickness through diseases arising from wind and
bile. •
frrr^»§rTf^5r%; WHrfrg i
'iTpv gr
Slok'j 61^- -During Ketu's Bhukti in the Mahadasa of
Venus, a person will be destitute of children and happi¬
ness, will suffer much from danger through fire: he
will further suffer losses and disease in some limb, and
will associate with courtezans.
?T?i;9rrf^5 w «<«i

Shka fl^.—What has been stated as the effect in
each of the'Bhuktis of a Dasa should be so declared as
to suitably fit in with the person's caste, status, occu¬
pation, etc. In a similar way should results be attempt¬
ed for each Antara or Antarantara; or, the effects may
also be foretold after guessing correctly the particular
Dasa then ruling by means of the characteristics reveal¬
ed (exhibited) at the time in the native's person by the
elements (Panchabh'utas Fire, Air, Ether, Water and
Earth) through Eyes, Touch, Ears, Face and Nose; or
by hearing the words emanating at the time.
Thus ends the 21st Adhyaya on the “Sub-Divisions of Dasas,
vis., Bhnktis, Antaras, .-Intarantaras etc.” in the work T’lialadoopika composed by Mantroswara.
tl II
II 11
ADHYAYA XXII.
Sloka I.—The triad of stars reckoned from Aswini
should be cast by quarters in the (Apasavya) or
(Pradakhina) order from Mesha to Meena among
the 12 Basis to which the Navamsas composing the
tzaid belong. Again, the 12 quarters of the triad
reckoned from Rohini are to b® assigned to the l2
Basis counted from Vrischika to Dhanus in the
(Savya-reverse, * Apradakhina or anti-clock
wise) order.
HC'nwnrewt w iftfw i
rngt wfRT? iRii

^44 Adh. XXII
Shka 2. —^Thus are the triads of stars reckoned in
their order (from Aswini) to be distinguished as
(Apasavya) and (Savya). The years assigned to
a planet constitute the Dasa'peiiod of the Rasi owned
by that planet. This is the peculiarity in the
(Kalachakra) system, say the wise.
*Tf: Tr: I
IIBII
Shka 5, 21, 7, 9, 10, 16 and 4 are the numbers
representing the period in years respectively of the
seven planets reckoned from the Sun, and are the
means (sources) for feeling the good and bad effects.
g?:gT??T?r ii«ii
Shka 4. —In this Kalachakra system consisting of
Dasas, Apahara.s, etc , 1 shall now expound the formulas
for the several Nakshatra padas from Aswini onwards.
Every such formula consists of nine syllables indicat¬
ing by their number (as per iB?rg«!nf^-Katapayadi
mnemonics) the particular Rasyapaharas composing the
Dasa of the Nakshatrapada under consideration, and
consequently the total life-period appertaining thereto
by means of the years allotted to the several Rasi
owners.
groft g-rg imii
SJoka 5. —For those born in the first gi^ (Pada) of
Aswini, the first sub-period belongs to Mesha-Mars ;
the second to Vrishabha-Venus; the third to MithunaMercury; the fourth to Kataka-Moon; the fifth to
Simha-Suu; the sixth to Kanya-Mercuty; the seventh
to Tula ■ Venus ; the 8th to Vrischika - Mars; and

SI- 6 5TR5fts«mr; d ir>
the 9th to Ohanur^Jupiter. For the 2nd (Pada)
of Aswini, the sub-periods are owned by (1) MakaiaSaturn (2} Kumbha - Saturn (3) Meena • Jupiter (4)
Vrischika-Mars (5) Tula-Venus (6' Kanya-Mercury (7)
Kataka-Moon (8) Simha-Sun and (9) Mithuna-Mercury.
For the 3rd (Pada) of Aswini, the sub-periods be¬
long to (1) Vrishabha-Sukra (2) Mesha-Kuja '3) MeenaGuru (4) Kumbha-Sani (S) Makara-Sani {6)DhanurGuru (7) Mesha-Kuia (8) Vrishabha-Sukra and (9)
Mithuna-Budha. For the 4th (Pada) of Aswini, the
sub-periods are owned by (1) Kataka Chandra (2)
Simha-Ravi (3) Kanya-Budha (4) Tula-Sukra (5) Vrischika-Kuja (6) Dhanur-Guru (7) Makara-Sani (8) KumbhaSani and (9) Meena-Guru.
li^ii
Shka 6.—For the 1 st gnf (Pada) of Bhaxani, the
several sub-periods are (1) Vrischika-Kuja (2) Tula.
Sukra (3) Kanya-Budha (4) Kataka-Chandra (S) ISimhaRavi (6) Mithuna-Budha (7) Vrishabha-Sukra (8) MeshaKuja and (9) Meena-Guru.
For the 2nd (Pada) of Bharani, the sub-periods
are (1) Kumbha-Sani (2) Makara-Sani (3) Dhanur-Guru
( 4 ) Mesha-Kuja (5) Vrishbha-Sukra (6) Mithuna-Budha
(7) Kataka-Chandra (8) Simha - Ravi and (9) KanyaBudha.
For the 3rd gr? (Pada) of Bharani, the sub-periods
are (1) Tula-Sukra (2) Vrischika-Kuja (3) Dhanur-Guru
(4^ Makara-Sani (5) Kumbha-Sani (6) Meena-Guru (7)
Vrischika-Kuja (8) Tula-Sukra and (9) Kanya-Budha.
The sub-periods of the 4lh (Pada) of Bharani
are (1) Kataka-Chandra (2) Simha-Ravi (3) Mithuna-

Adh. XXI
2-in
Budha (4) V 'ishabha-Sukra (5) Mesha-Kuja (6) Meena*
Guru (7) Kumbba-Sani (0) Makara-Sani and (9) Dhanur'
Guru.
Sloka 7.— The formulas for Aswini and Bharani are
as described above. The four formulas given for the
four Padas of Aswini will edso respectively apply to the
four Padas of Krittika in the 317937 (Apasavya -
Pradakshina' triad. The formulas for Rohini and
Mrigasira.c in the 937 (Savya) triad are stated in the
next two Slokr. and the four formulas given for the
four Padas of 1 irigasiras should also be used again for
the four Padas of Ardra.
Shka S.—The sub-divisions for the 1st TT? (Pads' of
Rohin^are (1) Dhanur-Guru (2) Makara-Sani (3’Kuiubha-Sani (4) Meena-Guru (5) Mesha-Kuja ( 6 ) VrishabhaSukra ( 7 ) Mithuna-Budha ( 8 ) Simha-Ravi and (9) KatakaChandra.
For the 2 nd 717 (Pada) of Rohini, the sub-periods
are (1) Kanya-Budha ( 2 ) Tula~Sukra (3) Vrischika-Kuja
(4) Meena-Guru (5) Kumbha-Sani ( 6 ) Makara-Sani (7)
Dhemur-Guru ( 8 .* Vrischika-Kuja and (9) Tula-Sukra.
For the 3 rd (Pada) of Rohini, the sub-periods
are ('.) Kanya-Budha (2) Simha-Ravi (3) Kataka-Chandra
(4) Mithuna-Budha (5) Vrishabha-Sukra ( 6 ) Mesha-Kuja
(71 Dhanur-Guru ( 8 ) Makara-Sani and (9) Kumbha.Sani.
The 4 th 7 T 7 (Pada) of Rohini has the following sub¬
periods (i) Meena-Guru (2) Mesha-Kuja (3) VrishabhaSulipra (4) Mithuna-Budha (5) Simha-Ravi ( 6 ) Katak4‘

SI. y-iu 247
Chandra (7) Kanya > Budha (6) Tula - Sukra and (9)
Vrischika-Kuia.
5T^sr tnrir i
SJoka 9.—For the Ist (Pada) oi ^[tTfirTlj (Miigasiras^ the sub-periods are (1) Meena-Guru (2) KumbhaSani (3) Makara-Sani (4) Dhanur-Guru (5) VrischikaKuja (6) Tula-Sukra (7) Kanya-Budha (8) Simha-Ravi
and (9) Kataka-Chandra.
The sub-periods for the 2nd tnT (Pada) oi
(Mrigasiras) are (1) Mithuna-Budha (2) Vrishabha-Sukia
(3) Mesha-Kuja (4) Dhanur-Guiu (5) Makara-Sani (6)
Kumbha-Sani (7) Meena-Guru (8) Mesha-Kuja and (9)
Vrishabha-Sukra.
The 3rd qnf (Pada) of (Mrigasiras) has the
following sub-periods (1) Mithuna-Budha (2) SimhaRavi (3) Kataka-Chandra >4) Kanya-Budha (5. TulaSukra (6) Vrischika Kuja (7) Meena-Guru (8) KumbhaSani and (9) Makara SaniThe sub-periods for the 4th (Fade) of ^rrfeiTfr
(Mrigasiras) are (1) Dhanur-Guru <2) Vrischika-Kuja
(3) Tula-Sukra (4) Kanya-Budha 5) Simha-Ravi (6)
Kataka-Chandra (7) Mithuna - Budha (8) VrishabhaSukra and (9) Mesha-Kuja.
SMo iO.—-The initial Mahadasa of a life belongs
to thelprd of the Rasi owning the Nakshatra Pada
occupied by the Moon at the time of birth, being so
much of the Rasi-Mahadasa as corresponds to the
Ghatikas that yet remain of the Nakshatra p-;<daand
the order of Mahadasas follows the natural order of the

Adh. XXII
Nakshatra padas reckoned from the aforesaid one. This
is the opinion, say the sages, held by some (astrologers).
^ ^ sr^^tn 5n«pniw ii'Aii
Shka J/.—There are a number of formulas each
composed of a number of mnemonic syllables referring
to the several Nakshatra padas beginning with the first
pada of Aswini and giving Basis in a certain order. It
is with reference to the order of Basis in these formulas
that the Basi Mahadasas of which a life is to consist
should be determined. The (Vakyakrama) men
of one school say, should be adhered to.
Sloka 12.-In the order of Basis (Vakya*
krama), the junctions at the end of Kataka, Vrischika
and Meena give rise to (1) (Manduka Gati)
(2) 'ifsar (Aswaj or grJpn'fff (Turaga gati and ;3)
(Simhavalokana) respectively and the Dasas at these
intervals cause woeful effects.
?r?<WTI?incJT
Sloka 13 .—The Apahara or Bhukti of any of the
planet constituting a Mahadasa is thus obtained. Find
out the particular mnemonical syllable (out oi the nine
syllables) composing a formula whose Bhukti is wanted
and find out the owner of the Basi signified by that
syllable. Multiply the number of years assigned to this
planet by the number of years fixed for the planet
whose Mahadasa is under consideration and devide the
product by the total number of years constituting the
entire Ayus of the formula or Chakra. The quotient in
years, etc, will represent the sub period required.

stittht cn5r?»n:inw?:5r i
?T^5f »r%JT ssr^srg^tft^ ?r?j; iiV^ii
SJoka i /.-The total number of years indicated by the
sum of the nine mnemonical syllables of any formula
represents the number (in years) of Parama Ayus for
that formula- Thus, the Parama Ayus in years for the
12 Rasiamsas reckoned from Mesha in an
(Apasavya Chakra) will be 100, 85, 83 and 86 repeated
thrice, while those lor the 12 Rasiamsas reckoned from
Vrischika in a (Savya Chakra) will be the same
but in the reverse order; that is, b6, 83, 85 and lUO
repeated thrice.
iiiuro infurijiitl.iod, plc.isc icfcr l,o Juiiilcijjai ijutii pp. ‘J(jj
tu loo .1.
II II
jTfT^sir^r !!T?qi5r JT?TT gn 1
nV'.ii
SJoAa i5'. —Whatever effects have been declared
before by me in the case of the several Mahadasas, the
same should be stated by a wise astrologer in the case
of these Dasas also.
3r?Jr^r»n:?r?g <T5grw#T5rTS«iTtrq5r?i^ ?5 tt
S/oka 16. —Ascertain the Sth, the 8th as well as the
4th star from (Janmarksha), i.e., the star occupied
by the Moon at the time of a person's birth. Cycles of
Dasas are calculated from every one of these as the

Adh. XXII
starting point. The Dasa counted from the 5th is called
3 'r^ra' (Utpanna); that from the 8th, STTcnw (Adhana);
that from the 4th, Mahadasa. If the Dasas in these
cycles have their ends tallying with each other or with
the end of the Dasa taken in the same order from
(Janmarksha), i.e., giving the same number of years,
months, etc., it is a sign that the life of the person con¬
cerned is to end with the Dasa. In the case of people
endowed with short, long and medium lives, the de¬
mise will happen at the close of the Dasa of the 3rd,
the 7th and the 5th stars respectively counted from
the natal stars they being called 51'iTfTTn and
src!i?F?n?:r.
II II
wi: i
nivsii
Sloka 17. — 1, 2, 9, 20, 18, 20 and 50 are the figures
indicating the number of years prescribed respectively
for the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Venus, Jupiter, the Sun
and Saturn in the (Naisargikadasa) system.
The Dasas play their part in the order given here ac¬
cording to the natural strength of the planets concern¬
ed. The Yavanas are of opinion that the Lagna Dasa
which is benefic comes after these Dasas. But others
do not approve of this method.
II II

Sloka 18.—The signs, degrees, minutes, etc., of a
planet should Ise converted into minutes, and as many
multiples of 2400 as may be found necessary should
be subtracted from the same. The remainder represents
the Ayushkalas of the planet. The same should be divi¬
ded by 200 (an^n isTtf^r— armi^io or 0, ^=0, 8TBa-=
2). The quotient gives the number of years, months
and days in the (Amsayurdaya) contribution
towards the span of life by a planet according to its
Degree, etc, according to Satyacharya. If the planet be
retrograde or in exaltation, this quotient has to be
trebled. If the planet be in his own Rasi or Navamsa,
decanate or Vargottama, the Ayurdaya has to be
doubled; if in depression, it has to be reduced by
half. If the planet be eclipsed, then also the reduction
is half. But this last reduction will not apply to Venus
and Saturn.
=24 (see Monier Williams' Dictionary) ],
q f ^ f 3 T«T=2400. There are 24 Tirthankaras or saints
among the Jains.
Sloka /9.—When malefic planets occupy the 6 Bhavas counted backward from the 12th, the whole, a half,
a third, a fourth, a fifth and a sixth respectively of
their Ayurdaya is lost. When benefic planets occupy
such positions, the loss is half of that incurred in the
case of malefic ones. When several planets are in a
Bhava, only the strongest of them causes a reduction
in the Ayurdaya. All planets except Mars lose a third
of their Ayurdaya when in inimical houses. The
aninber of years goxitributed by the Lagna according

252 *Fr55^Rr<Rf«rt Adh. XXI i
to Satyacharya's view corresponds to the number of
its Navamsas that have risen. Even MC the Lagna be
strong or of medium strength, the same rule holds.
arf^irorrfvr: i
?snr g ii^^oii
Sloka .?0-*’The rule of Satyacharya is preferable
(to that laid down by Maya or Jeevasarman). But some
make the process inconsistent and unwarrantable by
a series of multiplications. The dictum of the Acharyas
(Satya and others) is the following
(1) When several multiplications crop up, only
one and that the highest, is to be gone through.
For ini^tiince, when i\ I'llanoi is in its own Ijouso, and in its
eNaltatiriu and in retrograde motion, tlio .\ynvdaya is not to )>e
rloniiled first and t hen tlio result troldod and the .second result
further trelded. Aeeordito.i to Mie rule, the .Ayurdaya should bo
trelded oneo for all.
(2) Again, when there are several reductions appli¬
cable only one, and that, the greatest should be made.
I Vu-iiistanee, .i planet may bo in an inimical sign and may bo
eclipsed by the Sun. It is enough if the reduction ])y Imlf, i.c,,
Astan^af.a reduction, )»o made.
— This Sloka is from BriJiat laiaka
II 'tsTsj ii
5^ Ttftfir «T 5Rn||?r
Sloka 2;- The aggregate number of (Pindayurdaya) years assigned tp the several planets from

the Sun onwards (in their highest exaltation point) are
respectively 19, 25, 15,12, 15, 21 and 20. All the re¬
ductions should be gone through as before. When a
malefic planet is present in the Lagna, take only the
minutes, seconds, etc., indicating the Lagna leaving
out the signs. Multiply the total Ayus by this and
divide by 360. The whole Ayurdaya should be reduc¬
ed by this result. If the Lagna be aspected by a bene'
fip, the period to be subtracted will be only half of the
above result. So say those well-versed in the Ayurdaya
system.
Jrr^ftcsiT
Sioka 22.~ -In the (Pindayurdaya) system,
when the Amsa (Lagna Navamsa) is strong, the Lagna
Ayus (or Laana Dasa) corresponds to the Lagna Navam¬
sa. When the Lagna (Rasi) is strong, the number of
years for Lagna Ayus corresponds to the number signi¬
fied by the Rasi, etc , counted from Mesha, and not the
Lagna Navamsa.
mlr«l|TT%9K iR^u
sioka 23 .—The years assigned to the several planets
in Sioka 21 supra are to be adopted in full when they
are in exaltation. When a planet is in its depression
point, the period assigned to it is reduced by half ,*
when it occupies an intermediate position, the reduc¬
tion is to be proportionate, say the wise.
151^ sTviT# i
a:?T^ igrTTf ^spr*L iRyii
sioka 24. —The (Pindayurdaya) system is
advocated as the best by Manittha, Chanakya, Maya

Adh. XXII
and others. But Satyacharya has pronounced this
method to be faulty and Varahamihira also has made
similar pronouncement. t
Sloka 25 .—Jeevasarman lays down in accordance
with his own doctrine that the maximum period of life
given by each planet from the Sun onwards is Hh of
the maximum aggregate period (120years and 5 days).
In this Ayurdaya also all the reductions are enjoined.
The Lagna Ayus also should be calculated in the same
way as in the other systems.
^orf en^tsnnw qrnwrf qni 5^%vRor i
q5IT?: qrq q^!m?#TOTqr«f»i^
Sloka 26 —The full period of life in the case of men
has been declared as 120 years (12x10) by some.
Others there are who have stated that the full lifeperiod will be the time taken by Saturn to make 3
complete revolutions (in his orbit). There is a third
school who say that the full life-period of a man is the
time taken by the Moon for making 1000 revolu.tions.
But we are of opinion that the full period of man's life
in this Kaliyuga is only 100 years as stated in the
Vedas.
5Tr%fs!Tf?^qqT!n^^ q^S i
qirrq#4fTg: qqq^qqqnwlR «
4irq %^?qq qrq^fwq^qw^

S[oka27.—Oiihe Lagna, the Sun and the Moon,
whichever is strongest will have its Dasa first. Then
will come the Dasa of the planets in its Kendra and
other positions. When several occupy together any
one of these positions the precedence will be given to
the planet which predominates in strength. When they
happen to be of equal strength, that which gives a
longer period, in years, of (Ayurdaya) will have
its turn first. When there is equality even in regard to
the number of years of the (Ayurdaya) of the
planets, that which rises first after being eclipsed by
the Sun gets its Dasa prior to its fellows.
If sucli planets should however clianco to have equal sl i’eiigth,
otiual (Ayurdaya) and equal rising after tJioir conjunction
with the Sun, then that planet whicli is anterior in the general
order of pi'eccdonce among the significators would rule the l^asa in
(juostion ; and this general order of precedence is usually taken to
Ijo (l)tlio Lagna, (2) the Sun, (3) the Moon, (4) Mars, (5) Mercury
(G) Jupiter, (7) Venus and (8) Saturn.
And the strength of any planet for this purpose is
obtained by multiplying it-the position-by the distance
of the planet from its nearest Bhava>sandhi and divid*
ing the product by the distance between the
(Bhavamsa) and one of its Sandhis.
ijwsnnonwfir ir<2Ii
Sloka 2S.—3|t[nf?[hT (Amsaymrdaya) is to be calcu.
lated upon the predominance in strength of the Lagna;
(Pindayurdaya) upon the Sun's superiority in
strength and%«^l«19^ (Naisargikayurdaya) when the
Moon's power is strongest. We shall now state what
should be done, when the the three (Lagna, the Sun
and the Moon) are of equal strength.

Adh. XXI
sr?norii^f ?5rT snR5c?n i
Sloka 29. —Add the three Ayurdayas and divide the
sum by 3. The quotient will be the Ayurdaya requir¬
ed, If only two of them are strong, add the two
Ayurdayas and take half the result. When the three
planets are all weak, adopt the method advocated by
Jeevasarman lor finding out the Ayurdaya,
5r^5wnT«JT !?5rf ii^^'ii
Sloka 30. —Kalachakra Dasa system has to be resort¬
ed to only when the lord of the Navarasa occupied by
the Moon is strong. The Dasa calculation as per
Nakshatra method is always considered as the best.
wm: 'Tfersfn w^ar^rRoTf »Tiar ^
i-^nsrf i
^?r ?5rq*?r%crT: T<r g- iiji?ii
Sloka 31. —The full period of life in the case ol men
and elephants is given as 120 years and 5 days, while
in that of horses it is 32 years. It is 25 in the case of
asses and camels and 24 for bulls and buffaloes.
Twelve years are allotted for dogs and 16 for sheep and
the like.
^ »TS«T*Tt3r5T^ fsnrirwffTRT; I
Sloka 32 .—This 3ITf(Ayus) -span of life'has been

declared by wise men with respect to only those who
are engaged in the practice of virtuous actions, who
keep their senses under control, who eat wholesome
diet, who are devoted to the Brahmins and the Gods
and who preserve the land-marks of character and
conduct peculiar to their high families.
Tjius oikIh l;h(j li27i(l Adliyaya on “Kahu-'liaki’a in
Llic woik lMial!ulo(3i)ika c;oin]K)SC(l hy Mantvcbwara.
H II
II 'siqiUsrJT: I
ADHYAYA XXIII.
RliiVS/oAa 7.-— In order to ascertain the good and bad
effects caused by the several planets in their transits
through the Rasis of the zodiac, the Ashtakavarga has
been very highly spoken of by the great sages, and 1
now set forth the mode of accomplishing it.
iVo/e.—The jncjiining of STlJ^^fTT is liLcnilly lliu .urouij of -S
ihingb. In other woj’ds, it is the i;onil»ina.ti(;n of tlio good and liail
positions of a planet with rospeet to the 7 planets and I he Lagiia
(8 tilings). So it is the eomhination of tho hencfic and nuiJolie
dots in a planet’s eliart with roforcnco to tho positions of the 8
planets.
5r^!£n% cTsrsTJrsTiTnn i
Sloka 2 .—Draw well on the ground the Rasi Chakra
and post in the same in their proper places the several
planets as they stood at the time of birth. Regulate the
distribution of the beads in the manner directed (in the

Adh. XXlI
iollowing Slokas), in the several Rasis, the reckoning in
each case being made from the sign occupied by the
particular planet for getting the Ashtakavarga.
^srtiTcft«T!rTO
Sloka 3 ,—With reference to his Ashtakavarga, the
Sun is declared exceedingly auspicious in the 1st, the
2nd, the 4th, the 7th, the 8th, the 9th, the 10th and
11th places from himself. Mars and Saturn; in the 5th,
the 6th, the 9th and 11th places from Jupiter; in the
6th, the 7thand thel2th places from Venus; in the 3rd,
the 5th, the 6th, the 9th, the 10th, the llth and the 12th
from Mercury; in the 3rd, the 6th, the 10th and the
llth places from the Moon; and lastly, in the 3rd, the
4th, the 6th, the 10th, the llth and the 12th places
from the Lagna.
»fT5n^ srsrl!
ii«ii
Sloka 4 .—The Moon is auspicious in the 3rd, 6th,
7 th, 8th, loth and llth places from the Sun; in the 1st,
3rd, 6th, 7th, 10th and llth places from herself; in the
2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th and llth places from
Mars; in the 1st, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 8th, 10th and llth
places from Mercury; in the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th,
10 th and llth places from Jupiter *; in, the 3rd, 4th,
5th, 7th, 9th, 10th and llth places from Venus; in the
* According to Varahamihira, 1st, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th, llth and 12th
places from Jupiter.

SI. 5-G
3 id, 5th, 6th and 11th places from Saturn ; and lastly,
in the 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th places from the Lagna.
Sloka 5. —Mars is auspicious in the 3rd, 5th 6th,
loth and 11th places from the Sun; in the 3rd, 6th and
11th places from the Moon; in the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th,
8 th, 10th and 11th places from himself; in the 3rd, 5th,
6 th and 11th places from Mercury; in the 6th, 10th,
11th and 12th places from Jupiter; in the 6th, 8th,
11th and 12th places from Venus; in the 1st, 4th, 7th,
8 th, 9th, 10th and 11th places from Saturn; and lastly,
in the 1st, 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th places from the
Lagna.
ITR# ll^ll
Shka 6 .—Mercury is auspicious in the 1st, 3rd, 5th,
6 th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th places from himself; in
the 5th, 6th, 9th, 11th and 12th places from the Sun;
in the 6th, 8th, 11th and 12th places from Jupiter; in
the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th places
from Saturn and Mars in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th,
8 th, 9th and 11th places from Venus; in the Ist, 2nd,
4th, 6th, 8th, 10th and 11th places from the Lagna; and
lastly, in the 2nd,'4th, 6th, 8th, 10th aixd 11th place?
frQTO the Moon.

2 fi0
Adh. XXIII
5?ft >m?TTT?r% ^^3^:
sftwfcft ^rfsrfrr: ^?TTr^Rr%^ ct^: ii^ii
Sloka 7 . —Jupiter is benefic in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th places from the Sun; in
the 2nd, 5th, 7th, 9th and 11th places from the Moon;
in the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th and 11th places from
Mars; in the 1st, 2nd 4th, 5th, 6th 9th, 10th and 11th
places from Mercury; in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 7th,
8th, 10th and I Ith places from himself; in the 3rd, 5th,
6th and l2th places from Saturn : in the 2nd, 5th, 6th,
9th, lOth and I Ith places from Venus ; and lastly, in the
1st, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 9th, lOth and 11th places
from the Lagna.
iTtaiT rPfft:
fiirrsrlir^msv
33 : ikii
Sloka P .—Venus is auspicious in the 8th, 11th and
12th places from the Sun; in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
5th, 8th. 9th, 11th and 12th places from the Moon; in
the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th and 11th places
from the Lagna; in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th,
10th and 11th places from himself; in the 3rd, 5th, 6th,
9th, 11th and 12th places from Mars * ; in the 3rd, 4th,
5th, 8th, 9th, lO’th and 11th places from Saturn ; in the
3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th and 11th places from Mercury; and
lastly, in the 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th plades from
Jupiter.
Aci*<>rtlins to T\iras;ipa, the 3rd, 4.th, 6t.h, 0th, lUh and 1.2th* places
from Mars. '

gft g f wg r^T g r q^
wj5rrijm!Ti^ ^igsr «Rr% iwi
Sloka 9. —Saturn is benefic in the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th,
8 th, 10th and 11th places from the Sun; in the 3rd, 6th
and llth places from the Moon; in the 3rd, 5th, 6th
and llth places from himself; in the 3rd, 5th, 6th,
lOth, llth and l2th places from Mars ; in the 5th, 6th,
llth and l2th places from Jupiter; in the 6th, 8th, 9th,
10th llth and 12th places from Mercury; in the Ist,
3rd, 4th, 6th, 10th and llth places from the Lagna;
and lastly, in the 6th, llth and 12th places from
Venus.
Sloka 10. —Thus have been described the benefic
positions; the rest are to be understood as malefic.
The planets produce (to all beings) the effects
even of these two preponderate in the Ashtakavarga
calculations made from the Rasi they occupy at the
time of birth. Good or bad in a remarkable measure
in the above positions. That is a planet produces very
good results when it, passes through a Rasi that con¬
tains many benefic dots in its own. Ashtakavarga
chart. In their own, exaltation, friendly or Upachaya
places, the planets invariably advance the benefic
effect revealed by Ashtakavarga. In their depression,
inimical or Apachaya houses, they generally fail to
sustain whatever good effect may appear from the
Ashtakavarga process.

Adh. XXIII
Note:—Good houses with malefic dots, and bad houses with
benefic dots will neutralise the effects. In other cases the results
will he different.
For further information on the subject and about the Ashtakavarga plate, please see p. ]). 053-663 of my edition of »Tatakaparijata.
srreft 5 oros 11 Un
Sloka 11 .—When all the Ashtakavargas have been
prepared, if it be found that a Rasi is void of any benefic
dot in a planet's Ashtakavarga, it indicates that the
native will lose his life when the particular planet in
his orbit transits that Rasi. If there should be one,
two, three, four, five, six, seven or eight benefic dots,
the effects will be (1) destruction or loss (2) expend!*
ture (3) fear (4) fear (5) accomplishment of the desired
object (6) acquisition of a damsel (7) gain of wealth
or property and (8) gaining a Kingdom or high Govern¬
ment position respectively.
lURIl
Sloka 22.—Treating the several Rasis occupied by
the planets at the time of birth as their respective start¬
ing points (Lagnas), benefic dots should be computed
in 8 ways due to the countings by houses from each of
the seven planets and the Lagna, and effects predicted
for the several Bhavas counted from that planet
through the dots contained in them.
Shka 22.—Note the Rasi and Navamsa occupied
by a planet at birth. When the planet in its course

traverses through so much of the distance in that
house, it produces the effects due to that Bhava-'good
or bad as the case may be.
Sloka 14 .—When the Ashtakavarga (of any planet)
has been computed, note the house that contains the
highest number of benefic dots and what Bhava it
represents, reckoning the house occupied by the
Karaka planet as the Lagna or the first house. When a
planet—whether benefic or malefic—transits that
house, it advances that Bhava, that is, will produce
good effects. If otherwise, that is, when the planet
transits a house containing a few or no benefic dots,
the reverse will be the case.
Sloka J5.—When there are many planets simulta¬
neously passing in their course of transit through a
a certain Bhava containing also a good number of
benefic dots in the Ashtakavarga of a planet, they
promote the interests of the Bhava in an intense man¬
ner, /.e., produce good results for the Bhava represent¬
ed by it, the counting being reckoned from the house
occupied by the Karaka planet whose Ashtakavarga is
under consideration.
?nr iK^ii
Shka 16 .—When a benefic dot exists in a Bhava in
an Ashtakavarga, in order to definitely fix the exact
time of its (benefic dot's) fruition, a Rasi is divided
into 8 equal divieionsaand the divisions are allotted to

Adh. XXIII
the planets and the Lagna according to their orbits and
tte effect will occur in the transit over the particular
division owned by the planet that put forth the benefic
dot.
II II
iil^ii
Sloka 17. If you draw up a diagram consisting of
nine parallel lines at equal intervals from east to west
crossed by 13 parallel lines from north to south with
the same intermediate space as before, there will arise
a table containing 96 squares in 8 rows comprising the
results of each of the several Ashtakavargas.
For notes on this as well as the noxO Sloku. see JaUkaparijata
n^cil
Sloia iS.—The Lagna, the Moon, Mercury, Venus,
the Sun, 1^8, Jupiter and Saturn are the lords of the
divisions indicated in the eight rows extending from
south to north of each sign, and every one of them
yields the effect of the benefic dot appearing against
it in any of the 12 houses when the planet whose
Ashtakavarga is under consideration transits in the
house the particular division of the planet yielding the
benefic dot.
iK9.ii
Sloka J9.-Divide the Rasi into 8 equal divisions.
The first division belongs to Saturn; the 2nd to Jupiter,
that is. any benefic dot put forth by .lupiter will come to
fruition during the transit over the 2ndi. division of the Basi,

and so on according to their orbits. During a planet's
transit over the last division, any benefic dot put forth
by the Lagna attains its fruition.
sqr5r;T iRoii
Sloka 20. —When the Sarvashtakavarga containing
the results of the Ashtakavargas of all the planets is
computed by setting forth in each Rasi t^e sum-total of
all the figures for that Rasi in the seven Ashtakavargas,
if it be found that any Rasi contains figures exceeding
28, it must be understood that planets in their transit
over that Rasi produce good or auspicious effects. Any
number falling short of that particular figure produces
danger, or sorrow proportionately varying in intensity,
Sloka 22.—Find the number of benefic dots contain¬
ed in the several auspicious houses reckoned from the
Moon. Note also what planets occupy benefic houses
counted from the Moon in the horoscope of the native
and find the number of benefic dots in each of these
houses. If the sum-total in either of these above two
cases exceed 28, the effect must be pronounced as
good; if below that figure, it will be bad.
Sloka 22 .—The Ashtakavirga figures are to be com¬
puted as per rules stated (in this chapter) with respect

Adh. XXiV
to the positions of the planets (existing) at the birth-time
of any person. In that particular Rasi, month, Bhava, etc.
signified by the sign containing the greatest number
of benefic dots, one ought to get done anything
auspicious when the planets concerned transit those
houses.
S/oia 23 .—Even a malefic will promote or 'advance
the Bhava in which he is, if he should occupy his own
house, while, if posited in his depression or inimical
house, he will only cause its decline or ruin.
srm
Shka 24 .—A benefic planet even if he be in his
exaltation house will injure the Bhava he occupies if he
should happen to own a Dusstthana (6th, 8th or 12th).
A malefic in exaltation will do good to the Bhava he
occupies if he happens to own good houses.
Thus ends the 23rd Adhyaya on "Ashtakavarga"
in the work Phaladeepika composed by Mantreswara.
II =^^IS«JPI: II
Sloka I.—The 9th hoiise reckoned from that occu¬
pied by the Sun is termed the father's. Multiply the

*sr3fw5rtj«rpr:
figure indicating benefic dots in that house by the
figure denoting the *(Sodhyapinda).
sr^ysf ?n% i
?rf^ ^ sr iRii
Sloka 2 .—The figure thus arrived at should be divi¬
ded by 27. When Saturn transits through the asterism
counted from Aswini indicated by this remainder,
some thing untoward to the father will without doubt
come to pass.
?r?tiF^^onr^ i
^^5 ii^ii
Shka 3 .T-O 1 , when Saturn traverses through an
asterism which is trine to the aforesaid asterism, the
demise of the father or one similarly situated will
happen. The sum-total of the figures remaining after
the 2 reductions is known as (Sodhyapinda).
Sloka 4 .—The demise of the father or of one simi¬
larly placed may occur during the Dasa of the planet
owning the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 4th
house from the Lagna. Or, the same eveat may also
happen during the Dasa of the planet owning the 4th
house.
ini
?reT i
srfTwrf %gq i > si T fdmw i : : iRii
•After the Trikona and Ekadhipatya reductions have been made in any
Ashtakavarga, the sum-total of all the remaining figures is called the
(Sodhyapinda) in that Ashtakavarga. (Wr Sloka 3, iut'ra)»

Adh. XXIV
Shka 5—6. Multiply the (Sodhyapinda)
figure of the Sun's Ashtakavarga by the number of
benefic dots in the 8th house from the Sum, and divide
the product by 12. When the Sun comes to the Rasi
(counted from Mesha) indicated by the remaider, or its
triangular sign, the demise of the father should be
expected. A wise man should thus fix up with the help
of all the other planets the demise in other cases.
Sloka 7 .— The figure indicating the (Sodh¬
yapinda) ini the Moon's Ashtakavarga should be
multiplied by the number representing the benefic
dots in the 4th house counted from that occupied by
the Moon. The product should be then divided by 27.
When Saturn transits the asterism (counted from
Aswini) indicated by the remainder or its triangular
star, the demise of the mother may be expected.
ll^ll
Sloka 8 .— Find out the Navamsas occupied by the
lords of the 4th and the 8th houses reckoned from the
Moon. When the Sun transists through a position
triangular to these, the loss of the mother should be
predicted. The father's demise should be similarly
guessed by reckoning from the Lagna or the Sun
instead of from the Moon.
Sloka 9.- In the Ashtakavarga of Mars, the number
pf brothers may be guessed by the number of benefic

dots in the 3rd house from Mars. Similarly, the num¬
ber of relations or maternal uncles can be guessed from
the number of benefic dots in the 4th house from Mer¬
cury in the Ashtakavarga of Mercury.
mswt I
Sloka 10 .—Find how many planets have contributed
benefic dots in the 5th house from Jupiter in Jupiter's
Ashtakavarga. From that number take away as many
benefic dots of planets as are occupying inimical or
depression houses. The remainder will represent the
number of children one may have.
Sloka 11 .—In the Ashtakavarga of Jupiter, add up
all the benefic dots remaining after the two reduc¬
tions have been made, and from this sum take away
the number of dots in the malefic Basis. What remains
will represent the number of children the native will
have.
?T^ #«mW?rRr:
Sloka 12.—In the Ashtakavarga of Venus, find out
the Rasi that has the largest number of benefic idots.
In the direction of quarter signified by that Rasi, If the
wife should in that Rasi or Lagna, be born, increase of
progency through her is assured. If the number of dots
be low (small), wealth and progeny through her will
be poor.

Adh. XXIV
Sloka 13. —In Saturn's Ashtakavarga, multiply the
sft^qfqy? (Sodhyapinda) figure by the number indicat¬
ing the benefic dots in the 8th house from the Lagna
and divide the product by 27. When Jupiter or Saturn
in his transit passes through the star (counted from
Aswini) signified by the remainder, the demise of the
native may be expected.
?r«iT^35rT^i
Sloka 14. —(In Saturn's Ashtakavarga) add up the
figures indicating benefic dots in the several houses
from the Lagna to that occupied by Saturn both inclu¬
sive. Similarly add up the figures in the houses
reckoned from Saturn to the Lagna both inclusive.
In the years represented by these two figures should
danger or destruction be expected.
Sloka 15. —The figure indicating the (Sodh¬
yapinda) (in the Ashtakavarga of Saturn) should be
multiplied by the number signifying the benefic
dots in the 8th house from the Lagna and the product
divided by 27. The quotient will represent the total
Ayus in years of the native. The time of demise may
also be defined as before {vide sloka 13, supra).
n Br«hiT5ft«r!n ii
Sloka 16.—Oi the 3 signs in a Trikona group, find
which sign contains the least number of benefic dots.
The figures in the other two signs should be reduced

to that extent. If there be no dots in any sign, no such
reduction need be made in the other two signs of the
triangular group.
Sloka 17. —If there be no dots in two of the signs of
a group, remove the figure in the third. When all the
three signs of a group have the same number of dots,
remove all.
II II
nr^orsftvifrt i
^3% »i>srTf^ lll<ill
Sloka 18. —After performing the Trikona reduction,
the Ekadhipatya reduction should be proceeded with.
When both the houses owned by a planet contain
benefic dots, then only this reduction should be made
by a wise man.
iiWi
Sloka 19. —Of the two signs having a common lord,
if one alone be occupied and contain a less number of
benefic dots than the number in the other, the figure
in the latter is to be made equal to the former.
^frgifrg gwc% iRoii
Sloka 20. —If one of the two Basis having a com¬
mon lord be occupied and contain more benefic dots
than the other, remove the figure in the latter. If the
two Basis one of which is occupied, have the same
number of benefic dots, remove the figure in the un¬
occupied Basi.

Adh. XXlV
^i«r^ i
ST #sft«T ^Byr ^S T IRlII
SJoka 21. —If both the Basis (having a common lord)
be unoccupied and have the same number of
benefic dots, remove both. If the two Basis having a
common lord be both occupied by planets, no reduc*
tion need be made.
acRfr^ srhr^^BC^: ir^^ii
S/oI^a 22.—If one of the two Rasis (whether occu¬
pied or unoccupied) have no benefic dots, then also
there is no reduction. If both the Rasis be unoccupied
and have an unequal number of benefic dots, the
greater figure is to be replaced by the less.
^in%5r i
STfg'wiPj iTfJn%qr IR.^II
Sloka 23.—The net figures after the two reductions
in the several signs are to be multiplied each into its
Basi factors (Basimana). The net figures
in the Basis that are associated with the Sun and other
planets are to be multiplied by the appropriate plane¬
tary factors (or jrf*iT!T-Grahamana).
^ gf¥w: 5 r^: ir«ii
^ g r s r g fih tf i; i
silFJRT: ^^nsTf^ron: ?!!r^ IR»^II
Slokas 24-25.-~ln the case of the signs Vrishabha
and Simha, the multiplier is 10, while it is 8 for Mithuand Vrischika, 7 for Tula and Mesha, aiid 5 for Kanya
and Makara. The multipliers for Karkataka, Dhanus,

Kumbha and Meena are 4, 9, 11, and 12 respectively.
These are called Rasi-multipliers. The Graha>factors
are quite distinct {vide, next Sloka).
Twort ^nr;
Sloka 2G. —In the case of Jupiter, Mars, Venus and
Mercury 10, 8, 7 and 5 are respectively the multipliers
while in the case of each of the remaining planets, the
multiplier is Mercury’s figures, viz, 5. The multiplica¬
tion by the Graha factors should be effected separately,
and should be treated as distinct from the Rasi multi¬
plication.
^rsrffcr fV iR^sii
Sloka 27. —After thus multiplying and then adding
the two products, the total should be again multiplied
by 7 and divided by 27. The quotient obtained will be
the Ayus in years contributed by that planet.
5ft«r%r5^: n^cti
Sloka 26.—Multiply the remainder by 12 and divide
by 27 to get the months. Multiply the remainder by
30 and divide by 27 to get the days and so on to get
the Ghatikas etc. Twenty seven years constitute a
Mandala. So'me reductions have to be made further.
^ nVKW
Shka 29.—li a planet be in conjunction with another
planet, reduce the period contributed by the planet by
half. If the planet be in depression or combustion, in
that case also should a reduction of the period by half
be made.

Adh. XXlV
rwi i
5^5ftflrc??ir 5# «n5r?i«wrR^ ii?oii
Sloka 30.—If a planet be posited in an iniihical
house, a reduction by a third should be effected. If a
planet occupy any house in the visible half of the
horizon, a similar reduction should be made. For a
planet vanquished in planetary war or occupying a
position within the (Fata) range of the Sun and the
Moon, a reduction by a third should be made.
ITTH I
TsiTfriq:
Sloka 31 .—When several reductions crop up in the
case of a single planet, only one, and that the greatest,
should be made. All the figures should then be
totalled up and multiplied by 324,
sr \
’l^%5T*n^n^IS3C ITr^T ?reT
Sloka 32 .—The product should be divided by 365,
The quotient will be the correct rectified Ayus contri¬
buted severally by the planets, and may be shown in
years, months, days, etc., and will be their Dasa
periods.
^ artrnirf i
3re?nf^lTT»f: ll^^ll
Sloka 33 .—Thus should the Dasa periods of each of
the several planets be computed seperately. The
method of computing the Dasa periods by the Ashtakavarga process is the best of all.
cRunmrtgd Tnft gtrftt ftrarftfsrmw i
^ TFft 1

Sloka 34. — 35. In the Sarvashtakavarga the figures
indicating the number of benefic dots in the 12 houses
reckoned from
Total Sarvashtakavarga figure ... 337
SVoiba 36. —The Ashtakavarga system is declared to
be effective in all undertakings. There is no other way
to determine the power of the influence arising at the
time—whether good or bad.
fSr^nf^Nr^T ^ ^ g>iTJr5rr51
Shka 37. —'Signs containing 30 or more benefic dots
will always prove benefic. Those containing dots bet¬
ween 25 and 30 will be middling. Houses where the
figure is lower than 25 will cause sorrow or misery.
ii'i?nRi5nf5r«K ^ ^ \
^ ii^^n
Sfoka 38. —He in whose nativity the number of
benefic dots in the 11th house of the Sarvashtakavarga
exceeds that of the 10th house and the figure in the
12th l9ss thSQ that of the 11th, and the figure in th 9

27^> Adli- XXlV
Lagna more than that of the 12th, will Ee happy and
wealthy.
s?T?TWraTS?r ^ I I
3Tf^% Wtvrff ^
Sloka 39 .—Examine the figures in the several houses
from the Lagna to the 12th inclusive. In whichever
Bhavas there are more figures, transits over these
houses will produce good results. Where the figures
are less, the effect will Be untoward.
Sloka 40 .—The remarks made above in tl^e previous
Sloka apply only to houses other than the 6th, 8th and
12th. During the transits through the best signs (i.e.,
the signs containing greater number of benefic dots,
barring the Dusthanas), all things auspicious should
be done.
Sloka 41 .—Add the figures in the houses reckoned
from the Lagna to Saturn both inclusive. Multiply the
sum thus obtained by 7 and divide the product by 27.
Sloka 42.—In the year indicated by the quotient, the
native will suffer calamity or disease. The same
process should be gone through with respect to the
houses reckoned from Saturn to the Lagna. Similar
i;emark8 apply in the case of Mars and Rahu, and the

years indicating similar untoward events, ascertained
in the same manner.
g^rarfTorf ?nrV»r?riTnns3r g*r i
Sloka 43. —In the year indicated by the figure obtain¬
ed by (1) adding the figures (of benefic dots) in the
houses occupied by benefic planets and (2) then
multiplying the same by 7 and (3) dividing the result
by 27 should the year indicating anything auspicious
be intimated. On such an occasion, one will, without
doubt, obtain issue, wealth, happiness, etc.
jT?rr i
Sloka 44. —I have thus described here in a brief
manner the effects due to Ashtakavarga. The same
have been treated in greater detail in other works by
intelligent men versed in the science.
Thus ends the 24th Adhyaya on "the Ashtakavarga
effects as stated in. Hora Sara" in the work
Phaladeepika composed by Mantreswara.
il II
II ii
ADHYAYA XXV.
Sloka 1 .—I bow to all the Upagrahas, viz., (1)
Mandi, (2) Yamakantaka, (3) Ardhaprahara, (4) Kala

Adh. XXV
(5) Dhuma, (6) Patha or Vyatipata, (7) Paridhi, (8)
Indra Dhanus or Kodanda and (9) Ketu or Upaketu.
^ ^ fsnsrm# i
grsr g iRii
Shka 2- —When the length of day is 30 Ghatikas,
the position of Mandi on the week days counting from
Sunday onwards is at the end of 26, 22, 18, 14, 10, 6
and 2 Ghatikas during day time. These figures have to
be proportionately increased or diminished according
as the length of day chosen is greater or less than 30
ghatikas. In the night time, the lords of the first seven
Muhurtas are counted, not from the lord of the week
day chosen, but from that of the 5th; the position of
Mandi at night time will be different on the week days,
viz., at the end of Ghatikas 10, 6, 2, 26, 22, 18 and 14
respectively.
3r?T?r: ii^ii
Shka 3. —The position pf Yamakantaka during day
time on week days is at the end of Ghatikas*! 8,14, 10,
6, 2, 26 and 22; of Ardhaprahara, at the end of Ghati-
•rrr wm ?Rr«rrwr iiaii
SJoka 4. —The position of Kala on the week days
counting from Sunday onwards is at the end of Ghatikas
2, 26, 22, 18, 14, 10 and 6 respectively during day
time. These figures have, as already stated for Mandi,
to be proportionately altered and their exact positions
determined as in the case pf the Lagna.

^^f^wsi; s?Tf5nTRR^ ^rSBTT«IT^»T^ I
?9rcsT5r2^s3r %g^«i ?:&; ii''.ii
Sloka 5. —The position of Dhuma is found by adding
4 signs, 13° 20' to the figures for the Sun. If you sub¬
tract Dhuma from 12 signs, the result will indicate the
figures for Vyatipata. This increased by six signs
becomes Parivesha or Paridhi. When Parivesha again
is subtracted from 12 signs, we get Indra chapa. Add
to this 16'' 40'; Kethu is obtained. Kethu increased by
one sign will give the figures for the Sun.
<3^^ wsn sft# i
g^RT €rf««T «rR«R5j ?s-g ii^ii
Sloka 6 .—In the Adhyaya on 'Bhavas' the effects of
these have already been described in a collective
manner. It is only the effects on the Bhavas of those
that have been left out there which are to be descri¬
bed here definitely in detail.
?r«nf7 gfenTT^f i
Sloka 7. —Nevertheless, some special effect of
Gulika and other Upagrahas which have been declared
by ancient authors are here enumerated by me in a
condensed form.
s Tff a< ft 4?%S9 T: i
^ ST 3rOT%: ’Ct'Rt
Shka 8.-^li Gulika be posited in the Lagna, the

Adh. XXV
person concerned will be a thief, cruel, devoid of
modesty, ignorant of Vedas and Sastras, will not be
very stout, will have a deformed eye, will not be very
intelligent, nor will have many children. He will eat
much, will be devoid of happiness, will be lustful and
depraved, will not be long lived, will not be brave,
will be stupid and of an irritable nature.
5T ii^ii
Shka 9 .—If Gulika be in the 2nd Bhava, the person
born will not talk in a pleasing manner, will be quar¬
relsome, will posses no wealth or corn and will live
abroad. He will not be true to his word, nor will he
be able to intelligently take part in any discussion.
SJoka 10 .—^When Gulika is in the 3rd house, the
person born will be distinguished by aloofness, pride,
drunkenness and such other qualities, will display an
abundance of ill-temper and ostentation in the acqui¬
sition of Vealth, will be exempt from distress and
fear and will be without brothers or sisters.
ftS*Rr3fe% iiUii
Shka 11 .—When Gulika is in the 4th Bhava, the
person born will be devoid of relations, vehicles, and
wealth; when Gulika is in the 5th (Bhava), the
person born will be fickle-minded and badly disposed.
He will be short-lived. When Gulika is in the 6th

house, the person born will destroy hosts of foes, will
dabble in demonology, will posses a very good son
and will be brave.
^?T5T^ ^f5»T?r! ^5'T«i^sr: lll^tll
Sloka 12 - 'When Gulika occupies the. 7th Bhava,
the person born will be quarrelsome, will be the hus¬
band of many wives, will prove a public enemy, will
be ungrateful, will know only a little and will be a
little bit angry.
^ Bi=?T5r!
Sloka 13 .—When Gulika is in the 8th Bhava, the
person born will be deformed in his face with weak
and impaired eyes and will have a dwarfish body (will
be short in stature). When Gulika is in the 9th Bhava,
he will be deserted by his elders and his children.
When Gulika is in the lOih Bhava, the person will
abandon all religious duties and observances produc¬
ing good effects, and will not be disposed to give any¬
thing to others. When GuMka is in the ILth Bhava,
the person born will have happiness, children, intelli¬
gence, power and beauty.
Sloka 14. —When Gulika is in the 12th Bhava, the
person concerned will not have any liking for sexual
pleasures, will be poor, and will have a heavy expen-

Adh. XXV
diture. The Janmalagna or Rasi of the native will
be a sign that is triangular to that occupied by
Gulika or the Navamsa identical with the one occupi¬
ed by Mandi.
Sloka 15. —If Gulika be associated with the Sun, the
person born will kill his father; if with the Moon, the
person born will cause distress to his mother; if with
Mars, he will lose his brother; and if with Mercury, he
will be insane.
irgs?nv?n?cr«r
Sloka 16 .— ilf Gulika be associated with Jupiter, he
will be a blasphemous heretic; if with Venus, the per¬
son born will be in the company of low and base
women; and if with Saturn, he will be afflicted with
leprosy, and will be short-lived.
iilvsii
Sloka 77 . - When Gulika is associated with Rahu,
the person concerned wijl suffer from a poisonous
disease; if with Ketu, he will suffer from fire. If
Gulika's time on any weekday be synchronous with
the (Tyajyakala) on that day, the person born
then, though a king will become a beggar.
Sloka 18. —Wherever Gulika is in conjunction, in all
those, evil has to be predicted. Wherever Yamakantaka is associated, good has to be expected.

3??% 3r sq-gRST^ iil^ii
Sloka 79.—While Gulika is very powerful in causing
evil, Yamakantaka is very powerful in causing good.
All the other Upagrahas possess only half the power
that Mandi has in causing evil.
^ g iRoii
SJoka 20.~ln producing effects, Gulika is similar to
Saturn; Yamakantaka is like Jupiter; Ardhaprahara is
like Mercury and Kala is like Rahu.
sTffiTfn:: iRlii
Sloka 2/.—Kala's effects will be similar to those of
Rahu, while Gulika's will bring on death. The effects
of Yamakantaka will be of an' enlivening nature, that
is, will produce good results Ardhaprahara will cause
good effects if posited in a house with many benefic
dots and bad, if in an untoward Bhava.
^rraT sTTfltiwf 5nr?ft% qTrsTTJ iR^^ii
Sloka 22.—If the Lagna and other houses along
with their lords be associated with Dhuma and other
Upagrahas, these houses attain their destruction; so
says Parasara.
an
Sloka 23.—VHien there is Dhuma, there will always

2fil Adh. XXV
be trouble from heat and danger from fire and mental
anguish. When Vyatipata is thus situated, there
is danger from horned animals and death through
quadrupeds.
5RfT W’cft IPs^ll
Slokri 24.~ When there is Parivesha or Paridhi, the
native will feel afraid of water, will suffer from watery
diseases and also have to endure imprisonment. When
there is Indra Chapa or Kodanda, the native will be hit
by a stone, will be wounded by weapons or have also
a fall.
ifem i
Sloka 25. —When there is Ketu (or Upaketu), the
native will have a hit, a fall, etc., suffer ruin of his busi¬
ness, and there will be peril from thunder. The above
effects will occur during the Dasa period of the planet
owning the house wherein the Upagraha is posited.
^ ;rcT?»nr:
sr5!n^f5r?ft n?r: i
Sloka 26. —If Upaketu should occupy any of the 12
houses from Lagna onwards, the effects will respective*
ly be:—(1) short life (2) ugly face (3) courage (4) misery
(5) loss of children (6) perturbation of the mind through
enemies (7) decay of vital power (8) ending one's life
by following bad ways (9) holding views quite anta¬
gonistic to virtuous conduct (10) inclination towards
wondering (11) gain and (12) committing faults.

iR^ii
Sloka 27.—The five Upagrahas Dhuma etc., traverse
the sky without being seen. If at any time they are
visible any whe^e, they foreshadow something evil to
the world. '
T5TI«n^ S’TcfhTfT: IR-ill
Sloka 2S .—Some say that Dhuma is of the shape
of fume clouds, while others opine that it is a star with
a tail (comet). Vyatipatais like the fall of a meteor;
and Parivesha is a halo or disk round the Sun or the
Moon.
Isgsr f5%3: iR^ii
Sloka 29 .—Indra Chapa or Indra Dhanus or Kodanda
is the famous rainbow that is generally seen in the sky
during the advent of rain. Ketu is Dhumaketu and
causes a lot of mischief to the world.
^snnrg^orf ;rnT^ JTRg«*rt
srm
Sloka 30 .—If the lord of the house occupied by
Gulika be possessed of strength and be posited in a
Kendra, a Trikona, his own, his exaltation or a friendly
house, the person born will own chariots, elephants
and horses, will be as beautiful as Cupid; will b©

286 Adh. XXVI
highly respected and widely renowned ; and he will
rule the entire world.
Thus ends the 25th Adbyaya on "Upagrahas" in
the work Phaladeepika, composed by Mantreswara
. II II
II 11
srvfR i
^^*n5rsr^?*srT^: ii?ii
ADHYAYA XXVI.
Sloka 1 .—Of all the Lagnas it is only the Moon's
Lagna that is most important for ascertaining the
(Gocharaphala- -effect of transits). One ought
therefore to calculate and predict from the Moon's
place to predict the effects due to the transits of
planets through the several signs counted from that of
the Moon.
Sloka 2.—During transit, the Sun gives good results
when he is in the 6th, 3rd and 10th houses (counted
from the Moon), the Moon in the 3rd, 10th, 6th, 7th and
1st; Jupiter in the 7th, 9th, 2nd and 5th; Mars and
Saturn in the 6th and 3rd; Mercury in the 6th, 2nd,
4th, 10th and 8th; all planets in the 11th; Venus in all
places other than the lOth, 7th and 6th. Rahu and Ketu
are similar to the Sun.

Sloka 3.- -The Sun is declared auspicious when he
transits the 11th, 3rd, 10th and 6th, if, at the time, the
corresponding (Vedha) places, viz., the 5th, 9th, 4th
and 12th respectively are not marred by the transit of
any ot the planets other than Saturn.
For (Vodiia), see p. 834 of Jataka Parijata. Should Saturn
(K^cupy (in transit) these places, viz,, 5th, 9th, Ith and .1.2tli, tlie
ellect will not he bad, as tliore is no Vedha between the fatlier and
son and as Saturn is tlie son of the Sim. But if other planets
transit tboni, they nullify the ^^ood effect that would otherwise i>o
caused by the Sun’s transit.
Sloka 4 .—The Moon will produce good effect when
she transits the 7th, 1st, 6th, 11th, 10th and 3rd if
planets other than Mercury do not transit the corres¬
ponding Vedha places, i.e., 2nd, 5th, 12th, 8th, 4th
and the 9th.
cf-
%w ST ii'^.ii
Sloka 5. —Mars in the 3rd, 11th and 6th will give
good effect if the 12th, 5th and 9th places respectively
are free from the transit of other planets at the time.
The same remark applies to Saturn, but in ats case the
effect will not be marred if the Sun should transit at
the time the corresponding (Vedha) places.

Adh. XXVI
cf- ;n^:
^*T?r5 II
5T«it ?reT^ sr ^ 5f?T i
Sloka 6. —Mercury will be auspicious when he tran¬
sits the 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th and 11th houses provi¬
ded their corresponding Vedha places, viz., 5th, 3rd,
9th, 1st, 8th and 12th are not occupied by any of the
planets other than the Moon.
SF^Trft II
^f:5n?T^5d%cr: st^t: i
Shka 7.— During his transit in the 2nd 11th, 9th,
5th and 7th, Jupiter is good if the corresponding
(Vedha) places, viz., 12th, 8th, 10th, 4th and 3rd are
void of planets.
3Fii«r: ?5n?T»ft««T^^5T5rTs«si3raiBm: i
5r?»TO%^^; ir^ ;r il
5«nnr5yfirvR5?r«q^'5r
Sloka 8. —Venus will give bad effects during his
transit through 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th 9th, 12th
and 11th, if he is marred by planets in the correspond¬
ing %«r (Vedha) places, viz., 8th, 7th, 1st, 10th, 9th,
5th, 11th, 6th and 3rd respectively.

3r?iT«n!'^r3WHi?HsrfftgT?ifi:5fiTn: ii
i^^«r5r TSTcft^ ^5T% ^ ^r i
WRSTTfn f?IT
sr^^rflr ^ gf: wiim«Tt»TllrsT*i; h'^h
SJoko 9.—When the Sun traverses through the Rasi
occupied by the Moon^ the person concerned will
suffer fatigue and loss of wealth. He will become irri¬
tated and suffer from diseases. He will undertake a
wearisome journey. When he transits the 2nd house,
there will be loss of wealth ; and the person will be un~
happy He will be duped by others, and will be obsti
nate. In the 3rd house, acquisition of a new position,
advent of moneys, happiness, freedom from sickness
and destruction of enemies will be the result. In the
4th house, the Sun will cause diseases ; and there will
often arise impediments to the native in the matter of
his sexual enjoyments.
cRgr a»TT*i: ^ i
3TaR:3?rw?r%wTW5r
3R5r?r% TT3T*ftf^ g- ^rnrg iRoii
Sloka 10 .—Mental agitation, ill-health and embar¬
rassment in all possible ways will be the result of the
Sun's transit in the 5th house. The Sun in the 6th
house will remove all diseases, destroy enemies, and
dispel all sorrows and mental anxieties. In the 7th
house, there will be wearisome travelling, diseases of
the stomach and the anus. The person concerned will

Adh. XXVI
further suffer humiliation. During the Sun's transit in
the 8th house, the native will suffer from fear, and
diseases. He will be drawn to a quarrel. He will incur
royal displeasure and he will suffer also from excessive
heat.
STTStf^ I
^ ^ WWW
Shka 11 .—The Sun's transit in the 9th house will
cause to the native danger, humiliation, separation
from his kith and kin and mental depression. During
the Sun's passage through the 10th house a very
mighty undertaking will be successfully completed.
A new position, honour, wealth and freedom from
diseases will be the effect of the Sun's transit in the
11th house. When the Sun passes through the 12th
house, there will be sorrow, loss of wealth, quarrel with
one's friends and fever.
*T=!i 5ft^Jld»TrrT ^ I
^ sTf?r% ?r?sr5
Sloka 12 .—-The Moon in her travels through the
12 houses counted from the irf»r?:T% (Janmarasi) will
give the following respective effects: (1) dawning of
fortune (2) loss of wealth (3) success (4) fear (5) sorrow
(6) freedom from disease (7) happiness (8) untoward
events (9) sickness (10) attainment of one's cherished
wishes (11) joy and (12) expenditure.
35^ f«r% wwfr ^ I

^ 3rspr% gnr
iil^ii
Shka /3.—When Mars transits the Janma Rasi, there
will result dejection of the mind, separation from one's
relations and diseases caused by (impurity of) blood,
bile or heat. In his passage through the 2nd house.
Mars will cause fear, hot words, and loss of wealth. In
the 3rd house, the effect will be success (in everything)
and happiness through the attainment of golden orna¬
ments. During his passage in the 4th house, he will
cause loss of position, disease of the belly such as
dysentery, diarrhoea, etc, and sorrow through re¬
lations
r«!IT m
Shka 14.—The effect of Mars' transit through the
5th house will be fever, improper desires, mental
anguish caused through one's son, or quarrel with
one's relations. When Mars transits the 6th house he
will bring about the termination of strife and the
withdrawal of enemies, alleviation of disease, victory,
financial gain and success in all undertakings
f^»T?r^Rr*n5ftsifr i
• ^ ’Tfer^s^srnfTiWr*
ill'll!
Shka 25.—When Mars transits the 7th house, there
will arise misunderstanding with one's own wife, eye-

802 Adh. XXVI
disease, stomach-ache and the like. In the 8th house,
the native will suffer from fever; his body will become
soiled by blood. He will have lost his wealth
and honour. In his transit through the 9th house.
Mars will bring about humiliation through loss of
wealth, etc., The native's gait will become retarded
due to bodily weakness and wastage in the several
constituent elements of the body.
5rr «rJT: % i
Shka 16. —When Mars passes through the 10th
house, the person concerned will either misbehave{/>.,
his behaviour will not be above board), or he will fail
in his attempts. He will have exhaustion. In the
11th house, there will be financial gain, freedom from
sickness, addition to landed property, etc. Mars in his
transit in the 12th house will bring about loss of
wealth, and the native will suffer from diseases caused
by excessive heat.
Shka 17. —Mercury in his transit through the 12
houses reckoned from the Janma Rasi will cause in
their order the following respective effects: (1) loss of
wealth (2) financial gain (3) fear from enemies (4) in¬
flux of money (5) quarrel with ones wife and chfldren (6) success (7) misunderstandings (8) acquisition
of children, wealth, etc. (9) impediments (10) happi¬
ness all round (11) prosperity and (12) fear of humili¬
ation.

5r«Tl^ 5rf?rt
smft% irf^ i
Sloka 18. —During Jupiter's transit through the
Janma Rasi, the person concerned may have to leave
his country, incur heavy expenditure and bear ill-will
towards others. When Jupiter passes through the
2nd house, the native will acquire money and will
have domestic happiness. His words will have
weight. In the 3rd house, loss of position, separation
from one's friends, obstacle to business and disease
will result. When Jupiter transits the 4th house, there
will be sorrow through relations; the person will
suffer humiliation and will have to apprehend danger
from cattle.
^rsrfrfi%
t[ft5qrJT%?T% wBr^r^rt wrTTf^.rr 51^
Sloka /9.—Acquisition of children, friendship with
the good and royal favour will mark Jupiter's passage
through the 5th house. In the 6th house, the native
will have trouble from hie enemies and cousins. He
will also suffer from diseases. When Jupiter transits
the 7th house, the person will travel on an auspicious
undertaking, will be happy with his wife and will be
blessed with children. In the 8th house, he will have
fatigue by wearisome journeys, will be unlucky, suffer
loss of money and will be miserable,

Adh. XXVI
5rT% 3^?«n?rTn;TT%5rwt
iT:%: Sre^rlrftj IRoll
Sloka 20 .—During Jupiter's passage through the 9th
house, the person concerned will succeed in enjoying
all prosperity. In the 10th house, danger to one's
property, position and children is expected. Acquisi¬
tion of children, new position, honour and the like
may be expected during Jupiter's transit through the
11th house. In the 12th house, there will be grief and
fear caused through property.
^^fJTvrw«!isrrf^^fsrTftji?9fir iRlii
Shka 21 .—When Venus transits the Janmarasi, he
will confer on the native all kinds of enjoyments. He
will cause financial gain when in the 2nd house;
prosperity in the 3rd; increase of happiness and
friends in the 4th; acquisition of children in the 5th;
mishap in the 6th ; trouble to wife in the 7th; wealth
in the 8th; happiness in the 9th ; quarrel in the 10th ;
safety in the 11th and acquisition of money in the 12th.
f

Sloka 22 —During Saturn's transit through the
Janmarasi, the native will suffer from disease; he will
perform funeral rites; in the 2nd house he will suffer
trouble to wealth and children; in the 3rd house, there
will be acquisition of position or employment, servants
and money. During Saturn's transit in the 4th house,
there will be loss of wife, relation and wealth. In his
transit through the 5th house, wealth will decline,
there will be loss of children and the native's mind
will become confused. In the 6th, Saturn causes
happiness all round. In the 7th, the native's wife will
suffer; there will be travelling; he will be depressed
by fear. In the 8th house, there will be loss in children,
cattle, friends and wealth. The native will also suffer
from disease.
^TgiT5?rrfilrii?^ ir-'.Bn
Sloka 23 .—In his passage through the 9th house.
Saturn will bring about loss in finance. There will be
many obstacles for the native's doing any good action.
A relative who is equal to the father will die. There
will be perpetual sorrow. In his transit through the
10th house, Saturn will make the native do a sinful
deed. There will be loss of honour. The person may
suffer from disease. Saturn in the 11th house confers
all kinds of happiness and wealth on the native, who
will also receive unique honour. When Saturn is in
the 12th house, the native will be wearied by being
engaged in a worthless and fruitless business. He will
be robbed of his moneys by his enemies. His wife and
sons will suffer from sickness.

Adh. XXVI
^ 5rrw ’5«T»T 5?r«T ^ ir?T?f?flTt IR«II
Sloka 24. —The following are the- effects in their
order caused by Rahu during his transit through the
12th house counted from the Janmarasi (1) sickness
or death (2) loss of wealth (3) happiness (4) sorrow (5)
financial loss (6) happiness (7) loss (8) danger to life
(9) loss (10) gain (11) happiness and (12) expenditure.
^%JT«rBrvnit i
?:ffs[rTr3sriri!T#Tr»r
5r%^JT?T53rwt mfr irmi
Sloka 25 .—Mars and the Sun produce effect (during
their passage) when they are in the initial 10 degrees
or first decanate of a sign. Jupiter and Venus become
effective when they are in the middle portion of a sign
(2nd decanate) while the Moon and Saturn bear fruit
when in the last portion. Mercury and Rahu produce
effect throughout their passage.
II II
5K;ir-
^hrTTf?r«T*nf^sfv i
^ iisi^iii
Shka 26. —Draw seven lines horizontally (from west
to east) and over them draw seven lines vertically. The
28 extremities ox points reckoned from the north-east
are to be assorted to the 28 stars (including Abhijit)

WEST
SOUTi f
counted from Krittika (as shov/xi. ;ii the previous page).
If the star occupied by the Sun the time happens to
be the Vedha asterism to the r nl::l star, danger to life
has to be apprehended; if to the isT(tqrr«R^ (Adhana
Nakshatra, 19th from Sff.lR^ir-Jdnmanakshatra), there
will be fear and anxiety; if to the (10th from

Adh. XXVI
?rJT;f^ 5 r-Ianmanakshatra), loss of wealth will be the re¬
sult. Should however the Sun in the above positions
be also associated with a malefic, death alone has to be
expected.
T5i?r fi
^ IR^II
Sloka 27 .—If any one of the three asterisms referred
to above be thus marred by the occupation of other
malefics (other than the Sun), death may happen; if by
benefics, there will be no danger to life. Everything
should be judged similarly.
2loka 28. -Ifthel'Jlh, lOth, 3rd, Isl, the 23rd, the
5lh or the 7th (all reckoned from the ^IrRcTI?:! Janmatara) are afflicted by malefics during their transit, there
will be danger to life. But if the planet be benefic,
failure in business will be the only result.
3n«rr*r (AdhiUia), WJW (KsumarKshn.', (Vainuiikii), etc., see .l.'itaKaiArijiii.a jt.
Jrg-torf ar%5T% ?r?:aT gr 3V •
Sloka 29. —The three asterism {viz., 3frlT" Janma,
3T33r?*r (Anujanma\ fsrir?n‘ (Trijanma), 1st, 10th, and
19th) falling on a day identical with the Sun's Sankramana (Sun's entry into a new Rasi) or at a time when
any of the other planets transit from one Rasi to an¬
other, or when there is an eclipse, planetary war
(Grahayuddha) or a fall of meteors

Ulkanipata) or other unexpected occurrence, death or
a similar untoward event should be expected.
(Ulka) denotes tlie lOth star from the one jjovernod by
the Sun (vide Kiilapraloisiloi-Ch. XXXlTr-HCs Edition).
But (Biilahliadra) says it is tlio 21st star eonnted from tint oecnpied hy the Sim. See notess on S].^ IS infra.
’T: I
^ 7f : •fi^oTI T%5r f^rrtf^TTSI llBoH
Slokn 30.--A planet yielding unfavourable result
when aspected by a benefic, or the one that gives good
results if aspected by a malefic, both become void of
effect. The same will be the case if they are aspected
by their respective inimical planets.
sr ?{VTi:iftw»rvrT5r’T^?i; ^35 ii
Sloka 57.—A planet in an untoward Bhava, if he is
in exaltation or Swakshetra, will not do any harm. If
in such favourable position, he should also occupy a
favourable Bhava, he will give full beneficial results
(effect) to the native during his transit in that Bhava.
Sloka 32 .— Planets in their transit through favour¬
able places (houses wherein they should give good
effects) become void of effect if they happen to be at
the time in their depression or inimical houses or be
in an eclipsed state. But if the houses transitted be
also unfavourable, they give bad effects and that too in
an aggravated form.
8cr3r5minr«JT55«iT: jp: i
<5T!T^?wr

f^oo Adh. XXVI
Sloka 33. —Saturr !’;o Sun, Mars and Jupiter when
they transit the Pih or the 1st, (counted from the
Moon's place) bring r-' out danger to life itself, a fall
from one's position nd loss of wealth.
" Ts-i- ^ I
Sloko 34 .—Tho ^:r^on in the 8th, Mars in the 7th,
Rahu in the 9th, Ve? r ;n the 6th, Jupiter in the 3rd,
the Sun in the 5th, ^ ?f rn in the 1st and Mercury in
the 4th, bring abcui iosf. of honour and wealth, and
danger to life also, ':ii the conditions exist.
'^?W5r?T: II
In tlie followin.c5 six r^, tho author describes how the 27
stars (reHcnned from llu! !'•im;?na]<sliiitra) are distributed anionfj
the several liiiihs of the re eoiieerned during transits of each
of the planets from i.' ’ ' i.:i onwnrds and their oifeots are also
stated.
wrgprfw r.'iT’Tsrtj ww
5n*T ^ arRl^^Ts^
Sloka 35. —During the Sun's transit, the 27 stars
reckoned from the 7T?i7«T?3r?C (Janmanakshatra) will be
distributed thus: (. ) 1st star-face, (b) 2nd, 3rd,
4th and 5th—head ; (?) 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th—breast
(chest?); (r7) 10 th, ilth, 12th and 13th—right hand ;
(e) 14th, 15th, 16th, 17fh, 18th and 19th—two feet; (f)

51- 3G-3S T7r%!rftS«n?T: 301
20th, 21st, 22ud and 23rd—left hand; (g) 24th and
25th the two eyes; (J>) 26th and 27th-organs of genera¬
tion ; When the Sun transits through these limbs, the
effect will be (a) destruction (b) influx ofvrealth; (c)
success, (d) financial gain, (e) loss of wealth, (f) bodily
illness, (g) gain and (h) danger to life respectively.
i:rr RTTi??
q-ffl TT.tf ii^’iii
Sloka 33 .— MOON
No.
of Ttc'cko'U'f' from t'lo I’lirti'-uliir I'ffoct
stars s'.ar ilwolt
2 1st and 2nd Face Exceeding fear
4 3rd, 4th, 5tb, 6th Head Safety
2 7th, 8th Back Subduing of enemies
2 9th, 10th Two eyes Financial gain
5 11th, 12th, 13th, Chest Mental happiness
14th, 15th
3 16th, 17th, 18th Left hand Quarrel
6 19th, 20th, 21st, 2 feet Going to a foreign
22nd, 23rd, 24th place
3 25th, 26th, 27th Right hand Financial gain
sftint srk *argTwvrjr?rt ^ i
k 5yTvr
srrfkt ii^^sii
ifjk gr ^ <T2f ?T«rT
<kwk fk^gs«r g-Tor^rt: srTHiJrV^ir^rr: 1
5ft% 5!T*rJT*r4>r«J?k^?T ;rr5T srfk^t ^«rr
^f?pTTTfkjnTT>j5r sprtti;

Adh. XXVI
Slokas 37-38.-^ MARS
No.
of Reckoned from tho Particular Effect
stars natal star limb dwelt
2 1st and 2nd Face Death (danger to life)
6 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th,
7th, 8th Two feet Quarrel
3 9th, 10th, 11th Chest Success
15th Left hand Penury
2 16th, 17th Head Gain
4 18th, l9th, 20th,
21st Face Excessive fear
25th Right hand Happiness
2 26th, 27th The two Going to a foreign
eyes place
MERCURY, JUPITER & VENUS
3 1st, 2nd, 3rd Head Sorrow or grief
3 4th, 5th, 6th Face Gain
6 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th,
11th, 12th The two Something
hands untoward
5 13th, 14th, 15th, Belly Incoming of much
l6th,:17th money
2 18th, 19th Generating Loss
organs
23rd, 24th, 25th,
26th, 27th Two feet Honour, fame
WVKW
»T*TJT ^ JTRT i

Sloka 39 -^ 0 .— SATURN, RAHU AND KETU
No.
of
Reckoned from the
Particular
Kl'fcut
stcirs natiil star
limb dwelt
1st
Face
Grief
2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th
Right hand
Happiness
6th, 7th, 8th
Right leg
Travel
9th, 10th, nth
Left leg
Loss
12th, 13th, 14th, 15th
Left hand
Gain
16th, 17th, 18th,
l9th, 20th
Belly
Sexual enjoyment
21st, 22nd, 23rd
Head
Happiness
24th, 25th
Eyes
Happiness
26th, 27th
Back
Danger to life
R«i5ft i
cTSTf^KeT sn?’ gvT s?r?TTf^?**rf^«i?ft gvr iiy?ii
Sloka 41 .— Planets passing through Rasis containing
more benefic dots in the Ashtakavarga produce good
effect always. Even when such Rasis happen to be the
12th, 6th or 8th, the effect will be good and beneficial.
II ^ II
^scT^5r?i«5r 5|gcT9i i
5^; 5[T%?:w^K^*r iiyj-ji
^ 'gig^r: sr€lf%5iT: i
gsK^T cTTt g iiy^ii
srsrif i
?Tf%sTf5r«i^Sf3i?rr 3r?*rir s?t«it ii««ii
Sloka 42-44.~-The 12th asterism counted from that
occupied by the Sun at the time, the 3id from that of
Mars, the 6th from that of Jupiter, and the 8th from that
of Saturn are termed or forward Lattas. The
5th star reckoned from that of Venus, the 7th from that

^^4 Adh. XXVI
of Mercury; the 9th from that of Rahu and the 22nd
from that of the Moon are called ^’g55'f?TT: or rear Lattas -
If, when thus counting, the (Janmanakshatra<
natal star) happens to come as the Latta star, there will
be sickness and anguish.
?:%: ^5rT5iciffr: ^^nf?TiTH>5:Jsrg^?T^ i
w?:of sn^^rrfTsrf
^5T 3TJT'4: g I
5g-fsr^?!T g JrffCTRffrcTmi^Ti^ «r%rj; iiy^ii
Slokas > ■- -During tae Sun's Latta there will be
the ruin O'l ■J'/ru/biiiiness Misery v/ill result during
the Latta oi iicia'.i and Kotii. In the Latta of Jupiter,
death, ruin of lelatious and a oi genordl fear or
insecurity may occur There v/ill be quarrel in the
Latta of Vena.,;. In Mircuiy's L-'i.'a .viii occur loss of
position or similar untoward fc /cmt. A groat loss will
mark the Moon's Latta Tims the rjopavaic effects of
the Lattas have been described.
%gnrB(gnrif^^rr I
gorf jrfi^frrTf^^^rrffrg ii«-sii
Shka 47.--When two or more Lattas synchronise,
the cumulative effect will proportionately increase in
intensity being twice or thrice and one ought only to
predict evil as the outcome of the combination.
iTT<T%«rr »rWt rrrs^ ii.jdti
Sloka 48. TheVedhas pronounced as auspicious
in the '.Sarvatobhadrachakra) bring happi*
ness, while those declared as evil produce only misery.
One should note this also while considering the effect
caused by transit (of a planet).

The following Slokas regarding (Sarvafcobhadra*
chakra) are extracted from other works and will bo found useful:
I- sncr^KTcot—
aT«r[?r: i
?r#cftvrjf !R5r?rg;i?:«n «<ii
?n»?rt^T: m»nT^ ;r^nr i
srfeisrmwtir w^rr iiJ^ii
?:r^ ^ ^ ^r^g: ii^ii
«iTn?rgBT£t i^#r ^ ^5rt 5(T3 [t fT^R ?T?ioT I
g^rf ^ =5r^ »T^rf iwii
^iTK^^Rg^FRTi’ir ^irfl ^3?f ^ i
?r«nf*Ti«tf<5Tir^«T ^ % 9rvr^ ^st; 11*^11
'g- sR: T^Ti: =5r "fitof ^ ^«rr 5r^n 1
Irssiii^ii
OC# %Vi: Rt#^:?Tfkf?Tsftq-: ig^tw: I
^a[«r; ^Trirsf RlT?T3rrcrtSt!i??i- iivsii
%«r^?Tf ’tit: ^isf^4 ?n% ?TfeTsj: |
?rfei5ww^ 41%?n5Tt siIp?^ ^fifjriwr^r ^if^f%gii<:n
arssTRT*. #sr5r«f«nf^ 1
55T%ci>*Tsr JTcSr^TfiKSK^ lUll
3;«^3TT ?r5r %«rsn0TCrm ^5r 1
n^iTi?ft%<Tsf ^ 3rRr% !nw iRii
^T t KFCif^ *^5 f 5rT^ fiTf^% spmg; 1
j^firJTWor ^f?rs?n ^gw*r^ ii^ii
fe%^5rt 1
^ JBin^?rRiTg5Tf?r iwii
«ii.iC1-39

Adh. XXV i
31^^^ %% sn^ JTCT^cnar f i
rf fii *<>a n g r reg »r?T^ 5 rT^a«rt^^ 11*^11
5 r?r^«ft 1
3 ?if 5 m»f*n: ii^^n
sr^fifr firf^t^ss^ir 1
sTRnart ^ g;«:?T^ ii\sii
^ frsTPrf 3r?PrT i
snrwt ^ 3^: firri^TT vrm^^vii ii<;ii
3jmT 5 Tf^^ 2 J %f?irsjcni I
frtcftvr^ #Ti^ jr?n ii'^.ii
:[rrzr«n3%r?i^i: ^nn: gfl-sr^i: 1
«T^?T?3% %r<T; %S 55 rRft «T%ci: I
sTf^rs^^iw ^m^TfgjsTTf^niw \\\\\\
wsf ^ ^%5r wi ^rw^gr^iort ^hij
5 nR%^ I ?Tcr; ?:i 3 rfir 3 r%—
^T^'RWii: i*TW ^T w^T gsjT =er stw. i
Br^rnirf st^ ^ fq^^fsTw^i^cr: \\\^\\
srfsTOT qfqqfw^fcsr 1
*r«qqi^ q«n q^qi %qT nun
^r^T q^T ^qm qpsrqRq;^ 1
q^^?qqTqrqT%qT ^%qq q%?^ Ill«ll
ar^ qqrr qfT^: 3 ^»qi qsPT qfrgqr: I
^3: qrfq^qqrq^j ^^qr; s^Ttsr #qqf; \\K*^\\
q^ ^at qnrsT I
q«qqT qqqiqiqf qqqi m\ II un
qqt 5 |q qqt I
q%q firqq irq f^^rqrgqq^; nun

5^: ^»:Tf»T% ii^-ili
TTgir 5i% i
swwrrfg 55rg«^:^ %v:t: tjarf^^sTT \W
«K5r snrrqf^ i
3^ir*ra w gTJft ^rj: ^or w iRoii
vr*T gi^: ^5i> 5»TTf^4%f^5|t i
’T^ sr ii^?ii
w ^ 5»ir%«r «R?jW: I
«T%5r^ IR^ill
gm ^STT^n: ^T»«n: g«TSTgi: I
^5^: 5?r: #Tgr ^Fr^n^srgT; li^t^ll
gs^^rf^sr I
^ fsrfrfV ll^'-ill
fjRTqrw «rT»f% i
»T%rJrgT '•^'^H
g5R?r% «??# Brijof i
^g«ng5r <F5j ^ST ;ft^^^ ^ q =; ^grg; ii^^ii
5r?:sr|nr i
g«r«Ff^5 srWtT: IR^II
iTSFgfg ^ gnrwT 5nf5rgg% I
«T%g«r: l
tn^ir^T *r%T^5 ^ ir’ ii
^ gfg ggTC ^ ^g nfir ’TT^rs^
^HFiTfmt W ^ 3 I
JT ?r?5r ^»Tsr^ ^ n^oii

Adh. XXVI
^rr %?n fk^i W ^r^f^rn: ii^lii
f^rwrems sTT^rf %?n *5n^«r>n ^ i
^%?r?«rT 5 gmisirf #»?rm irtt \\V<\\
sr^^nftr ^rorf: ?:i5r«i%«Rt f^^r: \
^ irm |r?n ^nr ii^^ii
qr^T5rPE% 553rT ^of ?Ti^: ^w> l
firST f^slt «ft%: JRTof ii^aii
^n^rr ^ 5Tt snRi^j4?ft: i
sr ^^5?r gw ^t?5r^?fTi5nf^rg#5R:: n^'^ii
a r ^ i g rfgr wmi^mi^Rg; i
5rTT g jr:: ii^^ii
^ «i^ ?T«n “STTg^ jt?t5% i
3r??nT?n ’^twT ii^'sii
jfetof ^smi i
srqf^sft %mi »RnRt5r^ ll^<2ll
a^^5fPT?ft f^: ?ren^<fdR»w<i: i
Tr%RrTO?T ^ w^rftr ?TRr mra": ii^’Mi
?nCT grgw Tt»n9r«n:5t^ wt ii«oii
f^wRf %?T f^^?gisrTBRT» i
^rreww irHi> R^»TRf iw^n
g^ wgg <KT I
^ 5r?r«; iws^ii
?E% srtxBTJ IW^II
5RIW anwR ^Rtw ^ng^rriSwg {
?TfTf^ g IW«lt

3rHff?5nr*iw«r *Rr raw^iiR ^jjTa j i
^ ^nr?rT '?:55 a% *^: g^ingvr^ n«*^ii
anwf sr ggq r ^ iT i
UL^htffi^^IH l VTW SRltW f ^g rtgT S TI^r ||«^||
sT^nrw “g" sr^ «ia^irti^«ii«ha; i
^ TO «r1[«i5m?r % iiwii
%5rsTmw ^^r^jErftr^r^i^ ii«<sii
j|ff: ?«rraF*T% ^ I
3n«IR^ stto: yy ^B t g gt IIWI
^rg^iBr^ir^Bre ^Br: q^B r % nm i
anBrJr frcSJn^r: ii'^®ii
^5nnF^ g^: g«T^ 1
^nrw? ^rRr^g- i
BrRi^w ^t^rrrer ^of #«r g 1
'^ ’ ^sn^wrapre ii'^^ii
Mantreswara makes mention of the Lattas and Sarvatobhadra
as both have a bearing on the Vedhas.
The Lattas, are of two kinds (l) “Forward” or Puro Ijattas
and ( 2 ) “Bear” or Prishta Lattas. The Lattas of the Sun, Mars,
Jupiter and Saturn belong to the former class. The rest belong
to the latter.
Thus, if the Sun should occupy at any, time, say the asterism
'Mula’i his Latta Star (which is the 12th from Mula) will be
Krittika. Suppose at that time, Venus occupies Sravana; his
Latta Star which is the 5th from Sravana will be Jyeshta; the
counting in this case being made from Sravana in the reverse
direction as it is a Bear Latta.
In tiHe next page is given a free rendering in English of
the Slokas extracted from Horaratna on Sarvatobhadra in
pp. 304—307 supra.

Adh. XXVI
I shall now describe the (Sarvatobhadrachakra) which has become famous and serves as
NORTH
«nT
jftjT
w
3r
Sjt
fT*T
»rm
«r
v:
•ft
WZXi
y
sr
^8rT
rt
z
z
*Ttn‘
an
HOrTII
In the above Chakra.
(1) vowels and consonants are shown in antique type ; .
(2) Nakshatras.Tithis,Basis and week days are shown in smaller type.
a light for the three worlds and which infuses im-

SI- 48 3li
mediately a settled belief and confidence in the mind
of the user.
Draw ten lines vertically and another ten lines
crosswise over the same. You will have 81 squares.
Write in the regular order the 16 vowels from ST
onwards in the corner squares commencing from the
outmost corner in the North>east, thus filling up in
rotation the 4 corners of each of the 4 sets of squares.
Fill up the 28 vacant squares of the outermost corner
beginning from the North-east by the 28 asterisms
beginning with (Krittika), so that each side will
contain 7 asterisms.
The 5 vacant squares of each side of the next inner
row may be filled up by ST, Cf, ^ and in the East,
by I, ’Tj t: and in the South, sf, vf, K and ^
in the West, and rr, ? and ^ in the North. There
now remain 12 squares, 3 on each side in the next
inner row. These may be allotted to the 12 Basis be*
ginning with Vrishabha from the East in regular order.
The 5 inner squares still remaining vacant may be
allotted to the 5 groups* of Tithis-;rrS{T (Nanda),
(Bhadra), grqr (Jaya), ftrBT (Rikta) and trorf (Puma) as
shown in the Chakra.
The 7 week'days may also be entered in the squares
thus: Tuesday and Sunday in the square contmning
(Nanda) group; Wednesday and Monday in
the (®badra) group; Thyirsday in the (Jays)
~ JTTmr
— feHhn
arr^
arejfr
Thrift
or ^<Wir

^12 Adh. XXVI
group; Friday in the (Rikta) and Saturaday in the
(Puma),
Saturn, the Sun, Rahu, Ketu and Mars are malefic.
The rest are benefic. Mercury is a malefic when as¬
sociated with malefics. So also is the waning Moon.
In whichever asterism a planet may be posited,
three Vedhas arise for the same by its aspect—one in
the left, one in the front and one in the right.
In the two sides—whether in the right or left—the
(Vedha) may be with a star, a consonant, a Rasi or
a vowel and not with others. For it has been clearly
stated in Rajavijaya thus :
A planet posited in Krittika may have (Vedha)
with the following, viz., (1) Bharani (2) the vowel gj ;
(3) Vrishabha; (4) (Nanda); (5) (Bhadra);
(6) Tula (7) the consonant g'; ( 8 ) Visakha and (9)
Sravana.
Similarly a planet stationed in Rohini will have
(Vedha) with (1) the vowel 7 , (2) Aswini (3) the con.
sonant (4) Mithuna (5) the vowel (6) Kanya (7) the
consonant (8) Swati and (9) Abhijit.
In the same way, a planet quartered in Mrigasiras
may have Vedha with (1) Kataka (2) the consonant ^
(3) Simha (4) the consonant q (5) Chittra (6) Revati
(7) the consonant ^ (8) the vowel sf and (9) Uttarashadha.
When a planet is retrograde in motion, the aspect
is towards the right. It is on the left when the motion
is direct (swift). When it is mean one, it is towards the
front. This is with reference to the five planets from
Mars onwards.

In the case of Rahu and Ketu, which are alway9
retrograde, the (Vedha) will be on the right, and in
the case of the Sun and the Moon which move direct
(and have no retrograde motion), the (Vedha) will
be on the left.
Owing to there being no uniformity in motion
among the other planets, three kinds of Vedhas have
been mentioned. Malefics when retrograde will cause
intense evil if they are in'gvi (Vedha) position, while
benefics will do immense good. Malefics and bene*
fics when in rapid motion partake of the nature of the
planets they are associated with.
When the four asterisms Ardra, Hasta, Purvashadha
and Uttarabhadrapada which occupy the four central
positions of the outermost border are passed over
(transitted) by a planet, the following four triplets, viz.,
respectively hit (have Vedha).
In the case of the pairs (1) q', ST (2) (3) V
and (4) 3r> q'? (5) sr if one letter of any pair be hit
(has Vedha), the other also should be considered as hit.
A (Saumya Vedha) is one that is caused by «
benefic.
If there be (Vedha) in one of the pairs of similar
vowels, the other vowel of the pair should also be
considered as hit. The same remark should be made
in the case of the Anuswara and Visarga (vowels).
Wh en a planet in transit is in the last or the first
quutei of two asterisms (forming the juncture) in any
of The four corners of the square, there is the
(Vedhi.) of the four voweli^, ar, 3 tt, f > f and the
in regi.lar order commencing with that vowel interven*

314 Adh. XXVI
ing at the particular juncture occupied by the planet.
The effects arising from these five are:—agitation or
excitement from the first, fear from the second, loss
from the third, disease from the fourth and death from
the fifth.
When the (Vedha) is with an asterism, there is
confusion; when with a letter, loss; with a vowel,
sickness; and a very great obstacle, when with a
Tithi or Rasi.
When there are five Vedhas simultaneously, the
individual will not live, A single (Vedha) will
engender fear in battle ; two Vedhs, loss of money;
three, some obstacle; and four, death.
Just as malefics produce evil, benefics cause good.
Benefics associated with malefics produce only evil
effects.
In the Sun's Vedha there is misunderstanding; in
that of Mars, loss of wealth; in that of Saturn, trouble
through sickness; in those of Rahu and Ketu, obstacles.
In the Moon's, there will be mixed effects; in that of
Venus, sexual enjoyment; in that of Mercury, intelli¬
gence; in that of Jupiter, an all round good effect.
When the planet causing the Vedha is retrograde, the
effect is two-fold; it is thrice when he is in exaltation;
when his motion is rapid (direct), the usual (natural)
effect; and when in depression, the effect is only half.
Any Tithi, Rasi or Amsa or Nakshatra hit by a malefic
should be scrupulously avoided in all auspicious
undertakings. A marriage celebrated during a Vedha
will not be happy; and any journey undertaken will
not prove prosperous ; any treatment given to a patient
will not end in cure; and any business started will not
be successful. If a Vedha caused by a malefic should
occur during the time of sickness, it will culminate in

death if the motion be retrograde. If the motion be
direct, the sickness will soon subside. If there be
Vedha caused by‘a malefic in one's own weekday (of
birth), the person will not have peace of mind and he
will suffer from mental pain.
During the transit of the Sun in the three Rasis
Vrishabha, Mithuna and Kataka in the East (see
Chakra), that direction is considered as 'set' while the
remaining three as existing (or visible).
The vowels ahd aft in the North-east should
be considered as belonging to the East; the vowels
STT} ^ and in the South-east, to the South;
q; and 37 to the West; f, ?E ^ and 37 ; to the North.
In'the particular direction in which the Sun is stay¬
ing for three months, all the asterisms, vowels, con¬
sonants, Rasis and Tithis in that direction should be
deemed as 'set'.
When an asterism is set and there is Vedha, sick¬
ness will be the result. When a consonant is set, there
is loss. When a vowel is set, there is sorrow. When a
Rasi is set, there is obstacle; when a Tithi is set and
there is Vedha, fear will arise. When all the five are
in the 'set' direction and there is Vedha, death will
surely result.
Towards the direction deemed as 'set,' journey,
^ight, discussion, fixing of a new door or gate for a
palace and upper storeys should not be undertaken.
Any other similar auspicious action should not be
done. Whoever has his initial letter situated in the
set direction should consider himself as destined un¬
fortunate for the time.
People whose initial letters are in the 'set' direc¬
tion should, iftheydosifo sucooss, shun , a poetical

Adh. XXVI
contest, a foit, a battle (consisting of elephants, horses,
chariots, infantry, etc.) in that particular quarter.
In the case of an asterism situated in any of the
other 'risen' directions, if there should be a Vedha,
there will be growth. If the Vedha be with a consonant,
gain will be the result; if with a vowel, there will be
happiness; if with a Rasi, there will be success; if
with a Tithi, there is lustre; if with all the five, a posi¬
tion is secured.
When there are Vedhas caused by malefics on both
the right and left sides with consonants, Tithis, vowels,
Ilasis and Asterisms at any time, the person concerned
will surely meet with his death.
When at the time of a malefic Vedha there is a fate¬
ful Upagraha (see next three Slokas of this note) syn¬
chronising, death is sure to happen to him either
through sickness or at battle.
The fifth star reckoned from the one occupied by
the Sun is termed (Vidyunmukha). The 8th
is called (Sula) and the 14th, g firqTgT (Sannipata),
the 18th is known as (Ketu), the 21st is (Ulka),
the 22nd is designated (Kampa), the 23rd is known
AS (Vajraka), and the 24th is termed (Nirghata). These eight are known as the Upagrahas and
are recognised as causing obstacles to all undertakings
when at the time planets transit their respective places.
Ascertain if there is (Vedha) with any of the
following asterisms: (1) sFinT (Janmabha), (2) inS*
(iCarma) (3) aTT%rT«r (Adhana) (4) (Vinasa) (5)
(Samudayika) (6) (Sanghatika) (7)
snflr (Jati) (8) ^ (Desa) and (9) (Abhisheka),
and predict good or bad effects according as the Vedha

produced is by a benefic or a malefic as the case
may be.
The star in which the Moon is at the time o^ birth
of a person is known as an’m? (Janmabha) or
(Janmarksha). The 10th therefrom is called
(Karmabha) or (Karmarksha). The 19th is designat*
ed as stt^TR (Adhana), the 23rd is termed Rnn^T^T
(Vinasana) or (Vainasika), the 18ih star is styl*
ed (Samudayika), the 16th asterism is known
as (Sanghatika), the 26th, 27th and 28th are
known as 3n% (Jati), (Desa) and (Abhisheka) respectively. ^
If the (Janmarksha), the (Karmarksha),
the (Adhanarksha) and the (Vinasarksha) be each occulted by malefic planets, death, sorrow,
absence from one's place and quarrel with one's own
relations will respectively result.
When there is itvf (Vedha) in the
(Samudayika Nakshatra), evil or something untoward
will arise. There will be loss when the (Vedha) is in the
(Sanghatika Nakshatra). Destruction of
the family will be the effect when the (Vedha) ia
in the oTTf? (Jati) or the 26th star from the
(Janmarksha). In the 28th star, the (Vedha) will
cause imprisonment.
When the occultation is by a malefic in the
asterism known as (Desa), the person concerned
will be expelled from his country. But if the ^
(Vedha) in the above cases be by benefics, the results
will be all auspicious. Should the Vedhas with the
Upagrahas (see supro) also occur simultaneously, the.
result will be death and nothing short of that,

Adh. XXVI
When at the time of a battle, there is a (Vedha)
caused by one, two, three, four or five malefics, the
corresponding effects will be fear, failure, killing
(blood'shed), death and ignominy respectively.
When the Moon happens to be in a^«r (Vedha)
simultaneously with a (Tithi) or Nakshatra, a
vowel, a Rasi and a consonant on any day, that day will
prove auspicious or otherwise according as the planet
causing the Vedha is benefic or malefic.
While the use of the Sarvatobhadra Chakra and the
light it may throw on the human cycle of life on the
person condlrned has fully been explained in p. 312
supra, the technique and the pointeers to such deduc¬
tions (of results) have not had full explanation to make
the same both handy and useful for easy reference. The
same has been explained below.
Ist 2nd 3rd 4th
pada pada pada pada
1st 2nd 3rd 4th
pada pada pada pada
gr
ftsfrran
3ig?Tm
ft g
ST ftr
ft
ft
aft
jft 31
ft
ft;
j^
m
ft
•arurf
s
JT
ft
ft
sft
jft
SRTW
ft
ft
Jim
JT
«rftgT
JT ft
ft
jft
z
ft
tiRrfvrm
3ft W
ft
it
ft
ft ftt
T
ft
s
or
F
KT
•ft
r
ft
W
ftr

There are 112 letters (or sounds) belonging to the
28 asterisms at the rate of one letter for each Nakshatra
pada. These are mentioned for ready reference. Per¬
sons whose names begin with any one of these letters
have got a bearing on the corresponding Nakshatra
pada and judged accordingly.
li«Ml
Shka 49. —If planets should be badly situated
whether during their Dasa, Bhukti, Ashtakavarga or
transit, one ought to invoke by prayers and incanta¬
tions agreeable to the concerned planets and perform
Shantis or propitiatory rites for averting the evil other¬
wise threatening, by doing virtuous actions, observing
religious vows, making gifts and doing proper adora¬
tions.
Sloka SO. —Planets are always favourable to one
who is harmless (who does not injure others), who
possesses self control, who has earned wealth
through virtuous means and who is always observing
religious discipline.
Thus ends the 26th Adhyaya on "Transits of Planets"
in th e work Phaladeepika composed by Mantreswara.
II II
II II
ADHYAYA XXVII.
Sloka 1. —When the lord of the 10th house conjoint¬
ly occupies a Kendra or Trikona position with four

Adh. XXVIl
other planets, the person born will attain emancipation.
If the end of a Rasi be rising and the same be owned
by a benefic, and Jupiter occupy a Kendra or a Trikona, then also will the person born attain emanci*
pntion.
The first line may also be interpreted as—when four planets
are posited in Kendras or Konas or when the lord of the 10th
house is conjoined with four planets.
si*rr?rat iRii
Sloka 2. —If at a birth four or more planets occupy
a single house, the person born should be said to
become an ascetic of the class signified by the
strongest of them; while others are of opinion that if
the lord of the 10th house be one of the four or five
planets conjoined in a house, the person born will be¬
long to that class of ascetics indicated by the lord of
the 10th Bhava.
^ 5r^f5rg5?Tf m 5 jt; ii^ii
Sloka 3. —^The Moon posited in a decanate owned
by Saturn and aspected by Mars and Saturn will make
the person born an ascetic. If the Moon occupy a
Navamsa owned by Mars and be aspected by Saturn,
the person born will enter the class of asceticism signi¬
fied by the planet Mars.
oFmftl’TS I
snrjft^si?t ii«ii
Sloka 4— 11 at a birth the lord of the sign occupied
by the Moon having no aspect of other planets on itself
be aspected by Saturn, the person concerned surely
becomes an ascetic of the particular class of signified
by the
The remarks made above apply here too.

^ ik*ng-
^ #t«nsnTJ?^^i?ft ?rt *T5rT«iJrfire*i: i
wim :&^5iRr tjrRrftf «iRra ^ssi ^fw^sr ^ ii'aii
Sloka 5.—.The Sun will cause the native to become
a chief or lord among contemplative saints or one who
has taken initiation of asceticism; the Moon will
make him a traveller visiting places of pilgrimage ;
Mars will make him an ascetic of the Buddhist class
and an expert in base spells; Mercury will enable
the man to become a mendicant who does not know
anything about the various philosophical schools;
Jupiter will make the man versed in Vedanta philo*
sophy or an eminent ascetic; Venus will make him
a religious hypocrite, {i.e., one who assumes the dress,
etc., of an ascetic to gain a livelihood), an outcast
or a public dancer; and Saturn will enable him to
'become an outcast or a heretic.
«rflr3r«T<Tft^fr: ii^ii
Sloka 6. —The Moon becomes exeedingly powerful
in the bright half of the month. If the lord of
the Lagna should aspect the Moon when he is de>
void of strength (/.e., the waning Moon, say), the person
born will become a miserable ascetic engaged in the
practice of rigorous penance, distressed and wretched,
without wealth or helpmate and getting his food and
drink with great difficulty.

Adh. XXVlt
srsnrfw
Sloka 7. —In the ascetic Yoga alluded to in the pre¬
vious Sloka, if there should exist a Rajayoga, it will
pull up by the roots all the bad effects and then make
him a Lord of the earth initiated into asceticism and
virtuously inclined, at whose feet other kings make
salutations with their head bent.
3r%5r5r«ft ^ i
swx«rt JT%?rf ^cTTJifwrrf ii<iii
srm
Sloka 8. —If four planets with the lord of the
loth Bhava occupy a Kendra or Trikoaa; or if
three planets endowed with strength be posited in a
good house, the person born will seek admission into
the holy order and become a successful ascetic. If the
planets forming the group contain more benefics and
occupy good houses, the holy order will be one that
is respected by all and honoured by the great. If it be
otherwise, the ascetic order will be one that does not
command reverence.
Thus ends the 27th Adhyaya on "Ascetic Yogas"
in the work Phaladeepika composed
by Mantreswara.

II II
II II
«f\Fft rm srfmf iitii
«Tni!«TnTt 3n?r% 'ciSlJftsrf i
?Tf<iJ® ?rf5na vrRT?^JTnft«RTiT ^ ^ i
?^q!<ftg r wg gr^:r ^T ^s^rrers^n ii
gn rgs r ?^ : i
src^rmr^ r^wf^: ?r«T2^is!: sFirs^rj^ir ii«ii
ADHYAYA XXVIII.
Shkas 1-4 .—This work consists of 27 chapters treat¬
ing respectively of (1) Definitions (2) Karakas (3) the
different kinds of sub-divisions of the Zodiac (4) the
various kinds of strength of the planets (5) profession
and means of livelihood (6) Yogas (7) Rajayogas (8) the
effects of planets in the several Bhavas (9) the effects
of Mesha and the other signs happening to be the
Lagna (10) all about the wife's house (11) female
horoscopy (12) children (13) death incidental to child¬
hood (14) all about diseases (15) the Bhavas (16) the
effects of the 12 Bhavas (17) exit from the world (18)
conjunctions of two or more planets (19) on the Udu
Dasas (20) the effects of the Dasas of planets with re¬
ference to the Bhavas owned by them (21) the Antardasas or Bhuktis, etc., (22) the Kalachakra system, etc.,
(23) on Ashtakavarga (24) on the Ashtakavargas as
treated in the work "Horasata" (25) on Mandi and the
other Upagrahas (26) on transits and (27) on Pravrajya
or ascetic Yogas. I shall now mention the place of my
biith. )

Adh. XXVIII
tamnr 5^ INI
g ^ s- agt 4 ?t ^RNtOT^if^rsftj^ i
^?n m »T>g ^ fir ^ T ii^ii
X^ ;T5>55ITftT^T?rt qR g^ f^tKrqf 3wip^
STTJT 3llTfirefti:«n?T:
Slokas 5-6 .—After worshipping the Goddess Sukuntalamba who bestows on her devotees all that they
desire and through her gr^ce, this work Phaladeepika
has been prepared by me—Mantreswara—an astrologer
and a Brahmana who was born in Tinnevelly*—for the
enjoyment of other astrologers.
Thus ends the 28th Adhyaya on "Upasamhara”
in the work Phaladeepika composed
by Mantreswara.
FINIS
—Sri = Tiru ; —Sali =* 0®«>—Nel;
—Veil ; —Sriaalivati =
Tinncvelly. f

II II
N. B.—The Roman and Arabic numerals opposite to each Sloka
refer respectively to the Ohai)ter to which it belongs and to its
number therein.
3n!rfw¥?r«r!f
3Tfifr*ftRir?:ar
3T»wnf^mc»i?T?Tt
siw.gwiryircftfr
3W 5n?rf
XXII-28
VIIM8
XXVI 2*
XXI-62
XIX 2
XIV-14
XXVII-6
IX-12
XIX-18
IX-lO
VI.43
XXVI.31
3Rcr:^% XXVM3
VI-10
XXIV-29
VI-32
amiw^nw^s XXI-55
awrwwTJ ^raj^ XXV-27
VI-58
xix-22
«TIR 1 ^ XXI -56
s^lTTI^ XVI-9
aT ft g ffVB a't XXI.71
VI-60
XXI-36
3T4rf^«RR?r;nwt^ XXIV-1
XVI-5
3T«i!r% V-i
«T59rri7??ft XVIIM5
XXV-26
3T5Twfr5nft5Rrt5r^; XII-13
XXI-26
arf^^ng^^RRft
3?s*rw ftwRTTirr
3TRRB5r:
aifiRrfew^mfR^
sTRT^sn^wwrt
arRTRigR «ritiTart
VII-8
XXIV-15
XVII-23
XIII-6
XXVI-30
XVIII-5
XIX.21
XXVI-50
VM2
XX-44

IV-16
^lr4fRUt.s R | g |^ T: XXV-22
^ ^ XIIL4
XXVI-28
8n MH^*I I ria^^ 5r gl TXI132
^ XXVMl
VRWJ VIII-29
irr^r II-7
sTK^ir^’g«re%: XVIIM2
3n?T#Tt ?i3r?ft»rei XX 54
in-8
3TRf^ XIV-26
XXIIM7
XXIII -2
XXVI-8
XXIII -10
^cgW*^< T gi gy< 5R VI-7
VIII-34
xi-2
^^gn i uiH T q g r XVII-3
>j«H|ju«iMRniftr»r^XVIM6
;wRMRni^W ‘ XXl-24
grvnwrf wp&sn^ XXIV-21
XVI-28
^ - 11^ fr^ifT-Tj w
*rRn
VI-68
?KnT^wtgR
XX-9
XXIIM5
XXIM7
XXVII.2
ng:^j|5i:«ra%
XXIV-22
^ -^SirTT^V
VII-21
XXVI-43
flfilRI
XXIV-27
XXIV-33
5ijgTwnrasiT
XXII-2
XXVI-27
XII-23
XV-21
kji)
3Tt%
IIM2
^ TrT 1A
XXIII-22
grey9RR!fTf^re*l
«^;w«Tf^«nniThT
XXI-36

B2l
XXV-12
^IT«TJTTOir«r?T^ VI-18
wsrwiRT^n xxii-3o
xxv -21
%?r xxv-4
VI-69
VI-47
lwr%Ti»>sg«r
Wfk^
®«f5rs«r«rsr<»n^
^rf?r
» (^q <nviw f ^ s ; T q^ ^ XIII-2
%?ft(^ErFrnTft^k^3^5XIX-^i 7
^Tg q 'gf m ^ XXV-25
*Si-5^ VII-18
XII1-24
XX-45
fe^d^wtonfirq?rlf: XX-47
%gi n ^g« 8r XVI-21
VI-23
VII-13
XVIII-ll
XIX-14
IIM7
XIV-15
XVIII-2
VI-56
XXIlI-14
XXIII-11
XXI-48
%% JT^'iorrgi^w
^T?n
J^t¥T3r%
frfeq3>^t5[T”T
f^iddH<<fWWT
%f?n!rrnn?i^
XX-50
IV-8
XX-41
VI-16
XIV-23
XX-42
III- 14
XXVM2
XIX-12
XX-23
XIX-6
VI-17
VIII-8
XIX-20
XXVI-25
IV-15
^?rfiniTf>i?Tq«n»rar5rt5r III-i
*ft?n^ir5r%
g ggr i r gt qr •
III-4
1II-3
VIII-16
VII-5
IX-17
XXIII-4
XXI-68
XXV-16

XVII-22
XXIV-10
3^t?:CT:^g
XXIV-ll
XVII-13
xxv-30
XXV-18
55ITF5r^^5ft^JTt?:
XIV-6
»fif?PT>^j‘5?r3rirji;«Tf??r«i !-*»
»ftg-^C«r5TT5JT5
XXIII-1
?rrf5j I
ift^TSTiTVIRr
VI-48
XXIV-24
XXIV-19
src; wff^snRTJ
IX-16
^sr
IIM9
sr^or
XIV-3
JT^MTO#
XXVI-32
fri ^
IX-14
sr%«rgws
XXVII.l
IX-19
VI-53
XX-33
XXVII-8
«srenf^'»>^5
XXIV-7
XXIV-8
VI-19
«r?jn^«8r
XXIV-34
i5?j{T^^t3r^vn»<rn5
xi-io
«r%sfit^5ttw*T5l‘
VII-23
XI-6
XXV-2
IX-7
XIII-iO
VII-10
f^fr^
XXVI-10
XXI-18
(%5m^4if%cT^wr^5r: Il-i3
^5 SEd
XXV-8
VI-70
SRif^iClr
VI-22
sFJnijr^gnsng;
XVII-27
5T!ft
XVII-24
3r?iTSREr5Rn«i^?T
XII-30
STWeiPn^r^cTT
XXVI-9
3r?*TsH^«T5f sft^
IV-12
3FlT«[f?<TT^
XXII-16
XXVII-4
XIII-13
VII-19
?R4rf%JR^ V-3
3rRr% g-gg^gIV-20
snrf;
VI-9
XIIM
3n^»i«gf?r
XIV-12
XXIII-8
wmgs^^nr
XX-18

aft«n?:g»fWhBn5rf XXlV-26
3a% 3ff*ri^ XXVI-18
sftir g Xll-29
XIM4
VII-14
VI-11
XVI-6
^JT w^oTJnmsr ^ II-s
5gRJTgf%rrf^f?rr XXVI-H
?sRTf!T;r^fi:«r^ XXI-34
XII.33
XXIII-13
dT i ^tiit^fga XXIII-12
XV-2
?r^?fnpnp;i%«rP5r^ XV-7
XV-25
XVII-i
gt *ayra i8T q^< a: ^ XX-sg
gfrfir XXIV-3,6
^ XXIV-42
?r«nft g fe tg i^ ^ T XXV-7
?nft<T5n?w Xili-5
?nnr#9«WJn»nT
grrm^
XXIM3
XXI-82
VIII-17
XX-53
IM
XIV-29
XVIIM
XVII-28
VI-20
XXIII-5
XXM4
IV-5
f^»*rTgj|5Rrf^
^«fart5rl4Tfdrm7%
g?Fm
xil-18
snnorTf^f^ XXII-29
5ft?nn!T^gijTornRr XXI-19
XXII-9
f^nnrft«Rf XIV-18
Br^orrf^irq^qSv-^ XX-46
^ XXIV-16
i%5nftra^5!T: XXIV-37
5?n^: VII-1
xx-61
XX-59
?5Fnr5Ta«^5^ XXVl-49
XXI-84
T gT T M^8 ' A^4K« t gl III-2
XXI'28
?f$rer 9 T xx -36
xxii -1

XXI-15
XIH-H
XXVI-23
XXJI-«
^ XVI-23
XXV-3
viii-ii
VI-^
IX-9
VI-2
VI-62
XXI-58
XXVI-4.0
fssirfiwHfrqwA I-I6
1'# VIII-22
XX-16
^ I-ii
XXVI 16
XV-29
XVI-10
5:^«rjn^ XX15
XVI-14
VI-57
II-U
XXI-5.9
XXVI-24
xxv-*9
^ ja fiaq iri w^ift XV-*7
XXVM
jg^iii!lfi5nrH?ftT% VIII-3J
sct^fi^BTjggrjpdifilE XH-20
BjCfayi^oT^gssw; XXIV-26
HW t jfgq srg ^ EWg: XXVI-33
XX-40
feaWTa tg f : XXI-67
xxi-23
Ql<q w te <Tfe l > 6 g XV-11
I it m 5?n?n vii-4
I g?rgK 55
gS gr ^ 91
XXI-8
VI-37
XlX -11
XXI-57
VIII-27
XVI-22
g^«Be^9llHfsqppXVI-26
XIV-24
XV-26
Hft.H ii iw. t i ; »m!CT i VI -27
XXV-28
4^ *W P y"l XXV-23
XXV-5
XVIII-10
^«iw XXn-8
xxiRi

5T^in|«?r?r^
XXIMO
XXI-77
XXI-8^
5r ^iS(T3C^
XXV-9
sr ff;
XX-43
g^nir’t ^
XVI-27
XXV-1
XXI-76
'•^ - i.iIiTV
XHM8
aRr^«tqyffgy
xxi-43
XV-3
VIII-26
VI-55
r?R»VT-24
VII-30
XXI -28
VIII-10
XXI-3^
XXU2J5
w^5r?r
xm-7
xxi-ie
j W»T^
IV-W>
IV-21
q^gpn^rRr^t^:
XII-7-5
i MMWicSr%
Br«^»5^»T?n:i^ft xvil-30 I
XXI-79
xvn-25
IV-U
^qriTjrf^ VIl-7 i
•iWrWm
XII-31
IX-18
vii-afi
xn -9
XX-27
VIM2
VIM6
VII-29
«?I%S^|3R?T
g«ra:fi?r
"THfelTfser^^TT
’TnrinrT:
VI-51
XXI-73
XXV .24
XX 37
XIX-3
XX-3
XX 38
XXI-2
II 4
XIV- 7
iTmff^prgw viii-32
qrnrfe% xi v-20
’TiTifenirwTwm vii-24

xii-7
XII-3
XXIII-23
xii -21
./rwlsnfrsnfejRT^ Xlx -16
IX-5
XXM3
XIV .2
fT ^> qr ^«gu i<rf XXl -21
VI-66
%rq%:
S^ gw
jwirw
Swsnfccf
jsftpT^gwfe
IM2
XV-24
VIII-30
XX-6
XXlII-3
XII-19
VIIM5
XXVI-19
XIMl
III-20
XX-19
IX-2
XXII-24
lgRgKt^ws^:Tf g XIV -17
^ mwt XXll-5
sn»f5r?rgl%wWr XXVII.7
sr^wrwl IX-ii
SWfiRRrft^l^feRW XV-16
SRUt 2r3r% VI.45
g?n cW5 r fi=ft»T Bftq *fll< iXlI34
XXVI -12
XXlV -20
q> s if ^q>
qffqqjii: xx-s
XXI-47
qfijqwIqnrirfcRRr: XXI-46
^ XVI-7
^q^Sfqlg XIM2
^ fr# XIX-8
q^Hwrft WPW^ XX-35
XXIV-31
XXIV.34
XXIII-16
XV-23
XX-51
XVIII-13
VI-31
w|r%f?:5r
HfllTNMilWllft
wq^qr ^ XlX-i
g XXlV-17
wwwmtfwsrwRT Vlli -24
wi^ XXVI -20
wig: wtfw XIX-5
xnsrt; II-31
»nwt; q ;g gq>«|i4dW XVII-7
wrfwi^3rra% XXVIII-2

«rTW?mt5ra»?N«rrs VIlI-35
«rTW«I XV-20
«nw^9rr*TTBr?rear XV-9
XXV-6
wtwt; XV-i
5tn%5rf?«i?r*rT?r^or XVi-3i
w?Ti^; ?dhT^
*r?:of g sn
IV-23
XIV-10
XVI-24
XX-1
«n%g XV-h
«nlr: ^Tagaf^a: vi -44
ai.^aaf55<ir^ XXVI-39
gtn: VII -2
gat XVIII-6
^^firannlr: VI-38
^^a^aa^ftarra VII-o
wtaf5r% ^ V-4
4^inaa# X-5
4tair^^a ^i R t « r XXIV -9
;ftat qg i aqnm f v i II-I 8
giFiaad%^ XX 56
xiv -5
a>s^ ?par:
aasama
ag: aa:
ar-ft—42A
XXIV -38
IMO
XIX-7
XXII-3
|a?:orgai XXl -52
I a^aa;5aHaa%Tftga XXI-6
agia5Tig XX11 -15
agrari^ srra: VI-15
I a^sanfa^WT^rfa^ XXl-3
i arw^a^rggafe a i fa M 4
1 armaa ai:5r; 11.29
aiaw555a XXIV-32
afg: ?af^a II 2
aigarat^gasi^ XVi -12
argaiga^CfwargaT VI -61
aRgTi^?:aaRTa XXI-63
ai'T XII-8
arfpa^an%a%^acr IIM6
aiPa^gjt XVii -10
XVIM2
at< i t g gifa> ?:gt a XXlll-7
»fi% g|ir?atfcrR VII -22
i^'trfa 11-36
aaiaaaiaat vi-33
XXVI-38
;53rfaat IV-i"
UMi(ewa^z: XVIII-^

XIV is
^ VIII -7
W^' XIII -8
«W ^sw III-5
?icqn«f»n^g^ XX-ii
^nrrwJf-sRRj XXVl-41
^ %% ^ Br^ SIT XX-52
«rirrw»ft xx-34
?rfig5TT«fI XV-5
XVl-34
XV-28
XVI-19
?r^«n%5rwBi5[r^^ XV-12
«i3(W%;if^«r^rt5r XVl-32
?TTi%^wg*rtf7 XV-10
?rafi5!r?i% wf XI-i
VII-27
?r«ir«ife^g lll-io
^ri^«ri^ VII-28
XXlII-21
^TTwBrT wqiBr XX-60
gnnE%!r 5 !fl 3 ft& XVIII-?
3 rBr<rf^»TR XXI -27
XXlI -32
gft»r q ;i?:< Kq> > q i ^ XX -48
I «iWbiT ^t%cr XXVII -5
j XVlI -21
*Bft?n?^*iR 5 rRR XXI -45
^wsnrtqrl
4BTf«F^
sftsftsw
^nsmnnrwftsr
XVII -5
xlli -12
XVII-2
XVII -26
XlX -23
XXV .15
XlX -4
XXVI -42
XXIII -9
XXVI -45
IV .2
XXI -20
tnrr ^^tBrwsrRraEftX VIlI-s
Tp?r >r)*ri^g»n?w I -12
^T*TWor??r «Ror XIl-i?
^^^rrawwT lX-13
XV-30
^T^?re«mr XXIIM9
c i ^qlJ i rnf^gtgat ; XV-8
XXVI -44
XXI-7
XXI-4
ftgwins^yt XXI-66

<s r i T f
’TT
^jcrsjwoft
3nT?5n*TO^
^^Rwhtnrg^^Rrg:
«5?r ?tTT'K«^r?5T
55?nr«5rw^
«rjn?sr^»n'^T5?r
^STr§^WT!T^5r
^STfraT^l^CTW
?nrrf^sf?R«5^
^irrBwt srjTT^
ssai'^hr:
wr^t^gwr:
XXI-6 ggreft»gT < Ti ^^>
XX 7
VI-1
XXI-5
XXIV-35
VI-29
XXI-78
IV-6
XXVI-26
XXVI-22
XIV-1
VI-30
XXI1-22
XVM
MO
XXIV-41
XXIV-4
XIV-16
IV-24
XXII-27
XV-4
XXIV-14
XVIM8
VI-35
XIII-21
XIII-16
XII-26
XIIMfi
j OTTreWf^
i ^*% 5 r^VsnrJran» 5 ^
|i
' vs^
; ?5T%^ l^itSSWT
5r»%nrra%?i3T:^
^*r5T«lt5r
TO ac
TO*rer
VI-28
XII-2
XVI- 33
XVII- 9
XII-25
VIII-28
XIIM4
XX-2
VIII-1
XVI- 35
XVII- 6
XIV-28
XVI-2
XVI-U
XIII-17
XV-27
VIII-25
XXVI-3
VIII-33
VII-25
XVI-29
XXIM8
XXV-29
XXVI-35
XXVI-37
XX-14
IX.20
IV-4

iMi
^^fa?!wr5r^5Rn«nsff XVli-s
XXI-37
XXI-53
I1I-7
XVIII17
XX 22
VIM7
VI-36
XXI- 75
XXIM2
XXII- 7
XXII-14
XIV-8
XXV-13
w^TrrrJTRrw
rvT r
g[T^^»«r«l*R’TlT
fw5^?TinTt59r«lsn?T:
^t?n% srf^«rni^
%wiF!nJi
VII-6
XXI-29
XXI-80
XXV-14
XXV-17
XXI-30
XIM6
VIII-9
VI-40
IV.l
XX-17
XIV-19
lX-1
IX-8
XXI-40
XVI-30
filrg;»rreft5*T: XXVI-5
f%Wfr«T
f^tn^wr?rnT;
fiR5wn»w!tJnr
^rarrsnn^T^S^
XVI-4
VIII-2
XXI-9
VIII-4
XXVI-17
VIII-13
VIIl-12
XIX-15
VI-5
VIII 21
XXV-IO
XII-27
XVlI-17
XVIMI
XXI- 64
M5
XVIII-9
XXIV-30
5r?;n^g
XVM8
VI-50
XXI-44
XVI-25
XXV-20
5r%»rgs!ff
XX-24
5wrw^
VIII-235r*irsr%

5rft^3r?TP#:
VI-67
5i>3(TiRq:
VIIM4
XVII-5 9
XVI-8
5Tf5rar!R5r^l^
XIX-24
XX-4
t-%.r rt
5Rft?rfre3rwf^nT»Xiii 20
5r5[ft €»nit XXVI1-3
«EreT^ XX-57
^irer: VI-4
wsm XXI'42
5r^fir«ft?:ft3Jjq- XXI-22
%f^3rf^?rT5rwf XIX.25
f ^ gsrr XXI-11
5Tf?Tt XIX-19
XI-11
^rTTSrt#^ XXVI-36
VI 26
gsmfmrt
XXVI-46
VIM 5
VII-20
XI-5
XXIV-43
X.l
^ flTir: VI-41
$m: g wi f g ftr m ? xxiv-25
ll# ijn*i II-15
xxlv-13
XXI v 23
XX-20
VI-34
sfW?3^?T?5TTf5»: XIII-25
^>5fOT?rTfsrri^fi1«pr III-9
srs’feer IV-9
XVII 15
<T5IWS?r!!IRR«RW XXIV-40
q^^irg IIMi
XIV-ii
5r?:'ir?r XVIIM 4
5T^’U^InT; VI39
?i?n«Twr: XXVIII* i
XX-2i
^wlnr JT?iT XXIV-44
^^5tRt W«^««*RfVl-54
XXII-20
XVI-3
xvi-20
VIIM9
»r% xi-3

?r*TT <Tfiitm:
^3[T?^g?5r»i5or
^qm^^rwcorffsT
M
XIII-19
XXIV-2
XXII.31
XXI-32
II-5
XX-8
XXIV-5
XXIV-36
XXIII-20
XXVI-48
XXVI-47
XXM7
XIII-22
XXIM9
VI-21
^rtsTfinrf
*5T#rft«T5-«r5^^
^#^«i5nraTsar
XXVI-i
^TRTTnrfw^ VI-46
^rrarH^ lV-22
%5nnf«Tg^ig2iiT lll-ia
^ ^ VIII-5
(^ScRyT^TT S3«5S*r XXVIII-6
VIII-3
VI.63
XII-6
VlII-6
XXI-31
i?irreiT5nTi^«r?r!
f9n*ft
Xll-io
XII-2,^
Jjarrasr^sr^ XXI-74
WrT^^rsrqw XXI-72
XXI-83
XXI-33
Xl-4
g«rrgorTsfmf%j^ Vll-u
VI-25
XXI-49
XXI-69
^7^;r^wTt VI-59
5^T^?T«rT VI-13
54^IR#vrF7 VI-49
WWl rq55?I5T^jfts XIM
«%5rg3^ XVI-13
gs?!FJnfnT?r^«T XXI-51
w5^fTcr4:#?T^^3l? XV-18
g;5i^5rRf^ XXV-ii
s^gr^r: XXI-io
^Rrfvlt 11-22
XXVI-2
XV-22
^<i?^rrJi^?pwra XV-15
XXII-25
g?rl%?fTSirf5T<K^ XVIII-16
XXVIII-3
^?5rfii:T«T5r II-24
^ XIl-4
^ 5n«Ti% XII-5

XII.24
XXI-39
XIX-10
XVI-15
5^PRrRTt»nT?f
XXIII-6
XIV-21
XVIII-4
VI-42
^^*i?nr»ifT®!T^R XXI-41
sssft^rwff:
IX-4
XX-10
XXI-12
JT?nr;
IV-13
'TrqTTT
XVI-16
XIV-27
XVIM4
IX-6
XXI-70
XI-7
^5n?Tf
XX-49
5R^arti«pn*T
VI-64
5PWf*55Rr5
XXI-54
IX-15
VI-6
XIV-9
XII-22
sir
XVII-4
?^eHf5r^5r^
III-6
XXVI-6
XXVI-7
^^soT’^srr^
IV-19
^^Br^qr^rffgrtfi: XX-3o
XX-26
XXIII-24
IV-3
XIV-25
IV-7
JT^:
III-18
XV-13
!^g#?rvTq%
VIII-20
XIV 22
VI-3
VI-52
XXI1-23
%r%f|
VI-8
XXI-60
XXIIM8
XXVIII-**

Adhyaya
Slokas
Adhyaya
Slokaa
f
»r
3r
cT
sr
«r
?r
w

N. B.—The Roman and Arabic numerals opposite to each Sloka
refer respectively to the Chapter to which it belongs and to its
number therein.
XVII - Same as tTsrf^T;
3i5nK5r-XVIIM6
a?5n3?k-XXIM7, 18
3T5rTg#TT5n- XXII-28
arfjmrf?!- XIV-3
VI-3
arBr-1-16
aT%«ft?r- IIM9
StBt- 1-2
amiT- VM4, i8
awn- 1II-14
arfNtn- VI-42, 43
ansftar- 1-8
arntg^- XIV-27
arnn- VI-5,6
argapiT- XXVI-29
srgqwr- XI-u
XXM, 84
nSrPCIW:- XXI-84
arScST- 1-16
aiwsr- i-io
arsnspir- I-i5
arr^- XXIII-IO
arrsn^-1-14
anrosq-- XXlI-1, 2, 7, i4
aitr^- XX-22, 55, XXM,
XXVI-49
III-19
amiarnWT- XII-15,18
arrara:-11-28
araw- 11-24
amswr- IV-i, 2
are%- XIV-3
XXVIII.1-4 aTfe-I'7,l4

III-6,14
3T?iTl g<nu - XIII-18
smtqr- VI-57, 58
XX-56
arirjT- VI-13; XX-41
«T5*TITRyi- VI-21
3Tq«nn^S«KT- VI-23
arsHT^rillr- Vl-io
VI-10
8rw*ft*raraft- VI-lo
3rsOT%- XXll-12
«r>gr«r- II-16; XII -21
VII-8; XXIM,5,
7,1I;XXIV-13
3TS^r?nf- X-ll; XIII-25;
XV-12,28; XXIII-1,3,
XXVI-41,49; XXVIIIarer- 1-13
8rarf!r- xxn -20
8i5r- M3
3T^nft*r- VI-44, 50
3fr
armu- V-6
«r!mr?r- I .15
8TFnt-1-15
sTT^rar- 1-14
aiTsft^- V
aiTrJnC- 1-12
an^R- XIII 2
XXII-16
sn^iRsr^rsr- xxvi-26
ar wR^i r- XII-31, 32
XXI-54
8n33r:- XIV-6
8rnTt%IT- 1-18; XIII-15,
VI-14
ail'll- IV-3
STTf^^SRlorr:- IIM3
M4; XIIM, 25;
XXII-32

XX-56
arnrf- XI-9; XXII-7
anlr^- M4
srnrfw^- Xlv-26
3n=^T- XI-9; XIII-3
sirer- l-io
r
1II-9
CSST^ni- IV-5; XXV-5,
XXV-1,29
f
fw- II-5
XIII-25; XX-63;
XXVIIM-4
Tfrm- III-14
3? TO i nPT- XXII-16
^iHTf-XVII-lO; XXV-1,7,
XI-ll; XX-61; XXIII-10
grw- 1-9
XIII-14
35«l»l^lcr- XXVI-29
T
g;stg^- XIV-27; XX-25
sRor-1-13
«??RTBT»T5i5fI«r!n- XXIVIII-7, 9
XI-7; XII-5; XIV-17;
XVIII-7 ; XXlI-12 ;
XXIV-25

XI-4; XII-3; XIV-18;
XVIII-8; XIX-16;
XXIV-25
II-ll
wrsn- 11-27
XXVI-26
XXII-26
«5«r- I-io
WXWtlT- VI-44, 51
XX-54; XXIII-14, 15;
XXVIII-1-4
^tr^4r-xli-20
WTOP- XIII-25, XXII-2,
4, XXVIII-1-4
XXII-30
«Brar«Ry- IV-1
l-io
VI-46
XIV- 19 ; xvm-ii,
XXIV-25
XI-9 ; XIX-2 ;
XXII- 7; XXVI-26
^tor- xii-16
^wrqr^T- IV-i
XXVI-2

XXV-30; XXVII-1, 8
iv-8
%?sn%3Rr- IV-3
%?Td?Tl*T-VI-14, 16
^oTT^ET- XIV-23
M5
^Bnqr- 11-24; XIV-9
^*T?5rT- XXII-6
jgrnsj- II-21
V!
»r»»Rr- XIlI-9
XIV-1, 5
IV-11
III- 13
Ilf - I-ll
irt^- XXVI-1
III-7, 8
nte- VI-39, 41
iTfgon^Ti:- XXIV-24
JTfffs- 11-23
WfII
ITflTR- XXIV-23, 24, 25
XXVI-29
iftilT- 11-24
IT
4wr- XXII-13

XIM6
XIM7
^rgi?T-1-‘7
’srgwnf- 1-7
’5rg«7r^^or- III-14
’^'sffiR^IPTrcr- IV-13, 15
^sCT^snw- IV-16
XII-15
TOT%- XIIM4
XXII-24
^sn?n;- IMS
^nwT-VI-44,45
fW^I- XI-9; XIII-8
3r
sret-1-12
3rsff- I-lO; XXVI-29
^rfJTO%-X-ll; XX-23,63;
srsiT^- XXIM6
STfll^- XXV-14
srr- 1-14; XII-23
sr^rf^- VI-44,48
grra^- IV-20
afNw- 1-15
3ft^5rik- XXII-20, 25, 29
lV-6
IT
?r
?reiiir-11-29
rTW- III-3, 10
JTJriKifec- 11-23
tn?«T^ 5 r 51 Cf«r- iv-io
tfhFrfg-1-8
XXVIII-5

xxii-12
XVIII-9; XXIV-24
Bwtor- 1-18; XI52, 61;XXV-30,XXV1IBnF*r- XXVI-29
IIM, 4,
XXV-17
i-ii
i-io
III-l
XXVI-49; XXVIIM-4
?T«TTfe.Si:- XII-20; XXI-21
I fTJTd*T- XIII-8
I XIII-14
I III-19
- I ll
XXlII-24
II-ll, 13
lV-24
lV-9
III-7, 9
49, i VII-4
I r^rg- XIII-8
i IV-i

I-IO
IV-3
XIII-U
!raf5r-IIM,4; VIII-34;XSri^5rT5r- III-l, 4, IS; XII33; XIIM4; XVlI-4, 12;
XVIII-16
XII-17
SCK {fry 1-9
«r
OTW- 1-7, S; IV-^; VII
9, 10; IX-9; XlV-iy
XVIII-10; XXII-1;
XXIV-25
IJIT- XVII-IO; XXV-1,
XXV-29
I-ll
ST
frrgvn^- XXII-io
M2
snnft- xxii-17
22 , 30 :XXIIM 3 ;XXIV-
; iT^Rrar - XII- 16,18
: ;rRr*rBr - VI -30
:t 5 W^^ior- III-I 3
: IIM 9
i XXIM7
IV-3
XXII-28

^rf^^SRIW- III-13
ITOTK?:-1-18; XIU45 ;
lv-3
iT%-M3
trfiwsi- i-io
tnr-VI-3
IX-8
qriTsft^-i-e
TOI3?»-XXII-4, 14
tro^re- 1-2; XIX-I; XX-41;
XXV-22 ^
«Tftfir-XXV-l, 5, 24
qft^n-VI-32
tTft%^-IV-5; XXVn S, 24,28
IT#-XI-11
<n^-;\xxiy-30;±xv-i
'TRfRS:-1-12
Ijpr- I-IO : ‘
^rtirs^:^:yi-8,ii,;i3;
XKVms^'\y''■ '■■
«TRI«Rr- III-^.’?i i !
tmEr-VI-39,40
III-13
IMO
jnnr- v-8
XII- 16
gd g f IT- XXVI-42, 44
JWRSr- VI-19, 20
XI-9; XIII-8
Hjarr- I-i4
XIII- 6
^^r-XIIl-8
^SRTT- XXVI-42, 44
XX-33
^hr-I-M
^«jr^-J^ti8;
sif%wr- XXII-i
snrPBft-11-25,
snPTT-111^3,.] ft
STf%-I-15
sw5?n?f^;^ xxyil,
XVIII-1-4
srw- IV-20; XX-e3

‘•aso
srere- XXIIM?
sri^jnm:-1-9
mfff-l 15
imrrtjfir- 11-25
1-2; xxviri -6
«r5rlTO5T^- IV-22, 23
3rT5y?nr- XlTI-3; xiV-3
XIII-6
58, 62; XXV-6; XXVlIIJTm'fir- IV-24
XXII-27
^?r- VIII-35; XXII-a7
STT^^- TI-30
XIV-23
67, XXII-32
XXIl-6, 7
M5
«rf^«?T3*?rnr* I*i2 '
I-rl
III-19
M3
5 % (?«nar)- l-io
afe-XlII-lS; XX'23, 28,
XXII -13; XXVi:,f>9;
gfeire-xx-29
^jisr- xin -2
II-31

w?i- i-i i
IT
XVIlI-10; XXIV-25
JTir^- H-28
TTfoTcTT- XXII-24
XXIV-28.
XXII-12
TTr?^- VI-3
TTV^mi- 111-14
Trarw^T^- XIII-6,14
lT«n- XX-56 ,
ar?>w?:-l-2;tXXVIII-5
T|ir^'XXII-20,:24 ^
#in«^f^iii-i; 20; !jcxi-2,
JTSTSWftm:-VI-1
JTfTTTTWT-VI-14, 15
TT?1?fl»r-VI-32, 34
JfiCSt- II-3, lO
TltlR^r- 1-14
WR!- Ml
JTlf^T- IIM6; XII-8, 22;
XlV-9; XV-8; XVII-7,
XX-50
JTTif-I -13
iTT^rraRT-IV-1
i^sr-Mi
17; XVIIM; XXIV-24
XVIII T .U ; XIX -16 ;
xxii-i; xXiv-2^^:.:
gf^5T-lil-18 -,r .

XX-so
;|^-XI-9;XIII-8
XXII-7, 9
X^- VII-9, 15; vill-t; IX1; XIV.17; XVIII-6;
XXIM, 22; XXIV-6, 24
xt
XIV.3, 6
?m-XII-21; XIV-23
XII-25; XVIIIV-2
?r>n;-XXVIIM-4
xiil-6
KrVt- 1-14
^gH-II-7
XX-54; XXVII.l;
xxvnM*4.,;
narnf-1-12
Trfiw?rT^I-8
XXVI-9; XXVII-1;
XXVIII-1 - 4
^ f ffT ^ qr- XlI-17
XII-24 .
^i%3orwiT- XXlV-24
xxni -2
^Tf^raHT- XXIV-23, 24, 25
XVI-6i l4, 28; XVIl-5,

nrwigwimw
B5S
XIl-17
^HW-XXIM, 7, 8
5r
cnpfif- 11-27
1; XXVII.6; XXVIII-
»iwxxn-i7
w
VI-18
9if- X-4
IV-3
III.l, 6; VII-5, 6,
17; XVIII-17
^ntwimr- IX-20; XXII-
«nSin5T- i-io
^?3C^’C-XX-63; XXII-24
IV-1
«rppni!»r-XXlI-ii
ww- II-U
wiwrwsT- 1-15
wfint-1-9

^i?sr- Ml
III-I9, 20
ix-i 4
fitpr-1-'4
MO
-Brar- I-io
f^r«r^- xiv-6
XIX-15
fsr»Tsr-1-15
f^lTW- VI-57. 69
XI-9
firT?r&iT5r- XIII-s
XIM5
XIV-23
sii?fhT?r-XXV-1, 5, 23,28
5?rrm:- M5
Win-1-15
5r|fnln- VI-37, 38
5rfTf5ln|- XI-9
5nr«r- M®
XII-3; XIV-18; XVIII- 5rf5ri?r- 11-24- 25, 37
XIX-16; XXIM, 12; 5n??l- IIM8
XXIV-24 XXVI-49
XII-3; XIV-17; XVIII- XV-8
V.5 f^-V-s

XIII-2; XIV-22,
giR^r- iv-i
gWRH- VI-21
g»T^-VI-8
XXVI-48
VI-8
gvfhTSEwtt- vi-8
Ml
sww?r- XII-17
XIII-25
^1^-Ilt2, It
XII-16
XXVI-29
^nsTPftms- VI-39
M5
XV-18; XXII-IS.
xiv-3
^mnf- III-2; XX-59
?nrwi?iW5r- IV-3
XXVI-26
WW(4ft*r)- VI-14, 18
j ?R5r?ftir- VI-57, 65
III-14
4T#^*ra[- XXVI-48
XXIII-20;
XX-63
1-7; VII-9, Viri-l;
IX-5; XI-4, 7; XII-3i

XXIV-24
xxil -12
WfT^rST- III-7, 8
g S: »<i^ i 4i T r -XXVIlI-6
gfe- IIM8
g 5 jfe?r- ni-19
wsniwrtir- vl-5, 6, i3
wmftarRT- VI-44
ww^nriT- XII-16
XII-20
^rmsyr- VI-22
g«n fe 4y<i - vi-9
Vl-9
fWR- I-l’
fpTK- 1-^6
VI-9
Urn- l-ii
XII-18
gft- 1-6
^msTfSr- lV-l,7,2l
^«rcipnir- XII-is, 16
xili-14
I-l2
21;VIII-20; IX-20;XII23;XXV-30; XXIV-31
iaif-XIV-23
gr?«r- III -18
w
COTt*r-VI-i,3
f«nf-1-7
fT- III-6
eft- XII-18
e^- IM
I-IO; ni-l, 4, 6,
fftWWW-IV-l
eftHmr-xxviil-M

INDEX
N. B,—The Eoman and Arabic numerals opposite to each refer
respectively to the Adhyaya to which it belongs and to the number
of the Sloka therein.
A
ABANDONED. Child to be-by i
both the parents XVD24. i
ABDAPABALA IV-i.
ABEEUATIONOFMIND. Death !
dwe to—IV-19. '
Riihu causes—IV-9.
The D.isa of the 5th house-lord 1
when weak produces—XX 17 I
ABfllBHDTA—Avastha III 19. '
ABILITY. —of a person, to be
at the lowest, middling or
higliest VI-i8.
ABODiL The—s of the planets
The -s. of the signs I—5.
ABROAD. To be constantly liv¬
ing—VI G7.
Yoga causing the native to live
-XXV-9.
ABSENCE-from one’s own
country XlX-17.
—-from Olio’s re-sidence XlX-13.
ABSENT. To be—in foreign
places XX-l':!.
To be constantly—from home
VI-f)7.
ABUSE. To-others VI-IO.
ACCEPTANCE, -of presents
ACCOMPLISHMENT, —of one’s
desires XlX-11.
A term for the lith house 1-15.
ACCOUNTANT. Matters relating
to a clever—are denoted by
Mercury II—18.
ACHABA. A term for the 10th
House 1-15.
AOrlABYA. A name for the 9th
House £-14.
ACID. Flavour denoted by Venus.
ACQUISITION. A term to signify
the 11th House. I—15.
The Sun in good houses brings,
on—of wealth XlX-6.
ACTION. It is Mercury that
influoncos one’s.—XV-I5.
ACTOR. To bo an—XVIII—4.13.
To earn money as an —XVIll-1
ACTS. To do cruel -IX-8.
AOUTEN.FiSS- To ascertain the —
of a person Il-l.
ADDICTED. To be—to other
people’s wives. VI*64; XVIII-3,
ADDICTION. Information re :—
to many maidens II-6.
ADDRESS To be affable in—
VI-9.
ADHAHA.—Signs 1-8.
ADHAMA —Decanates 111-14.
ADHAMA.—Yoga VI-14. 18.
ADHANA. Time of—, considered
by some as Lagna of birtli
XlII-2
ADHANA DASA. XXII—16.
ADHANA LAGNA. Birth may
happen when the Sun transits
the 3rd Rasi from the—, or a
Rasi trine to—XII 31.
Effect of benefics occupying or
aspeoting the--.XTI-3*2.
ADHANA NAKSHATRA. XXVIADHI. A term to denote the 8th
house 1-14.
ADHI YOGA VI-42. 43.

ADHO MUKHA RASTS
INDEX
ALI
ADHO - MUKHA BASIS D8 ;
XlV-27.
ADHVAN. A designation for the
7th house 1-13
ADHYAYAS XXVIIT - 1-4
ADITYADYIT. A term aijplied
to Bahu 11-26.
ADOLESCENCE. Planets in—
in 3.
ADOPTED. Yoga for a child to
be—by another XVI-26.
ADOPTION. Predictions with
reference to the Moon and the
L'igna at the time of -of a son
To have a son by —XII-S.
ADORATION.—of the Brahmins,
elders and relations XXl-7.
—of Gods, Brahmins and re¬
vered seniora. XXI'59.
Doing proper—s for averting
evil. XXVi-49.
ADORNMENT. XXl-33.
ADVANCED AGE. Planets are
said to be in—. III-3.
ADVANCEMENT.—-of any house
or Bhava. XV-18.
ADVERSE. Tobe-.Vni-S.
ADVERSITY. It is Saturn that
settles a person’s —. XV“i6.
APEABLE. To be—, XVI-5.
To be—in address VI-9.
To bo -in one’s speech. VI-12
AFFLICTED. Effect when the
7th and 8th houses are —.X-7.
A person to be—often and-often
XVI-4.
AFFLUENCE. Bhuktis of pla¬
nets related to a Yogakaraka
will produce good effects lead¬
ing to—. XX-4c,
It is the Moon that determines
one’s—. XV-15.
AERAID. A planet is—when he
is in his depression. 1 1 1-19.
AGAMA V-6.
AGATE 11-29.
AGE. Saturn is ripe with old—
j II-U.
\ AGHA. A name for the 6th house
AGNIMANDYA. XIV-3.
AGREEABLE. Moon in the 7th
house will make the person
: born—to look at. VIII-6.
I AGRICULTURAL IMPLE¬
MENTS. Re—‘One ought to
guess thro’ Saturn. 11-7.
AGRICULTDEAL OPERA¬
TIONS.
Break of—XXI-11.
Loss in -XXI-37, 74.
To be engaged in—XXI-19.
AGRICULTUBE. Augmentation
of wealth by—.XIX-26.
Income through—V-3.
Increase in—.XXI-48.
Increase of wealth through—
xxr-51.
To be engaged in—IX-2; XXI-4
To devote oneself to—^VIII-24
To have loss in—XIX 13.
To have profit in—XXI-45.
To have success in—XX*5.
To puruse—VI-40.
AHT. Grain belonging to—11-28.
Precious stone of—11-29.
Same as Bahu.
Sex of—11-27.
Stage of life typified by—^11-32.
The kind of tree generated by—
The place belonging to—or Bahu
IH6.
AID-DE-CAMP. V-7.
AINDAVA. 1-8.
AIB. Ii-27.
A IB A VAT A. Same as Iravata.
AJA. Name for Meaha. 1-7, 8.
AJA. Name for Brahman, 11-27.
AJEBVA. AdhyayaV.
A JI—"Battle. 1-13
AJNA Term indicating the 10 th
house.
ALM-7.

INDEX
ALOOFNESS
ALOOFNESS To be diabinguished
by—XXV-10.
ALPAYUBYOGA. XIII-1«.
ALPAYUS. XIII-6, 14.
AMALAYOGA. VM2, 19. 20.
AMAVASYA. XII-IS.
AMBA. Name for Goddess Parvafci
A^^B.ABA. Country signified by
AMBU — Term to denote the 4th
house. 1-12.
AMIABLE. To be endowed with
—-manners VI-6,
To be exceedingly— VI-30.
To be very-r- VIII-15.
To sport with a damsel of a very
—disposition. VI-24.
AMOBOUS TOPICS. To be versed
in—.XVI-6,
AMSA. XV-8: XVI-lT^Sl. 32:
XVII-See Navamaa: XX-56, 57.
AMSA PHALA. XVIII-16.
AMSAYUBDAYA. XXII-28,
AMSAYUBDAYA DASA. XXIIAN.AEMIA, Death through—
XIV-14.
Mercury brings on—XIV-5.
Venus signifies— XIV'7.
ANAPHA YOGA. VI-5, 6.
AN GEB. To become son-less d ue
to the—of the mother XIl-20,
Saturn is a personification of—
IM4.
ANGHBI, A designation for the
12th house. 1-16.
ANGBY. Tobe—. VIIM
To be a little bit—. XXV-12.
To he—at trifles. IX-5.
ANGBY TBMPEB. To be of an
—. XVIIl-14.
ANGBY TEMPEBAMENT. To be
of an—, VI-41.
ANGUISH. Sun promotes mental
ANIMAL. XII.19.
APOKLIMA
I ANIMAL KIND. XIV-27.
I ANIMAL SIGNS 1-9.
; ANKUSA. To have—^Bekha.
i VI-3.
I AN NAP AN A. An appellation for
' the 2n(l house. 1-10.
: ANNIHILATION Conditions
under which a Bhava suffers
1 ANNOYANCE. To be subjected
! to ooDSfcant and intense—.
i XVI-i9; XXM7.
j ANOREXIA. Caused thro’ the
Moon. XlN-3.
Death due to—. XIV-17.
ANTARA, XXI-1. ^^4
ANTABANTARA. XXI-84.
ANTARDASA. XX-44; XXI-2.
7; XXVlll 1-4.
ANTELOPE. TM7.
ANTHILL. 11 16.
ANTHYA. 1-16.
ANTHYAJA. II 24.
ANUJAN^^r.V NAKSriATRA
XXVl-29.
ANUPACHAYA XMl.
ANUS, To suffer from a disease
in the - , VIII-25; XXVl-10.
To suffer pain in the—VI-64.
Trouble in the—. XXl-ll.
ANXIETY. —caused by the
separation or demise of porents
XlX-26.
To l>e free from—ies XVI 21,
To have fear and—XXVT-26.
To suffer from—. XXI-13.
ANY-AKARNA. A term for the
11th house. 1-15.
APACIIAYA. XII-12; XXlII-10.
APAHABA. XX-22. 55; XXI-1.
APASAVYA. XXlI-l, 2. ,7, 14.
APAVADA. 1-14,
APOKLIMA. —houses 1-18,
Benefice and the lord ofjbhe
Lagna posited in —houses make
the life short, XIII* 15.

APOKLIMA
INDEX
AEUNA
Yarishta Yoga is formed when
fcheMoon occupies an—house
counted from the Sun. IV-14.
APOKIJMA BALA, lV-5.
APPAREL, Articles of—for the
several planets. 11-30,
APPEARANCE, A person’s —
will be like hat of the strongest
planet. XVM.
Mars has a youthful—. II 10.
Matters relating to a female’s—.
XM.
Predictions to he declared with
reference to the—of the decanates-occupied by the planets
owning the Oth or the 5th;
XIV'28.
To be beautiful in—. IIT-17.
To be brilliant in—■. I1L12.
To conjecture all about the—of
one’s father. XV-22,
To have a brilliant—. XX-2.
To have a liusband bright in—.
XI-3.
APPENDAGES To he endowed
with princely—. III-9.
AYPANDIOITIS. XIY- 4, G.
APPE'i’ITE. Death due to want
of—. XIV-19.
APPLAUSE. To have fame
through the—of tlie learned.
XIX-IO.
APPOINTMENT. Loss of one’s—
XXI-/8,
APPRECIATION. To get—from
a big wealthy lord. XXI-74.
APTI-An expression to denote
the 11th house. 1-15.
AQUATIC ANIMAL. IM7.
ARA. Another name for Mars, IARDRA. Effect of females born
under the asteMsm—. XI-9.
The formulas for the four Padas
of-. XXII.7.
ARDHAPRAHABA. XXV-1, 3,
ARGUMENT. To be impartial in
one’s — lX-7.
ARIES. Same as Mesha,
ARMS. MS.
To have drooping— IX-6.
ARMED. Ketu is— 11-34.
ARMOUR, BEARER, Mercury
represents matters relating to
ARMED DECANATES. III-13.
ARMPIT. To have marks on the
ARMY, A designatioh for the 3rd
liouse. I II,
Commanding an—. II-3.
To bo a loader of an—.VI*2.
To become the head of an—
XVIIl-8.
To be enrlowed with a huge —
To expect a leadership in an —
XX-4.
To own a vast—•.YII-15.
AROHINI DASA. XX-56.
ARROGANT. To be— VI-2.
ARROGANT FELLOW. To be an
— XVIII-10.
ARTICLES. To get back even lost
ARTERIES. Saturn has a tall
boby full of —and veins. IIARTISAN. Matters relating to
an—are represented by Mer¬
To be a bad— VI-41.
ARTS. A Woman to be skilled in
the— XI.7.
To know something of the—.
XVl-6.
ARUCHI.XIV-8.
ARUNA. Another name for the

INDEX
ARYA VAMSA
ARYAVAMSA. Name for the
9th house. 1-14.
ARYAVARTA. XIV-26.
ASCENDANT. I-IO; XI-2;XV-21.
ASCITES. XIV-14. 19.
ASCETIC. XXVII-2. 3, 4. 5, 8.
ASCETIC YOGA. XXVII-7;
XXVIIM. 4.
ASCETICISM. XXVlI-3, 4,
ASHES. To besmear oneself
with sacred—. VI-29.
ASHTAKAVARGA. —s. XXVIII-
—has been very highly spoken
of by great sages. XXlII-i.
—s of the Sun, Moon, Mars,
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and
Saturn. XXIII 3, 0.
—system is declared effective in
all undertakings. XXlII-36.
Ay us to be predicted through—.
XIII-26.
Benehc dots exeeding 28 in the
Sarva—. produce good, while
those below that figure give
bad effects. XXIII-21.
Computation of Dasa periods by
the—process is the best.
XXIII-33.
Effects due to—have been briefly
described. XXIIl-44.
Effect of bhavas containing a
number of beiiefic dots in the
—of the lord of the Lagna will
be happy. XV-28.
Effect of the arrival of a planet
in a house containing the
largest number of benefic dots j
(in the planet’s Ashtakavarga). |
XXIIM4, 16.
Effects of the transit of a planet
in the several Rasis containing
fic dots in the planet a—.
XXIII-11.
Effects to be ascertained from
the Moon’s—. XXlV-7.
Btfeots to be eulled from the
Sun’a—. XXlV-6, 6.
Effects to be divined from the—
ASPECT
of Jupiter. XXlV-10, 11.
Effects to be guessed from tlie
—s of Mars and Mercury.
XXIV-9.
Effects to be inferred from the
—of Venus. XXIV-12.
Planets passing through Rasis
containing more benefic dots in
the—produce good effects
always. XXVI-41.
Prastara—, explained. XXIIIRelation between the benefic
dots in an—and the owners of
the 8 divisions of each of the
12 Basis XXm-lB, 19.
Saturn’s—-will disclose the time
of one’s demise, danger, Ayus,
The destruction of a bhava will
happen during the Dasa periods
of planets which occupy houses
where there are no benefic dots
in the bhava-iord’s —. XV-12.
The Janma Rasi of the wife will
be that which contains the
largest number of benefic dots
in the Moon’s—table of the
husband. X-ll.
The malefic places in the several
—9. XXIlI-10.
The Sarva—. XXIII-20.
Time of fruition of a particular
benefic dot in any bhava in
an—. XXIII-16.
When planets transit Rasis con¬
taining less number of benefic
dots in the—, one ought to
perform Shantis and other rites,
etc. XXVI-49.
ASHTAMl. XlI-17.
ASITA. Another name for Saturn.
ASLE8HA. Effect of birth under
the star—. XI-9; XIlI-8.
A8PADA. 1-16.
ASPECT. Effect of a birth where
the Moon is in Moola and the
liagna has no benefic associa¬
tion or—. XlII-8.

€ INDEX
aspect asubha vest
Effect of bliavas—ed by malefics
or inimical planets. XV-5.
Effect of bhavas free from—of
malehcs, XV-1.
Effect of bhavas haying no benefic-XV-3.
Effect of the 5th house being—
•d by malefics and devoid of the
—of benefics. XlI-2.
Effect of the 5th house having the
—of a benefic. XII-1.
Effect of the 5th house or its lord
being aspected by male planets.
XIMi.
Effect of the lord of the 4th house
and the Moon occupying a
Dusstthana and devoid of bene¬
fic—. XVMO.
Effect of the Moon in a decanate
owned by Saturn and—ed by
Mars and Saturn. XXVlI-3.
Effect of the Moon in the several
signs, and Navamsas and Dwadasamsas l> 0 ing—ed by Mars
and other planets. XVlII-6, 7,
Effect of planets owning the 2nd.
7th and 12th being—ed by
Jupiter and occupying Trikona
or Kendra positions. X-10.
Effect of the 2Qd and 7th houses
— ed by malefics. X-7.
Effect of Venus having the—of
Mars or Saturn. X-4.
If the lord of the Lagna should
—the Moon when she is weak,
the native will bocotne a miser¬
able devout. XXVII-6.
Xiord of the Rasi occupied by the
Moon having no—of other
planets on it except that of
Saturn makes the native an
ascetic. XXVII 4.
Lord of the 7fch being—ed by
malefics and the 7th house associated or—ed by malefics< will
make the native lose a wife.
r . i
1Pianctaryr-8.11-23.
Strength of—. IV'21.
The planet—ing the 8th house
will cause misery to the native.
The 7th house—most effective.
lV-9.
Time when tb4 fruition of the
effect of-‘may be expected. XXASS. 11-20; XXlI-31.
ASSEMBLY. — governed by
Mercury. 11-15.
To be clever in addressing an—.
VI 2.
To become a head of an—.
XVIII-4.
To behave stupidly in a public
To win the approbation of the
audience in the—XX-3.
ASSOCIATES. To be in the
midst of bad—*. VI-69.
i ASSOCIATION. A female’s-to l)e
! predicted from the 4th honseXI'l.
' Bhavas free from—of malefics.
XV-1.
Effect of—with other planets.
To live amidst good—s. XVI-3.
ASTA. M3.
ASTANGATA. XXII-20.
ASTEBISM. Effect of females
bom Tinder certain—s. XI-9.
ASTEBISMS. Xn-30: XVlI-8.
ASTHMA. XlV-17.
ASTBA—A name for the 6th
bouse. 1-13.
—Yoga. Vl-44, 60.
ASTBINGENT. II-Sl.
A8TROLOGBE. 11-19; XYIH-S.
ASntOLOGY. V-6.
ASU. A designation for the 5th
booee. 1*12
ASUBHA. VMS.
Daea of an—’planet. XX'41.
ASUBHA MALA.-r-Y(«a VI-21.
ASUBHAMAIJXA. Yoga VB23.
ASUBHA. VA®[/-^Yoga, Vi-10.
ASUBHA Y®a.-^ogaVl-10.

INDEX
asubhobhayachari
A8UBHOBHAYACHARI—Yoga
VHO.
ASUGHI. A term to denote the
8th house. 1-14.
ASURA YOGA. VI-44, 52.
ASUBAMATYA. A name for
Venus. 11-29ASWAGATl. XXIM2.
ASWATTHA TREE. 11-16; XIIASWIN. Name for Dhanus. T-8.
ASWINI. VII-8 ; XXII- 1. 5. 7.
ASYA. An appellation for the
2nd house. 1*^10.
ATHEIST, to be an—. VI-62.
ATIBHEETA. 111-19.
ATMAN. A name to denote the
5th house. 1-12.
ATRI. 1-2ATTACHMENT. —to one*s duty.
XIX- 6.
—to females. II-3.
ATTEMPT. Success in all one’s
—B. ix-ie.
To fail in one’s—s. XXVI-16.
ATTENDANT. To be waited upon
by faithful—s. VI-7.
To have—s. XIX-22.
To live with—s. VIII-14.
AUDIENCE. To earn the appro¬
bation of the—in an assembly.
XX- 3
AUDISBSHA. 11-27.
AUSPICIOUS. Condition of the
lord of the 8th house proving
Lord of a Trikona posited in a
Eendi’a or the lord of a Ken¬
dra in a Trikona will prove
to-the native. XX-42.
. The time that must be declared
as very-to the native. XIII-20.
'Tlnsie when all things—should be
got done. XXIII-22; XXIV-40.
Time when anything-my hap¬
pen. XXlV*43.
•"Signs. I-9.
Time' 'When l^hu’s Dasa period
AYUS
will be fully—. XIX-15.
To be always in the midst of
—ceremonies. VI^SS.
To travel on an—undertaking
XXVI-19.
AUTHORITY. To attain high—.
VIII-30.
To fear danger from the —ies.
XXI-5.
To have—conferred on oneself.
AVAJNA. A name for the 6tb
house. 1-13.
AVANTI. 11-28.
AVARICIOUS. To be . XVIII-13.
AVAROHINI. —Dasa. XX-56.
AVASTTHAS. Bala and other—.
AVAYOGA. VI-57.58.
AYA. A term to denote the 11th
house. 1-15.
AYANABALA. IV-1.2.
AYUDHA DREKKANAS. III-13.
AYURDAYA. XXII-18.
—and the regulation of the order
ofDasas. XXII-27.
I Conditions when the Amsa,
I Pinda and Naisargika systems
of—have to be adopted. XX TI
Jeevasarma—system. XXII-25.
Loss in—. XXlI-19.
Pinda—system. XXII-21.
Rule of Satyacharya when
several multiplication sor
reductions crop up in com¬
puting—. XXII-20.
The method of computing the—
when the Lagna, the Bun and
tlio Moon are of equal
strength. XXII-29.
AYUS. A term to denote the
8th house. 1-14.
Determining the—(longevity or
otherwise) 18 the first thing
to be done when a son . is
born. XTII-1.

AYUS
INDEX
BATTLE
How to obtain the total-in years
of the native through the Ashtakavarga of Saturn. XXIV-15.
The persons for whom this—
has l^en declared by wise men.
XXI1-32.
The several agencies through
which one’s—has to be pre¬
dicted. XIII—26.
To get the rectified—contri¬
buted by the planets. XXIVB
BACK. The stars dwelliiii* on
the—of the native. XXVI-~36,
To have marks on the—. 11-32.
To have marks or moles on the
BACK-BITEE. To be a-. XVI
BACK-BITING. To I>e—. VIII
BAD GEAINS. To earn through
BAD LIFE. To lead a—. XX—
BAD PEOPLE. To be depend¬
ent on—. VIII-8.
BAD WAYS. To end one’s life
by following-. XXV.26.
To resort to—. VI-23.
BAD WOMEN. To seek the com¬
pany of—. VIIl-31.
BAD WOEDS. To hear—. XXI
To utter—. XIV-5.
BADLY DISPOSED. To be—.
XXV-11.
BADLY PLACED. Effect of the
lord of the Lagna or that of the
second house being—. XX
Planets when ?—. 11-36.
BAHIEBHA. 1-9.
BALA. —Avasttha. III-IO.
BAIjAGEAHAS. —to he expect¬
ed through the.Moon. XIV
Child meets with destruction^
being seized by—. XIII-3.
BALAPINDASAMASTTHA. IVBALAEISHTA. XIII-6.
BANDHA. A designation for the
12th house. I-I6.
The five kinds of—s or con¬
nections recognised between
two planets. XV-30.
BANDHU. A designation for the
4th house. I-ll.
BANISHMENT. To suffer—from
one’s country* XIX-25,
BAEBEE. To bo a—. XVIII-4,8.
BAEDS. To be praised by—and
minstrels. VISS.
BABKS. To be a dealer in—.
XVIII-3.
BAEEEN. A woman to become
BAEEENNBSS. Eemedies to
ward off the—threatening a
family. XII-16-18.
Yoga leading to—. XII-7.
BAEEEN WIFE. To have a—.
BASE. One of the ten Avastthas
of a planet. 111-19.
To expect insult from—people.
XIX-~14.
BASE AVOCATIONS. To resort
BASE WAYS. To be given to—.
VI-7.
BASE WOMEN. To be in the
company of low and—. XXV-IG*
BATH. A holy—in Bameswaram
to attain progeny. XII-24.
BATHING PLACES. To visit-.
XXVII-6.
BATTLE. A name to denot the
6th bouse. 1-13.

BATTLE
BENEFIC PLANET
Anything regardinjg—should be
ascertained through Mars. II-3.
Defeat in— XXM7.
Income by fighting in—s. V-4.
BATTLE FIELD. Abode of Mars
is a—. IW5.
BEADS. —Hor benefio dots in on
Ashtaka varga. XXIII-2.
BEARING. A woman to be
masculine in hei*—. XI-2.
BEAST. appropriate to each
of the planets. II* 17-20.
Tha Yoga under which a birth
will be that of a—. XIV-28.
Trouble from fire and —s.
XIX-18
beatitude. I.1;.II-5.
BEAUTIFUL. A woman to be—.
To be—in appearance III-17.
To have a—body. 'VI-25;
VIIM7.
To have—limbs VI-9.
BEAUTY. It is the Moon that
determines bodily health and—
II-2.
Matters relating to a woman’s
—should be determined from
the Lagna. XI-1.
To have—. XXV-13.
BED. —denoted by the 12th
hpnse. 1-16.
To acquire new—. XX-^S; XXI-26
TJo have giood”^. XVIrlSBEP’SOC^ One of the plaqea of
Venus. 11-16.
BiaaAB. To be XXV17.
BEHAB. The oountr.y pertaiaiag
toMank X1V*36.
BEHAVrOUfi. It i» thiooih
JFnpiter thab iefonaatioB ahonb
one’s—should be* sought for.
To be smotiouah iu ei)e’s-~.
To be of M Vivf»i
Tb be^roM&'iw ou e b —■ 'VLMh
To be wioiwii^&i one’i—< XX'-19'.
—should be determined through
the Moon. ll>2.
—is the substance asoribed to
the Moon. 11-30.
BELLY. A name for the 5th
house 1-12.
Disease affecting the—. XXI-76.
Disease in the—. XXL-22,
The asterisms distributed over
the—daring the transits o( the
planets. XXVI-38 39, 40.
To suffer from pain in the—
Trouble in the—. XXI-63
BELLY ACHE. Mars in the 5t)i
house will make the native
sufler from—. XIV-10.
Saturn brings on—. XIV-8.
To suffer from—. VIII 6, 26.
BELOVED. To enjoy all plea¬
sures in the company of
one’s—. XX-R.
To suffer separation from one’s
—. VlII-26; XX-IS.
BENBPACTOB. To be a—. VI-40
BENEFIC. VII-11, 12, 13, 16,
BENEFIC ASPECT. XII-l, 9.
BENEFIC DOTS. XV-12. 28;
BENEFICENT. Tlie oopditione
wJhioh p, EbAva will bp.
thorougbljr—-. XV’^*
ACTS. Tp do—.
xxr-46.

INDEX
BENEFIT
BIPED SIGNS
BENEFIT. To do acts causing
eternal—. VI *36.
To get eternal ~8. through one's
spiritual preceptor. XIX-24.
BENEVOLENT. To be— VI-36.
BENGAL GRAM. Jupiter's grain
BEST QUALITIES. To possess
the—. VIII-30.
BHADBA YOGA. VI-1, 2.
BHAGINEYA. A term to denote
the 4th house. I-ll.
BHAGYA. A name for the 9th
house. -1-14.
BllAGYA YOGA. VI-44, 53.
BHANU. Name for the Sun.
BHARANI. XXIL6. 7.
BHARGAVA—Name for Venus.
BHARYA—.A.designation for the
7th house. 1-13.
BHASANDIII 1-4.
BHASKARA. A name for the
BHASKARI. Name of Saturn.
BHASVAT. A name for the Sun.
BHAUMA. Name for Mars. 1-6;
XXV-6; XXVIII-1. 4.
BHAVA BALA. IV-24.
BHAVAMSA. VIII-35; XXII-27.
BHAVA SANDHI. XV-i3. 14;
XXII-27.
BHAVISHYATJNANA. A name
to d^ote, the 6bh house. 1-12.
BHEETA. One of the ten Avastthas of a planet. Ill-19.
BHEETI. A name to signify the
6th house. 1-13.
BBOGIN. A name for Bahu.
BHRATBU. A name for 5he 3id
house. I ll.
BHBIGU. A name for Venus.
BHRIGUJA. A name for Venus.
BHBITYA. V-1.
BHUKTI. A term to denote the
2nd house. I-IO.
Death may happen when the
Dasa and—at the time is un*
toward. XIII-18.
XXVI-49; XXVIIT. 1-4.
BHUKTINATHA. XX-29.
BHUMI SUTA. A name for Mars.
BHUPATANA. Some say that
the Lagna at birth of a child is
the time of its—. XIII-2,
BHUSHA. A term to denote the
4th house. 1-12.
BILE. Mercury is a mixture of
the 3 humours, wind,— and
phlegm. II-ll.
The Sun causes death through—.
XIV-14.
The Sun causes fever dominated
by excited—. XIV-2.
To suffer diseases arising from a
morbid si^te of—and blood.
XIX-20.
To suffer diseases arising
To suffer diseases due to wind
To suffer pain owing to excess
of—. XXI^29.
To suffer trouble through flow
of blood and—• XXI-78.
BILIOUS. Mars is—and urnel in
nature.
BILIOUS OOMPDAINTa Tu be
bothered by—*. Xl^r^
BIMOUS JSSVB8. 14.17,..
BIPED SIGNS. 1-7; IV-6.

INDEX 11
BIRD BODY
BIBD. The parfcionlar—s. denot- Trouble through flow of—. XXI
ed by the several planets. II'”
The Yoga under which the
previous birth of a person will
be that of a—. XIV-28.
BIEDDEOANATBS. ITI-13.
BIETH. —in a Lagna trine to the
Adhana Lagna. XII-32.
— of a daughter. XXI-67.
““ of a son to one’s family. XX-
—of a very good son XXI-72, 74.
Demise of the father of a child
soon after—. XYI-22.
Effect of—at the extreme and of
a Easi, a Gandantha. at the
junction of any of the four
oorners identical with the con¬
junction or aspect by a malefic
or when the Moon is in the
fateful degree in any sign.
XIII-9.
Past and future—s. XIV-27, 29.
Time when the—of a child may
take place. XII-31, 33.
BITTBE. 11-31.
BLACK. Eahu is—in colour.
Saturn wears a—^garment. 11-14.
BLACK GEAM. The grain be¬
longing to Eahu is—. 11-28.
BLACK SMITH. 11-20
BLAME. A name for the 8th
house. 1-14.
To get undeserved—. XIX-17BLASPHBMOUS. To be a—
heretic XXV-16,
BLAEING. One of the ten Avastthas of a planet. III-18.
BLEEDING. To bring on—from
rectum. XIV-10.
BLOOD. It is the Moon that
causes impurity of—. XIV-3.
Tbe Mom goveriKS—. 11-9.
To be bothered m impurity of
—, XIX-9; XXl-13; XXVI-13.
To imffer diseiBbir^^om a morbid
state of bile and—. XtX-20.
} BLOODLESSNESS. XIV.14.
! BLOW. To get a wound as a
result of a—^from a piece of
wood or stone. XIV-8.
BODILY SPLENDOUE. Loss
of—. XIV7.
BODY. —of Kalapurusha I—4.
Jupiter possesses a big—.
Ketu has an elevated—. 11-34.
Eahu, Gulika and Ketu will
cause trouble to the—. 11-26.
Saturn has got a tall—full of
arteries and veins. 11-14.
The—and limbs of a person will
be commensurate in their pro¬
portions with the rising sign.
XVM.
The limbs and—of Venus are
huge and his—has the colour of
the Durva grass. 11-13.
The Moon has a huge—, II-9.
The Moon represents the—.
The Sun causes burning of the
whole—. XIV-2.
The Sun has a square-built—.
The Sun is the lord of the bones
in the—. II-8.
To have a dwarfish—. XXV-13.
To have a—similar to a water
pot. IX-11.
To have a deformed—. VIII-9.
To have a lean—. VITI-1.
To have a lean and frial—. IX-7
To have a symmetrical and shin¬
ing—•. IX-12.
To have one’s—made white by
the besmearing ol sacred ashes.
To have one’s—soiled by puss
from wounds, and the gait re¬
tarded to—ily weakness and
wasted in the several consti¬
tuent elements of the—.
XXVI-li.

BODY
INDEX
BRB4Br
To have wounds in the—. XXI
To possess a beautiful—. VI3, 25; VIM3; VIIM7.
To possess a strong—. VI-50.
Trembling of the—. XXI-34.
BOIL. Death due to—s. XIVTo suffer from—. XXI-9.
BOLD. To be-. VIII-32.
To speak—ly in an assembly.
VM6.
BONDAGE. To live by servile—.
BONES. Mars governs the mar¬
row of the—and flesh. II-IO.
The Sun is the lord of the—in
the body. II-8.
BOUNTIFUL. To be— VI-7.
BOUNTY. To live at the—of
another. VIII-29.
BOWELS. To be afflicted by a
disease relating to the-.
VnL 31 .
BOXING. To be clever in-.
XVIII-3.
BOYHOOD. Condition when a
planet is said to be in—. III-3.
BBAHMAN. Presiding deity of
Jupiter and Ketu. 11-27.
BBAHMA. —as lord of Shodasamsa. 111*6.
The condition under which a
person goes to—loka. XIV-23.
To be absorbed in the knowledge
of the identity of the universal
with-. TI-31.
BBAHMIN. Acqalaiiion of.
niooey throughr—a. XXlr57.
Adoration of the r. XXI-7-*. 59;
G^iild|ff||B^8jy owing, tc^, th#,auri^,
crf.^T=.
Delight in worshipping Goda
and-8. XXI.56,
I ^v pt^'to ij^er-^s and thq Godf,
Matters relating to should ba
ascertained theoiigh Venue..
Meeting with-rf. XXI12,
Quarrel with a gre^—. XXl-jl57.
Beverence to Gods and:—e. II-6.
The dwellings of Gods ^n4—
IM6.
To be a wealthy—. XVIII-3.
To be intent in Worshipping
Gods and—s. IX-7.
To engage oneself in doing work
for—B. and the Gods, VI-48.
To get money through—s..
XIX-24.
To have aooess to—s. XIX-19.
To have no reverence for—s.
To maintain oneself through the
help of—s. V-6.
To please hosts of—s. VI*53.
I To revere Gods and—s. VITI*4.
To show reverence to—s. and
Gods, XX-10.
To worship the—s. and Gods.
XXI-23.
Troubles through dispqta'
with—s. and Kshatriyas.
XIV-9,
Venus and Jupiter are-r^s.
Worship of Goda and*—. XXI»
BBAHMINICAL. To a h i n
with—lustre. VI-31.
BBAIN FEV^E.
BB^V^, Npt,tft XX,
To be—.
XXV-ll.
BBAfVEitSE. & poww* w 9 m»^
8iw^7 XXi^k: ’

BREAST
INDEX
The particular aBterism resting
on the—of a person during the
transit of planets and the effects
thereof. XXVI-35.
BBIDGB. A term to denote the
4th house. 1-12.
BHIGHT, To be—in appearance.
XI'3.
BRIGHT HALF. Planets that
are strong in the—of a month.
IV-1.
BROTHER. A clue to guess the
number of one’s—s. XXIV 9.
A designation for the 3rd house.
I-ll.
Acquisition of wealth through
Elder—. A term for the 11th
house.
Help to, or from, a—. XX-4.
It is through Mars, that any¬
thing about one’s—s. should bo
ascertained. II-3.
Lo8aof--8. XVI-8.
Mars causes quarrel with—s.
XIV- 4.
Mars represents the youngest—
and Jupiter, the eldest. TI-25.
Misunderstandings with
one’s—s. XXI-32.
Separation from one’s —a. XXI
The condition under which the
prosperity of one’s—s. is indi¬
cated. XVI-8.
The number of—s. one may
have. XVI-9.
To ascertain all about one’s
father’s—. character, etc.
To be helpful to one’s—. XVI-7.
To be hostile to one’s—s.
VIII 25,
To bo praised by one’s—s. VI-47,
To be without—s. XXV-10,
To determine the effects (phalas)
of one's—. XV-21.
To divine all details about
one’s--, XV-25; XVH2.
BUSINESS
To expect the demise of one’s—.
To have a renowned—. VIII-14,
To have—s. VIII-S.
To have good—s. VIII-11
To have no - s. VI-60 ; VTII-8.
To lose a—. VIII-29 ; XXV-15.
To quarrel with one’s—s and
sons. XIX-20.
Trouble and sickness to one’s—.
XXI-49.
Trouble through, or to a—.
BROTHERHOOD To bo devoid
of good—. VI-68.
BUDDHIST. 11-20; XXVII 5.
BUFFALO. Aquisition of—s.
XlX-23 ; XX-9
Increase in—s. XXI-48.
Re : a—, one ought to ascertain
through Venus. II-19.
Re; a -, one should guess
through Saturn. II-7,
Term for denoting the 6th
house M2.
The full period of life of a—is
24 years. XXII-31.
To earn through—s. V-7.
BULLS. Acquisition of—.
XIX 23.
Life period of—is 24 years.
xn-3i.
BURDEN. To live by carry¬
ing—. V-8.
BURNING. — of the whole body'
XIV-2.
BURNING SENSATION. To
have a—. XIX-23.
BURNT. Yoga for one’s house
being—, XVI-14.
BUSINESS. Cleverness in doing
any—. XXI-33.
Failure of the—^undertaken
XIX-14; XXI-65 ; XXVI-28.

INDEX
CESSATION
BUSINESS
Gain of one’s—. XXIII-11.
Success in —. XIX-6, 7.
To be intent on one’s—. IX-9.
To bo wearied by being engaged
in a worthless and fruitless--^
XXVl-23.
To bring to a successful termi¬
nation any—orginated by one¬
self XX-II.
To engage oneself in other’s—.
VIII-27.
To have ebstacle to one’s—.
XXVI-18.
To have success in a - at the
very outset. VI-G5 ; VIII-7.
To suffer ruin of one’s—. XXVBUTTOCKS. To have elevated
I IX-4.
CALAMITY. IIMO.
Happening of a great—. XXITo be overcome by —ies. XVITo have ~ ies beyond number.
XXI- 24.
To suffer—. XXIV-42
CALLING. XX-21.
CALM. One of tlio ten Avastthas
of a planet. 111-18.
CALUMNIATING. Saturn is ex¬
ceedingly-—. 11-14.
CALUMNY. To have undeserved-XlX-17.
To suffer—. XX-18.
CAMEL. 11-20.
The period of life of a — .
XXII- 31.
CANCEE. Same as Kataka.
CAPABLE. One of the ten Avast¬
thas of a planet. III-18.
CAPEICOEN. Same as Makara.
CAPTIVITY. One’s—ought to
be guessed through Saturn.
II-7.
OAEBUNCLE. XIV-3, 11.
OAEDINAL SIGNS. 1-9.
CARNAL APPETITE. To suffer
from—. XX-18.
CARRIAGE. To posses a—.
XIX-16.
CASTE. Predications should be
so declared as to fit in with
one’s—. XXI-84.
The -of Rahu 11-33,
The—s. of the seven planets.
To know the particular—of the
native in his past and future
births. XIV'24, 29.
CAT. IM8.
CATARACT. To have a—in the
eyes. VIII-1.
CATARRH. Death due to—.
XlV-i7.
j CATTLE. Acquisition of—. XXIAll—will unite in one place.
XXl-19.
Destruction of—. XX-16; XXILoss of—. XXr-37, 74 ; XXVISickness to—. XXI-40.
To acquire more— . XIX-20.
To apprehend danger from—,
XXVI 18.
To be rich in—. VI-48.
To possess—. IX-2.
CATTLE-FARMING. To get in¬
come through—. V-3.
CELEBRATED. To be widely—.
CENSURE. II-7.
CENTIPED SIGNS. 1-7.
j CEREMONIES. —in honour of
departed spirits. XII 24.
CESSATION, —of quarrels. XX-

CHAKRA
INDEX
CHILDREN
C HAEBA. The number of years!
constituting the entire Ayus in
a—. XXIM3, 14.
CHAKRA. To have in one’s body
marks of—. VI-30.
OHAMARA YOGA. VI-44.
GHANAKYA. XXir-24.
CHANDRA. II-2. 24. 36.
See under Moon.
CHANDRA AVASTTHAR. IV-IG.
CHANDRAJA. 11-31. 32.
CHANDRA KRIYADI. lV-12. 20
CHANDRA KRTYA PHALA. IVCHANDRA VELA-PHALA. IV"
CHAPA. 1-7.
CHARA RASI. J-9 ; XIIM4 ;
XIV- 27.
CHARA KARANAS. XII-15.
CHARACTER, —of planets. IIThe Ayus is only for those who
preserve the landmarks of—
and conduct. XXiI-32.
The Moon determines the - of
one's heart. XV-15.
To ascertain one's father's—.
To be of a spotless—, VI-15.
To bo of a very good—. VI-25.
To be possessed of good—.
VIII-10.
To be vile in—. III-14.
CHARACTERISTIC QUALI¬
TIES. XV-15.
CHARIOTS. To own—. XXV-30
CHARITABLE. To be—, VII-22.
CHARMING SPEECH. II 6.
CHARMS. To be clever in—and
exorcising. VIII-15.
To be conversant with—or
spells. VIIM2.
CHASTE. A woman to be*—.
XI-7.
CHASTITY. XU.
OHATAKA. BIRD. 11-18.
CHATDRASRA HOUSES. M8.
CHATURDASI. XTI-17.
CHATURTHI. XII-IG.
CHATUSHPADA SIGNS. 1-7.
CHATUSHTAYA HOUSES. ICHEAT. To be a-. VI-62;
XVIII-10.
CHEATING. To be clever inothers XVIII-4; XIX-9.
CHEEKS. To be liable to diseases
affecting the—. XXI-76.
To have large -. IX 5.
CHESHTABALA. IV-1, 2.
CHEST. Distribution of the
stars over the—of a person
during the transits of planets
and the effects thereon. XXVIJupiter has an elevated—. 11-12.
To have a broad—. IX-8,
CHHATTRA YOGA. VI-44, 49.
CHUIDRA TITHI. Xll-ld, 16.
CHIEF. To become a—of one's
family. XVIlI-2.
To become a—or mayor of a
City. VIII-20.
To become a friend of a renown¬
ed VI-63.
CHILD. Early destruction of
Conditions under which long life
is secured to the—>. XIII-21.
To be blessed with—ren. X-9.
To have a - late in life after a
great effort. XII-4.
CHILDHOOD. XXVIII-1-4.
CHILDLESS. To be—. VIII-26 ;
X-8; XVIIM4.
CHILDLESSNESS. — and its
cause. XIT-19, 21, 23.
CHILDLESS BASIS. XII-3. 4.
CHILDREN. XXVIII-l, 4.
A planet in a Suralokamsa
secures to the native—. III-9.
Benefical effect through one's—.
XXI-41.
Birth of—. XIX-7. 11, 22; XXI-

CHILDREN
INDEX
CLOTH
—. male or female. XXII 11.
—should be declared through
the 9bh house iu a woman’s
nativity. XI-1.
—to be troubled by gout. XIXDanger through— XIV-2.
Danger to—. XIV-8.
Destruction of—. IX-19.
Happiness to—. XIX-10.
Ills to—, xrv-9.
Separation from one’s —. XXI-8.
Sickness to—. XIX-H; XXSuffering to—. XIX-IS.
Loss of—. XXI 37 ; XXV-26 ;
XXVI-22.
Misunderstandings with one’s—
xxr.32.
Not to have many—. XXY-8.
To be bereft of . VI-11 ; VIIL
To be deserted by one’s—. XXVTo be destitute of—. XXl-83.
To bo endowed with good—.
XX-6.
To be happy with one's—. XXITo become mothers of that are
dead XI-9.
To have a few—. VI11-16.
To have a good number of—.
VIII-12; XII-10.
To have a very limited number
of—. XVIlI-15.
To have—by a second wife. XIITo have many—. VIII-27.
To live happily blessed with—.
XVI 20.
To live in the company of one’s
To lose—. VL62. VIIM, 30;
XII-9; XIX.21.
To possess—. IIM6; VI'3, 27,
XXVM9.
To quarrel with one's... XIX9; XXVM7.
Trouble to-. XIX-23 ; XX-19;
Yoga under which acquisition
of—is assured. XII-1.
CIIITTOTTHA. A name for the
7th house. 1-13.
CHITTRA. Effect of birth in the
asterism—. XI-O; XIII-8.
CHOLERA. XIV-14.
CHORA. A name for the 7th
house. 1-13.
CHOWRIES. To be endowed
with waving—. VII-3.
To move in a palanquin with — .
Waving to and fro. VI-63.
To parade seated on the back of
an elephant with— adorning
on the two sides. VII-6.
CITY. To be a leader of a—.
XV1I.I.3.
To be a mayor of a—. VIIITo bo a watchman of a —,
XVlII-12.
CITY FATHERS. To get honour
from the—. XXI-Sl.
CLAN. To be the head of one’s—.
XVIII-27.
CLEAN. To he—. VI-2.
CLERICAL WORK. To earn
through—. V-5.
CLEVER. To be—. III*8, 15.
VI-2.30; XVIII-8.
To bo—in politics, XVL6.
To be—in working in metals.
XVIII’l.
CLEVERNESS. IX-H.
CLOTH. II-2, 6, 35.
acquisition of—s. XVI-13; XIXLoss of—. XXI-8.
To be an adept in the dyeing
of-. XVIII-2.
To be decorated with beautiful-s. VL20.

INDEX 17
CLOTH
To get new—s. XlX-22; XXTo have a profusion of—. XIXTo have—s and ornamenfcs. VITo have good—a. VIII-17.
To trade in—s. V-3.
To wear s of variegated colour.
CLOTHES. A designation to de¬
note the 4th house. 1-12.
CLOTHING. XXI-75.
CODE. To become a proficient
in the—-of laws. XVLfi.
COHABITATION. Trouble in—.
xrv-7.
COITION. Not to indulge much
in—. XI-7.
COLIC Death due to—. XIV-17.
COLOUR. IM3, 34; IX-IS;
XVI-1.
COMBUSTION. Effect of a
planet in—. XX-30,
Reduction in the period of Ayurdaya when a planet is in—.
XXIV-29.
COMET. XXV-28.
COMFORT. —s of the couch.
—B requisite for enjoyment
XXI-81.
Personal—s. XIX-10.
To be blessed with material—s.
VI-6.
To be endowed with happiness
and—. IIMl.
To be endowed with many—s.
VIII-19.
To be intent on having all —s.
XVIII-12.
To enjoy all - s III-16; VI-38 ;
X-7; XHI-24; XVM7.
To have various—a that wealth
affords. XXI*29.
To ifeenretbe-—a of one’s sons.
CONJUNCTION
COMMAND. A term to indicate
the 10th house. 1-15.
COMMANDER. Birth of a-.
COMMENDATION. An expres¬
sion to denote the 11th house.
COMMERCE. A term to signify
the 10th house. 1-15.
COMMODITIES. Acquisition of
saleable—. XXI-45.
COMMON SIGNS. 1-9.
COMPASSION. 11-5.
CONCEPTION. Clearness of—.
XXM7.
Time favourable to—. XI-11.
Time when—may take place
XIM2.
CONCH. 11-12.
CONCH SHELL. Sounds of the—.
CONDUCT. Course of—prescrib¬
ed in the Vedas. VI-31.
The land-marks of character
and-. XXII-32.
To shine in all one’s courses of
CONFIDENCE. To have—in
one’s speech. XIX 10.
CONFIDENT. One of the ten
Avast has of a planet. 111*18.
CONFUSION. Sorrow and—^to
the person concerned. XIX-25
CONJUNCTION. Effect of the
5bh house or its lord being in—
with male planets. XII’ll.
Effect of the lord of the 5th be¬
ing in—^with the lords of the
12th, 6th or the 8th. XII*9.
Effect of the lords of the Lagna
and the 6th house coming in—
(while in transit). XVI-33.
Effect of the lord of the Lagna
coming in—with the lord of
any particular Bhava. XVI-35*
On—s of planets. XVIII-1’5;
XXVIII1-4.
Reduction by half of the period
contributed by a planet when
he is in-*^with another planet.
XXIV-29.

INDEX
CONJUNCTION
Venus in—with a malefic in the
dth, 7th or 9th will make the
native bereft of a wife. X-4.
CONNOISSEUK. To be a goodin food VIIM4.
CONSTANCY. Anything re: one’s
—should be guessed through
Saturn. II-7.
CONSTITUTION. To be endowed
with a strong—. VI-63 ; VIII*
5; XVM7.
CONSUMPTION. Death by—.
XIV-19.
To be seized with—. XIV-11.
To suffer from—. XXI-4, 77.
To suffer from pulmonary—.
XXI-7.
CONTENTED. To be—VI-6.
CONTEOL To have one’s senses
under—. VI-31; XXII 32.
CONVERSANT. To be—with
everything. VIII-13.
COOK. 11-18; XVlir-4.
COOKING. — as a source of in¬
come. V-4.
COOKING UTENSILS. II-3.
COOLY LABOUR. II-7.
COPPER. II-l.
Acquisition of — - XXI-78.
To be a dealer in—. XVIII-7.
COPPER ORE. IM. 30,
CORAL. 11-29; XXI-60.
Income through trade on—s.
CORN. A planet in a Suralokamsa secures—^to the native. Ill 9
Acquisition of—. XXI-28.
All—^will unite in one place.
XXI-19
Anything about - has to be de¬
termined through the Moon.
II-2.
Loss of—. XXM],52.
Phenomenal increase of—. XXITo have plenty of— VI-46, 48.
To possess—. VIII-11, 14;
ix-ie.
To possess no wealth or-^.
XXV 9.
COURAGE
CORPSE. Fear by seeing—s*
XIV-9.
COUCH. Comforts of the—.
Information re : one’s—should
be feought for through Venus.
ii-e.
To enjoy the happiness of the—.
COUGH. Death by— XIV-19.
COUNCILLOR. The post of a—
under a King. XX-6.
COUNTRY. Absence from one’s
own—. XIX-17.
Mars represents the—of Behar.
XIV-26.
Residence in a foreign— XXIThe—ies signified by the planets.
The Direction of the—of the
wife. X-12.
To earn in a place other than
one’s own native country. V-9.
To go out of oue’s own—. XXITo know the particular—of the
individual in his past and
future births. XIV-24.
To leave one s—. XXVI-18.
To suffer banishment from
one's—. XIX-26.
Trouble in one’s—. XIX-23.
COUPLE The Yoga for a—being
lucky and enjoy all comforts.
Yoga for tlie—not living to¬
gether. XI-3.
COURAGE. Anything about—
should be ascerteined through
Mars. 113.
—is signified by the 3rd houee.
Ml.
To ascertain one’s own—. XVTo be*:-otts Vin-12, 22.
To shine in—. IX-14.
Uinketu in the Srd heuse tnelm
the native->»6us. XXV-26.

COURSE OF CONDUCT
'INDEX
DAIVATA
COURSE OF CONDUCT. To
follow the right—VIII-16.
COURTESAN. Association
with-—s. XXI‘40, 83.
Loss of bodily splendour as a
result of intercourse with—s.
XIV-7.
Re : a-*-, one ought to ascertain
through Venus. 11-19.
COVETOUS. Tobe—. IX-ll.
COW. A planet in a Gopuramsa
secures—s to the native. III-8.
About—s one ought to ascertain
through the Moon. 11*2.
About—one ought to ascertain
through Venus. 11-19.
Acquisition of - s. XVI-13 ;
Childlessness owing to the kill¬
ing of a—. XII-22.
—is denoted by the 4th house.
—s to go into the possession of
others. XVM4.
To earn through—s. V-7.
To obtain—s. XIX-12.
To possess—s. IX-2,
COW-GRAM. 11-28,
COW-HERD. 11*18.
COW-KIND. 11-21.
CRANE. 11-17.
CREEDS. A mendicant who does
not know anything about the
various—. XXVII 5.
CRIMINAL. To entangle oneself
in—actions. VI-68.
CROOKED. To be—in one’s
views. IX—4.
To go in—ways, XXI-55.
CROWN. VII-3.
CRUEL. A woman to be—beyond
measure to her husband. Xl-2.
Acquisition of wealth through—
deeds. XIX-6.
He who is born in a Daridra
Yoga will be—. VI-68.
Mars is—in nature. II-IO.
One's—ty should be ascertained
through Mars. II-3.
Saturn is—. 11-14.
Tobe—. VIII-IO, 13^ XVIIITo be—^hearted. VIII-1.
To be—in behaviour. III-12.
To be—in disposition. 111-14.
To be-minded. VIII-23.
To be making money by—acts.
XIX-18.
To do—actions. X.TX 9.
To do acts. IX-8; XVIIM4.
CUCKOO. 11-20.
CULTIVATOR. A—is denoted
by the Moon. 11-17.
To have misunderstandings with
one's-B. XIX-21.
CUNNING. Rahuis—. 11-33.
CUPID. To be equal to—in
beauty. XXV*30.
CURSE Harm resulting from
the—s of Brahmins and Gods.
XIV-6.
SonlessnesB due to the—of a
serpent or that of a Brahmin.
XII-22.
SonJessness due to the—of the
Manes. XII- 20.
To be—d by the people. VIIT 9.
CUTANEOUS ERUPTION. To
suffer from—. XXI-9.
D
DAINTIES. To feed others with DAIVATA, A name to. denote the
all kthdk bf***in plenty. XX-6. 9th house^I-14.
AINTA YO&A8. VI-32. 33.

DA8A
20 INDEX
DAESHA EARNA
DAKSHA KAENA. A designation
for the 3rd house. I-ll.
DAKSHAK8HI. —signifies the
2nd house. I-10.
DAMAYOGA. VI-39.40.
DAMSEL. Acquisition of an
excellent—. XXI-Hl.
Acquisition of many—s. XXIChildlessness due to the murder
of a—. XlI-22.
Service under a—. V 3.
To be ever sporting with a—.
To be loved by a beautiful—.
VIII- 6.
To enjoy comforts in the com¬
pany of many beautiful—s.
To obtain enjoyment in the com¬
pany of young—8. XIX-12.
DANCEB. About a—. one ought
to ascertain through Venus.
To become a public—. XXVII-6.
DANCING. To be fond of—and
music. VI-40.
To bo versed in the art of—.
XVlII-4.
To have a liking for music and—.
DANCING HALL. The—is one j]
of the places of Venus. 11-16.
DANGEB. —at ail times from E
enemies. XXI-52.
—from fire. XIX-17 ; XXV-23. '
—from fire to concealed wealth,
grain, sons and wife. XIX-5. i
—from poison, XIX-2I ; XXI-6.
—from poison, fire and weapon. i
XXI.36.
—from the authorities. XXI-5.
—from the sovereign, fire, D
thieves and serpents. XXI-71. D
—from the sovereign, fire D
thieves and weapons. XXI-88. D
—4rom thieves, XXI-47. D
*-*from thunder. XXI-S|6«
—from thunderstorm. XXI-14.
-^from water. XXI-18, 87.
—from weapons, fire, thieves,
enemies, rulers. XXI-22.
-to life. XXI-42,61; XXVI-
—to one's lands and house.
Mars causes—^from fire, poison,
weapons, leprosy, &c. XIV-4.
No-tolife. XXVI-27.
The Moon causes—from water,
Balagrahas, Durga, Kinnaras.
female Yaksha &c. XIV*8.
The Sun causes—from wood,
fire, weapon, poison, wife, child¬
ren, quadruped, thief, the sove¬
reign, &c. XIV-2.
The Sun's transit in the 9th
house will cause—to the native.
XXVI-11.
To apprebend-“-from cattle.
XXVI-18.
To bo exempt from distress
and—. XXV-10.
To guess—or destruction for a
person through Saturn's
Ashtakavarga. XXIV-14.
Transits of planets over a Basi
containing benefic dots less than
28 in the Sarvashtaka varga
produce—. XXlII-20.
DABIDBA YOGA, VI-67, 68.
DABIDBYA. —is denoted by the
12th house. 1-16.
DABING. One’s should be as¬
certained through Mars. 11-8.
To acquire wealth by doing—*
deeds. VI“2.
To be capable of accomplish¬
ing—acts. XVI-7.
To be very—and rash. VIII-S.
To subdue one's enemies by
doing—acts. XX-7.
DABKHALP. IV-1.
DABK HOLES. 11-16.
DABKNESa. IMO.
DASA. — (seryaht), a
denote tbe dth house.

DASA
INDEX
DEOANATE
DASA. X.I3.14; XIII-18. 26;
XXVIII-1-4,
DASAMSA. m-l. 2. 3. 6.
DASANATHA. XX-28. 29.
DASA PERIOD. XV.7. 8. 11, 12,
DASA VARGAS. IIM.
DAUGHTER, Birth of a new—
XXM2.
Birth of—s. XII-11; XXI-07.
To be the father of many—s*
XII-5.
DAY, TI-24; IV-1; XVII-21,
DAY-BIRTH- XVI-23.
DAY-SIGNS- 1-8 ; IV 6,
DAYADIN- XII-20 ; XXI.21;
XXVI-19.
DEATH. A child to meet with
its—at once- XIII-9. 12.
A planet weak in all the 10
Vargas will cause the—of the
native- III-IO*
—incidental to childhood—
XXVIII-1-4.
—of one's friends- XXVI-18.
—of the mother- XVI-10-
—through quadrupeds- XXV 23-
—will happen in the Latta of
Jupiter. XXVI 46-46Father's—should be determined
from the 8th house from the
Sun. XV-23.
Gulika's effects bring on—.
XXV-21.
It is Saturn that settles the
cause of-^of a person. XV-16.
Malefics in Vedha to Adhana.
Janma or Karma star bring
about—. XXVI-27.
Mars’ transit over the 1st and
2nd star reckoned from one’s
natal star brings about—•
XXVl-37One’s—should be guessed
through Saturn. 11-7Other conditions when—or
similar untoward event should
be expected- XXVI-29Sun while in transit if associated
with a malehc and in Vedha
causes—. XXVI-26.
The Pth house signifies—• 1-14.
The lord of the Lagna when
strong wards off — - XIII-21.
The manner in which a person
meets with his—- XIV''12, 13,
The 2nd and the 7th houses are
termed—producing houses.
Time of—of a relative signified
by any Bhava. XX-58Time of—of a revered elder.
XXI.68.
Time of—of one’s brother.
XVII GTime of—of one’s father. XVTITime of—of one’s mother. XVIITime of—of one’s son. XVII-8.
Time when one’s—may take
DEBTS. —ought to be guessed
through Saturn. II-7.
The 6th house signifies—. 1-13.
Time when complete discharge
of—will be ma<ie XX-9.
To be loaded with—. V1-G8.
To contract— lX-18
DEOANATE. III-l, II, 13, 14. 15.

DEOANATE
XXVII-3«
DECAY. ABhava suffers—. XV-
—of vital power. XXV-26.
DECEITFUL. A woman to be—.
XI-6.
DECEPTION* To have aberration
of mind through—. XX-17.
To suffer—. XX-20.
DECLINATION. IV-1.
DECLINE. The 12th house
signihos—• 1-16.
DECOEUM. Scandal due to a
breach of—. XIX-14
DEFEAT, —in battle. XXI-27.
The 8th house signifies—. 1-14
To suffer—. XX-17.
DEFINITIONS. XX-21; XXVIIIDEFOEMED. A woman to have
a—husband XI-3
Tobe—. VI-5S; VIII.3.
To be—in one's face. XXV-13.
To have a—body VIII-9, 28*
To have—eyes. VITI-10.
DEFOEMITIES. XIV-4.
DEGEADATION. Ee: one’s—
should be guessed through
Saturn. II-7.
To have a—from one’s position.
DEHA. I-IO.
DEJECTED. To be—. VIII-11.
DEJECTION. XXVI-13.
DELIGHT. To—in everything.
VI-9.
DELIGHTED. One of the ten
Avasthas of a planet. III-18.
DELIVEEY. A laboured—. XXIDELUSION. Saturn brings on—.
XIV-H.
DEMISE. Bodily impurity aris¬
ing from the-^of one's relations
XIV-9.
DESTRUCTION
—of both, a woman and her
husband. X-8.
—of the native. XIII-19.
Funeral rites for the mother at
the time of her—. XVI-11.
Time when one's—will happen.
XVII-20; XX-31. 40; XXIVTime when the—of one’s brother
may be expected. XX-16.
Time when the—of one’s father
will happen. XXIV-3, 4, 6, 6.
Time when the—of one’s mother
may be expected. XXIV-7.
DEMONS. Fear from frightful—
XIV- 4.
Harm from evil—. XIV-5.
To be oppressed by—, VIII-26.
DEMONOLOGY To dabble in—
XXV-11.
DEPENDANTS. Trouble to—.
XXI-18.
DEPEAVED. To be—. VIII-20;
XXV-8.
DEPRESSION. IV-7 ; VII-3.12,
DESCENDING. —Dasa. XX.66.
DESIEE. Accomplishment of
one’s—. XIX-11.
A term denoting the 7th house.
Failure of one’s—. XXI-SO.
DESPISED. Tobe—.XX.17.
To be—by all. XVIII-3.
To bo—by one’s relations. VI*
To be—by the wicked. VI-58.
DESTITUTE. To be utterly—.
DESTRUCTION. IIMO.
19; XVIII-1; XX-SS; XXV-22.
INDEX

INDEX
DESTRUCTION
—of cattle. XX.16; XXI.25.
—of one's enemies. XVI-18;
XXI.82.
—of one's own self. XXI-63.
—of one’s relations. XXI-70*
—of servants. XX-32
—of wealth. XXT'66.
Sun’s transit over the natal star
will cause. —XXVI-35.
To expect one’s—. XXIV-14.
Woman to cause the—of her
husband. XI-3.
DEVAGURU. D6.
DEVALOKA. III-7. 9.
DEVEDYA. 11-29.
DEVOTION. —to one’s duty.
XIX-6.
Intense—in the worship of Gods
and Brahmins. XXI-15.
DEVOUT To become a misera¬
ble—. XXVII 6.
DHAIRYA. A designation for
the 3rd house. I-ll.
DHANUS 1-7. 8 ; IV-5; VII9.10; IX-9; XIV-19 ; XVIII10; XXIM; XXIV-25.
DHATU 1-9.
DHATRU. 11-27.
DIIBNU YOGA. VI.44, 46.
DHI. A term to denote the 5th
house. 1-12.
DHUMA. XVII 10; XXV-1, 6.
DHUMAKETU. XXV-29.
DIABETES. Danger from—.
XXI 55.
To suflFer from—. VI-64,
DIAMOND. 11-29.
DIARRHOEA, —may be expectt^ through the Moon. XIV-3.
Mars during his transit in the
4th house will cause—■. XXVITo suffer fromXXI-77.
DIGBALA. IV-1. 2.5, 24 ; VH-4.
DIGNIFIED. Tobe—. VI-24.
dignity. One’s-has to be
DISEASE
I ascertained through the Sun.
II-l.
To be endowed with power
and—. Ill 8.
To command—. XIX-22, 26.
DIKSHA CEREMONY. XXVII 5
DILAPIDATED. Yoga for one’s
house to be old and—. XVl-14.
DINA. —(day). 11-24.
DINAMRITYU. XIII-8.
DINAPATT. 11-17.
DINAPABALA. IV-1. 5.
DINAROGA. XIII-8.
DIRECTION, —in which one’s
wife should happen to be born.
XXIV-12.
—of the individual in his past
and future births> XIV"24.
—of the signs. 1-9.
The—of the country of the wife.
DIRECTIONAL STRENGTH.
DIRECTOR. To be a VI-22.
DTRGHAYUS. XIII-14.
DIRTY. Saturn is—. IM4.
DISAPPOINTMENT. Generalwill mark the Sun’s transit in
the 9bh house. XXVI-11.
To meet with—in all one’s
undertakings. VIII-31.
DISASTER. —to one’s friends.
XXI.37.
DISC. XXV-28.
DISCHARGE. Complete—of
one’s debts. XX-9.
DISCIPLES. To have a good
number of—. VI-31.
DISCOMFITURE. To meet
with—. XX-16.
DISCRIMINATION. XV-15.
DISCUSSION. XXV-9DISEASE. Allayment of—.
XXVI-14.
Cessation of—s. XXI;20.
Danger from—s. XXI-53; XXVI-

DISEASE
INDEX
DISEASE
Death by—of the spleen. XIV-
—s arising through wind and
phlegm. XXI.65.
—due to excessive heat. XIX-17.
—due to phlegmatic disorder.
XXI-35
—s to one’s elders or youngsters
in the family. XXI-47.
—s to relations. XXI-14.
—s to wife and children. XXIFreedom from—s. XXI-31;
XXVLll, 12.
Bahu has skin—. 11-33.
The particular—s causing the
death of a person. XIV-12, 13.
The—s caused by Mars. XTV-4.
The—8 caused by Mercury.
XIV-5.
The—s caused by the Moon.
XIV-3.
The—8 caused by Jupiter. XIVThe—s caused by Saturn. XIVThe—s caused by the Sun.
XIV-2.
The—s caused by Venus. XIVThe Gth house is known as house
Time when—s will happen. XXTo ascertain one’s—XV-15, 23.
To be afflicted by a—relating to
the bowels. VIII-31.
To be free from—. VI-11, 24 ;
VIII-24; XITI-24.
To be liable to—caused by wind
and fire. XXI-50.
To be tormented by—s resulting
from wind, heat and phlegm
XIX-24.
To be troubled through—s aris¬
ing from wind and bile. XXITo become liable to—s affecting
the eyes. XXL 76.
To cause—in the stomach. VIIITo divine about one’s—s. XIV*
To have—in the belly. XXI-22.
To suffer affliction through—
VIII-9.
To suffer calamity or—. XXIVTo suffer—s arising from a
morbid state of bile and blood.
XIX-20.
To suffer—in some limb. XXITo suffer from a—due to wind
and bile. XXL32
To suffer from a poisonous—.
XXV- 17.
To suffer from a terrible—.
XIX.21 ; XXI-38.
To suffer from—. III-IO ; VIIITo suffer from—arising out of
the three humours. XXI-9.
To suffer from—arising from
bile, heat and blood. XXI-13T
XXVI- 13.
To suffer from—s arising out of
excess of bile and heat XXL21.
To suffer from—s arising from
water. XXI-4.
To suffer from—s at a very
early age. IX-8.
To suffer from—s caused by
excessive heat. XXVI-16.
To suffer from—s caused by the
three humours. XXI-41,*49.
To suffer from—of the spleen.
XXI-77.
To suffer from ear—. XX-20;
XXI.7.
To suffer from eye—. XIV-10.
To suffer from—through females
XXT-8.

DISEASE
INDEX
To suffer through a—in the
private parts. XEV-11.
Trouble through various kinds
of-s. XXI 16.
DISHONEST. A woman to be—.
XP6.
DISHONOUR. To be mentally
afflicted owing to public—. VITo suffer from—. XX-20.
DISMISSAL. —from an office.
XIX-14.
DISOBEDIENT. To be—to one’s
mother. XVTII 2.
DISPLEASURE. Childlessness
due to the -of one’s mother.
XII-20.
To incur the—of one's sovereign.
VII[-3; XTX-5; XXl7.
DISPOSITION. A woman to of
be of a masculine—. XI-7.
A woman to be of a virtuous — .
Saturn is of a slow—. 11-14.
To bo of a forgiving—. IX-2.
To be of a good—. X-3.
To be of a righteous—. VI*3.
To be wicked in - . VI-4.
To have a base—of mind, IXTo become bad in one's—. XIXDISPUTES. To become angry
through - VIII-12
DISRESPECT. To be treated
with—. VllI-14.
To suffer -. VIII 16, 31.
DISTANCES. To walk long—.
DISTRESS. —through relations.
XXD47.
—to one’s son-in-law. XX-18.
Planets in eertain Bhavas cause
To b6 exempt from—. XXV-10,
Tp —to one's mother. XXl«l KXV-16.
la iibdiire much—. VI-33, 64;
DURUDHARA YOGA
DISTRESSED. One of the 10
Avastthas of a planet. 111-19.
To he—. VIII-22.
DIURNAL RASIS. 1-8.
DOCUMENT. MO.
DOGS. XXII-31.
DRAMATURGY VI-27.
DREAMS. XIV-5.
DREKKANA. III-l, 4, 6 ; IV 3 ;
XVIMO. 12.
DREKKANABALA. IV-3.
DRESS. To—oneself beautifully.
VIIM2.
DRIGBALA. IV-24.
DRINK. Acquisition of food,—.
XXI-43.
—8igni6cs the 2nd house. I-10.
To be a dealer in—s. XVII1-2.
To come to grief through—ing.
XXI-41.
To command good food,—.VI-46.
To have good food and—. XXITo take to intoxicating—s. XXIDRISHTI. IV-9.
DROOPING. To 'have one's
shoulders and arms—. IX-6.
DROWNING. Death by—. XIVDROWSINESS. XIV-3.
DRUGS To be a dealer in—.
XVIII-3.
DRUNKENNESS. To be distin¬
guished by—. XXV-10.
DUAL. X-6; XVI-3.
DUBIOUS. To be— in one's
speech. VIlI-26
DUHKHA. A designation for the
12th house. 1-16.
DUHKHITA. One of the 10
Avastthas of a planet. Ill-19.
DULL-HEADED. IM4.
DUPED. To be—by others.
XXVI-9.
DURGA. XIV-3.
DURUDHARA YOGA. VI-6. 7.

INDEX
EIGHTH HOUSE
DURVA
DUBYA. II-ll, 13.
DUBYOGA. VI-67,67.70 } VIIDUSCHIKYA. A term to denote
the 3rd house. I-Il.
DDSHKBITI YOGA. VI-57, 64.
DUSHKBITYA. 1-13.
DDSSTTHA. 11-36.
DUSSTTHANAS. 1-17; XII-2;
DUTY. Success in one’s moral—,
XXI-64.
To be devoted to one’s—ies.
XVIII-ia. 13; XIX-G; XXIDWADA8AMSA. III-l, 4. 16;
IV-3; XII-33; XIII-14;
XVlI-4, 12; XVIIM6.
DWADA8I. XII-17.
DWANDWA. I 9 ; XlII-14.
DWABABHA. 1-9.
DWABPISH. To have a—body
XXV-13.
DWELLING. XIX-26.
DYEING. To be an adept In
the-of cloths. XVni-2.
DYSENTEBY. To suffer from—.
VIII-6; XXVM3.
DYUNA. A term denoting the
7th house. 1-13.
DYDSAMJNA. 1-8.
E
EAB. Loft—.1-15,
BigW—. Ml.
To have disease in the — XXI-7.
To possess big—s. IX 9.
EAB DISEASE. To suffer
from—. VIII 27 ; XIV-10 ;
XIX-22; XX-20; XXI-23.
EAB-TBOUBLE. Be. one
should ascertain through
Jupiter. XIV-6.
To suffer from—s. VI 68.
EARNING. V-9
EARTH. II-3, 27 ; VI-36 ; VITIEARTHEN JARS. To be a dealer
in—. XVIII-2.
EASEMENTS. Enjoyment of
various XXI-80»
EAST. Signs governing—. 1-9.
EASTERN QUARTER. 11-15.
EAT. The 2nd house signifies—
ing. I'lO.
To be a voracious—er. VIII-22.
To be ever—ing at other’s tables
VIII-28.
To—^muoh. XXV-8.
To—sparingly. IX-1.
ECLIPSE. XXVL29.
ECLIPSED. IV-7; IX-9, 19;
EDUCATION. To have a goodall round. VI-46.
EFFECT. VIII-34, 36; XV-14,
EIGHTH HOUSE. XII-4, 6. 9.
Affliction of the~in a female’s
nativity. X 7.
Death to be predicted through
the effect arising from the—or
‘ the Navamsa Basi ooonpied by
the lord of the—. XIV-16.

EIGHTH HOUSE
INDEX
ENEMY
Effect of a malefic in the of a
woman's nativity. XI-3.
Effect of the—being owned as
also occupied by a malefic.
XIV-20.
Effect of
Jupiter in the—■. VIII-15;
XIV-11.
Ketu in the—. VIII-Sl ; XIVLord of the—in the 7th. X«2.
Malefics in depression in the—.
Mars in the—. VIII-9 ; XIV-11.
Mercury in the—. VIIl-12.
Eahu in the—. V1II-2G ; XIVSaturn in the—. VIII-23 ; XIVThe Moon in the VIII-7.
The Sun in the ~. VIII-3;
XIV-11.
Manner of death to be guessed
through the , XIV-12, 13.
Moon at birth attaining the fate
ful degree in the—causes the
death of the child soon. XIII-9.
Period of happy life of a woman
with her husband depends on
the strength derived by the—
from benefics. XI-10
Weak Moon or a malefic in the—
causes early death. XIII-12.
Woman's prosperity has to be
deduced from the—. XI-1.
BKADHIPATYA EEDUCTION.
ELDBB. Adoration of —s. XXIDeath of a reverend— XXI-68.
Death of one of the—s XX-19.
Demise of parents and — s. XIXDisease to one’s—s. XXI-47.
Favour from—s. XIX-10.
Injury to one's—s. XXI-34, 46.
Loss of—s. XXI-22. 42.
Sickness to—s. XXI-IO, 62.
To despise—s. VI-66.
To suffer separation from
one's-8. XIX-22.
Troubles arising from serious
offences done to—3. XIV-G
Trouble from—s. XXl-70.
Trouble to one’s—s. XXI-24,
ELDER BROTHER lltlj house
signifies—. T-15.
ELDEST BROTHER. Death of
one’s—. XI-9.
ELEPHANTS. 11-20; 111-9 : VELEVATION. XX 9.
ELEVENTH HOUSE. VIMO,
ELOQUENCE. 11-4; XX-3.
ELOQUENT. To he—in one’s
speech. VI-9 ; VIII-13; IX-9;
XVIII-4.
EMANCIPATION. XXVII-l,
EMBARR.\SSMENT. XXVMO.
EMERALD. H-29.
EMINENCE. XX-2: XXI-40.
EMOTIONAL. VI-16.
EMPEROR. VI4; VII-13, 16,
EMPLOYMENT. XXVI-22.
END. IX 19.
ENEMY. 1-13 : II-3, 21; XII-

INDEX
eye
EJiEBOETIC
ENERGETIC. VIII-32.
ENERGY. IDS.
ENJOY. VIII-33.
ENJOYMENT. YI-18, 22. 40, 63;
ENLIVENING. XXY-21.
ENMITY. XVI-34.
ENTRAILS. XIV-6.
ENUMERATING. VI-27.
ENVY. XVI-34.
EPILEPSY. XIV-2. 4.
EQUIVOCAL. To bo—in one’s
speech. Vin-25.
ESTABLISHED USAGE. To fol¬
low the—VI-53.
ESTEEM. XXI 39.
EULOGY. II-4.
EUNUCH. 11-27; XI-6.
EVEN HOUSE. XV-11.
EVENRA8I. X-9.
EVIL ADVISEE. XXVII-5.
EVIL COUNSEL. XX-16.
EVIL COURSE. VIII-21.
EVIL DEEDS XXI-40.
EVIL-MINDED. VIII 22. 30.
EVIL SPIRITS. XIV-4.
EVIL TALK. XIX-13.
EVIL TIDINGS. XX-15, 20.
EXALTATION. IV-l, 2, 4; VII20; X-ll: Xri-26; XIV-22.
23; XXIII.24 ; XXV-30;
XXVI- 31.
EXALTATION SIGNS. 1-6.
EXALTED POSITION. XIX-10.
EXCELLENT QUALITIBS.XI-2.
EXECUTIONER. V-8.
EXERTION. IT-1; V-9.
EXIT. XXI-26: XXVIII-1-4.
'EXORCISING. VTII-IB.
EXPENDITURE. XV-24; XXD
8: XXIIMI; XXV-li;
EXPENSES. XXI-40.
EXPERIENCl?. XXI-33.
EXTOLLED. VI-4; VII-9.
EXUDATION. XIV-7.
A severe hurt to the—XXI-46*
—trouble. XIV'2, 7; XX-15;
XXI-38.
Inflammation of the s. XXI^
Mars originates—disease. XIVMercury brings on—disease.
XIV 5.
The Moon represents the left—.
The right—is signifled by the
2nd house. I-IO, and is represen¬
ted by the Sun. 11-25.
The Sun and Mars govern
The 12th house signifies the
left I-16.
To have bad— b. VI-59.
To have cataract in the— b.
VIII-1.
To have defective—sight. VIIITo have deformed—s. VIII-IO.
To have expansive—s. IX-8.
To have intense pain in the—s.
XXI-36.
To have reddish—IX-5.
To have round—s. IX-1.
To poBsesB black—8. IX-3.
To possess very good—s. XITo suffer from diseases relating
to the—. XIX-21; XXI-S2,
To suffer from—complaints*

sum;
INDEX
To suffer from—disease. VIII” Trouble to the—s.
XXVI 15.
F
FAMOUS
XXI54,
FACE. Disfcribntion of the stars
on one’s and the effects of
transits of planets on them.
XXVI-35 40.
The 2nd hou.se signifies—. I-10.
To be deformed in one’s—.
To have a big—. IX-2.
To have a broad—. VI-2; IXTo have a long—. TX-9.
To have an ugly—. VIIT-21 ;
To suffer from diseases in the —.
VII1-25.
Venus causes marks on the—.
FACILITIES. To command all—
for getting good materials.
VIII-33.
FACTORS, Rasi and Planetary—•
FAILING. One of the 10 Avastthas of a planet. Ill-19, 20.
FAILURE. —of one’s business
XlX-14; XXI-65 ; XXVI-28.
FAINT, To look—due to modes¬
ty. IX*6.
FAINTING. Diseases arising
from—. XIV-6.
FALL. A fall from one’s position.
XXVI-33.
Death due bfy a—from a height.
XIV-18.
To be hit by a—. XXV-25.
To have a—. XXV-24.
Signs of—. 1-6
FALLACIOUSLY. To argue-.
FALSEHOOD. Influx of money
through—. XIX-9.
Bahu speaks—11-33.
To earn one's livelihood by
uttering—. V-2.
To speak s. IX-l ; XVI-6.
FAME. Acquisition of—. XXTIt is from the Moon, that one’s—
should be ascertained. II-2.
Ketu in the 3rd house confers —
on the native. VIIL-29.
One whose ~ has spread over the
3 worlds. VI-27.
One’s—to he' at the lowest,
middling or highest. VI-18.
The 10th liouse signifies—. ITo attain everlasting—. VIIITo be endowed with —. XVIII*
To be known to—. VI-6.
To get great—through learning.
XXI-57.
To have—. VI.63 ; VIII-4 ;
To have- got in war. XXI-28.
To have immense—. VIL17,
To have wide—. XIX-6, 10;
XXI-82.
FAMILY. VI-25, 46, 65; VIIIXVIII-2; XIX-17; XX-3,6,
FAMILY EXTINCTION. XII.6.
FAMILY TRADITIONS. VI-53.
FAMOUS. To become—. VI-3.
XVIII-1.
To have a husband who is—.
XI-8.

FAMOUS
INDEX
FIERY PITS
A woman to become—. XI-6.
PAN. II-2.
PAR SIGHTED. To be—. XVIPAST. To be—in walkinsi. IXPATALDAS.\S. XX-24.
PATHER. Acquiaitipn of wealth
from—. V-1.
All about one’s—should be as¬
certained through the Sun. II*
Death of a relative who was
equal to a— XXVI-23.
Exit of one’s—iif born under
certain stars. XIII‘8.
Exit of one’s father soon after
marriage if his wife is born
under certain fateful stars.
XI-9.
The demise of one’s—soon after
his birth. XVI-22.
The bouse denoting the—’s in
the Ashtakavarga chart. XXIVThe 9th house denotes—. 1-14.
The planets playing the role
Time of demi'^e . of one’s—.
XVII-7: XX-19.
Time when anything untoward
to one’s—, or his demise will
happen. XXIV-2, 3. 4, 6.
To be bereft of—. VIII-24, 32.
To be more munificent than
one’s—. VIII-15.
To become a—of twins. XVIIITo conjecture about—'s appear¬
ance prosperity, brothers, cha¬
racter, etc. XV-22, 23, 24.
To guess the effects of one’s—.
Tdjv^tiess all about one’s—
t&^ngh the Karaka planet
oWning the Bhava. XVl-12.
To hate one’s—. VIII'4.
To kill one’s-. XXV.16.
To shine better than one's—.
Yoga for the—of the native to
live for a long time. XVI-23.
FATHER’S FATHERS XV 24.
FATHER’S SINS XIII-4.
FATHERLESS. VIII-10.
P.\TIGUB VI-60: VIII-11;
XXVI-9, 19.
FAULTS XXV-26.
FAVOUR. XIX-10.
FAVOURITE. IX-9.
64; XXIII-ll: XXVI-10. 12,
FEARLESS. VI 11, 65 ; VIII-16.'
XVI-2; XVIII-7.
FECUNDITY. XII-14.
5; XXI-8, 31, 78; XXIII-ll.
FEMALE AMSA. XII-11.
FEMALE CHILDREN. XXI-69.
FEMALE DEITIES. XIV-7.
FEMALE GHOSTS. XIV-7.
FEMALE HOROSCOPY.
XXVIII-1-4.
FEMALE PLANETS. IV-3; XIIFEMALE RASI. XII-11.
FEMALE SIGNS. 1-9.
FEMALE SOCIETY. XXI-49.
FERRY. XXI-19.
FESTIVITIES. VI-55.
I FETTERS. III-13.
FICKLE. IX-1.
FICKLE - MINDED. VI-56 ;
XVIIT 2; XXV-11.
PIERCE. 11-14.
PIERCE SIGNS. 1-9.
FIERY, PITS. XIV.5.

FIFTH HOUSE
INDEX
FRIENDS
FIFTH HOUSE. VII-25; VIIIFIGHT. XIX-23
FIGHTING. V-4; XVIIT-12.
FILTH. XXI-8.
FINANCE XXVI-23.
FINE ARTS. II-4.
FIRM-MINDED. IX-5.
FIRST HOUSE VIM3, 19, 20,
FIRST MATURITY. XTI-34.
FIXED SIGNS. 1-9; XVI-3.
FLAVOURS. 11-31.
FLESH. II-IO.
FLOWERS. II 2. 6 ; JX-11; XIIXXV-llPOOD. MO; VI-3; VIII-U,
POOD AND DRINK. XXI-14;
XXVII-6.
POOL. VI-33; VIII-25; XVI6; XVIII-12.
FOREIGN COUNTRY. Residence
in a-. VIII-21; XXI-27.
FOREIGN PLACE. VIII 29;
FOREIGN TRAVEL. XXI-68.
FOREIGNERS. XIV-26.
FOREST. II-l; VIH-3; IX-5 ;
XIX-6,
FOREST REGIONS. XIV.26.
FORGIVING. IX-2.
FORM. II 8. 14; IX-13.
FORMULAS. XXII-4, 11. 13. 14.
PORTUN.ATE. VI-". 12, 27 ;
XI-5; XVI-2.
FORTUNATE MAN. VT-4.
FORTUNE About one’s—. one
ought to divine from the Sun.
Moon’s transit over the .Tanina
Rasi will cause dawning of—.
XXVI-12
To be bei’eft of—-. VIII-24.
To take delight in (enjoying)
other’s— XIX-9.
FOSTER-FATHER XVI-25.
FOUL MOUTHED. VIII-16.
POUL-TONGUED. VI-33; XXFOURTH HOUSE. VII-24 ;
XX 16 ; XXIV 4. 7,9; XXVFRAIL. IX-7.
FRAUD. V-2.
FRIEND OF A KING. III-P, 10;
XVni-14.
FRIENDLY. XIV-25; XV-7 ;
fXXIII-lO; XXV-30.
FRIENDLY HOUSE. IV-7;
FRIENDLY PLANET. XX 59
FRIENDLY SIGN. XX-SO, 34,
FRIENDS. VI-61,03; VIII-2,

FRIENDSHIP
INDEX
GODS
FRIENDSHIP. II»21, 22. 23,35 :
IX-16; XIV-7; XVI-34;
XX-4. 6; XXI-48; XXVI-19.
FRUITS. II-2 ; V-8.'^ >
FRUIT TREES. V-2,
FRUITLESS. VI-G7; XX-19.
FULFILMENT. 1-15.
FULL LIFE PERIOD. XXII-31.
FULLNESS. XV-18.
FUME CLOUDS. XXV-28.
FUN. II-ll.
FUNERAL RITES. XVI-11;
XX-15; XXVI-22.
FUTURE BIRTH. VI-24, 27, 28.
G
GAIN.—in one's business XXIIIInformation regarding the
father's—s to be sought for
from the 11th house from the
Sun. XV-24.
The 11th house signifies—. 1-15.
To have pecuniary losses and—s
GAIT M5.
GAMANA. 1-15.
GAMBLEE. XI-3; XVlII-3.
GAMBLING. To come to grief
through—XXI-41.
To earn by—V“2 ;
GANDANTA. XITT-9.
GANDHA. IT-26.
GANDHAEVAS. XIV 4. 5,
GAEBHABHA. 1-9.
GAEMENT. II-9,10, 13, 36,
GAEUDA. IMR. 29 ; XU-20^
GBESHPATI. 11-16,32.
GEHA. Ml.
GEMINI. Same as Mithuna.
GENEEATING ORGAN. XXVIGENERATION. XXVI-35.
GENEROUS. IMO; VII-22.
GENIUS. To conjecture about
one’s own—, XV-16.
GENTLE. To be— VM2.
To be—in speech. VI-31, 33.
GHATA. A name for Sign Kum¬
GIDDINESS. — is indicated by
Jupiter. XIV-6
Mercury brings on deoth through
GIFTS.—recommended for ward¬
ing off sins. XII-23, 24; XXVI
To be liberal in one's—VI-15,
To take delight in making—XXI
GIEL. Time of gift of a—.XII-34.
Acquisition of good—s. XX-3.
GLAD. To l^e always—at heart.
GLORY. II-l; VI-47.
GLUTTON. To he a—. VIGOATS. Acquisition of—. XXGOBLINS. Childlessness due to.
trouble from—. XII-21.
Saturn brings on harm from—.
XIV-8.
Trouble from—• VIII 30; XIVGOCHARA. XXVIl,
63 ; VIII-4; IX-7; XIV-6.

GODS
INDEX
GUHA
GOD SIVA. VI 29.
GODDESS PABVATI. 11-16.
GOLA YOGA. VI-39, 41.
GOLDEN ORNAMENTS. XXVIGOLDSMITH 11-18; XVIII-9.
GONORRHOEA XXI 55.
GOOD A term denoting the 10th
house. 1-16.
To he extolled by the ~. VI-3.
To bo to every body Vl-69.
To be supremely—VI-20.
To do—acts. VlII-7. 13 ; XXTo do—to others. XIX-10.
To perform many—acts XIIITo slander the—. VIII-32.
To spend money towards the
cause of the . XX-13.
To stand in the way of any one
doing—acts. VIII-32.
Wherever Yamakantaka is asso¬
ciated,—has to be expected.
XXV-18.
Yamakantaka is very powerful
in causing—. XXV-19.
Yoga not to do any—act. VIIIGOOD ACTION. XXVI-23.
GOOD BEHAVIOUR. III-8.
GOOD CONDUCT. 1-15; VIIIGOOD DEEDS. XI-10.
GOOD EFFECT. XV-2.3. 4.
GOOD FOOD. II-2; VI-46:
VIII-29.
GOOD HEART. VI-63.
GOOD HOUSES. XXIII-24.
GOOD INFLUENCE XX-30.
GOOD LUCK. III-9: VI-63;
35VIII-2: XXI-39.
GOOD MEN. Coming in contact
with—. XXI-39.
GOOD-NATURED. Xl-5.
GOOD QUALITY. II-5.
XX-4: XXI-39.
GOOD SON. XXI-39.
GOOD WORDS. To be devoid of
GOPURA. III-7. 8.
GOURT YOGA. VI-21. 25.
GOUT. To be troubled by—.
XIX-13.
GOVERNOR. To be a—or Dire¬
ctor. VI 22
GRACEFUL To be—. III-12.
GRAHABHBDA. —Adhvaya II
GRAHA DRISHTI 11-23.
GRAHA FACTORS. XXIV-25,
I GRAHA GUNAKARA. XXIV-24.
GRAHA MANA. XXlV-23. 24.
I GRAHA YUDDHA. XXVI-29,
GRzVIN. 11-28: XIX 5.
GRAND CHILDREN. XX-IO.
GRAND F.ATHER. XV-16.
GRAND.SONS. 1-14; VI-16.
GREAT MEN. To receive prai¬
ses from—. XIX-11.
To worship—. XIX-24.
GREATNESS To have all the—.
VIII-12.
GREAT PEOPLE. To bo intent
on hearing stories of—. VI-55.
GREEK PARTRIDGE. 11-17.
GREEN II-11
GREEN GRAM. 11-28.
GRBBSHMA. 11-24.
GRIDDHRASYA. 111-13.
GRIEF, m- 10 ; VI-17; VIIIGUESTS. To show hospitality
to—at all times. XXI-23.

GULIKA
INDEX
HEAT
GULIKA. 11-26 ; III-16 ; XIV- f GUNA. M5.
H
HABITATION. To settle one¬
self in a permanent—. XX-11.
vm-i.
To have curled—s. IX-3. •
HALE. To be—and healthy.
XIV- 17.
HALO. XXV-28.
HAMMEES. To be a dealer in—.
XVIII-2.
IIAMSA YOGA. VI-1. 3.
HANDS. IX-8: XIX-23: XXVIHANDSOME. A woman to be
very—. XT-10
To be— VIII-14
HAPPENINGS. XX-19.
. HAPPILY. To be-placed in life.
XX-2.
To live—;With one’s wife. VIIIHAPPINESS. 1-12; IM. 6;
HAPPY. III-IO, 18: VI-4, 6, 9.
XI-5; XVD4, 24; XVIII-1;
XX- 36; XXVI-19.
HAPPY DEATH. XIV-21.
HAPPY LIFE, Xl-lO: XX-11.
HABA. III-6.
H.ABASSMENT. XIX-26; XXIHAED-HEAETED. To be—.
VIII-26.
HAED LABOUE. To be an adept
in works involving—. XVIHAKDSHIPS. To endure-. IXHAEI. XII-18.
HAEM XXVl-31.
HAESH. To be—in speech.
VIII-12
HAESHA YOGA. VI-57. 63.
HATED. To be—by others. VIIIHAUGHTY. VI33; XVIIM6.
HAYANGA 1-7.
HEAD. 11-32; XVI-1; XIXHEADACHE. To suffer from -.
HEADMAN. To be a—. VIIITo be the—of a village. VI-4;
VIII-27.
To become a friend of a renown¬
ed—. VI-63.
HEADSTEONG. To be—. VIHEALTH. II-2; XV-16 ; XX-7.
HEALTHY. VI-6; VIII-17:
XVI-17.
HEAEING. To possess clear
organs of—. VI-3.
HEABT. XIV-9; XV-16.
HEAET DISEASE. XlV-2.
HEAT. XIV-17: XIX.17, 24;

HEAVEN
INDEX
HUNGER
■HEAVEN. VT-56; XIV-22.
HEIR APPARENT. II- 4 .
HELL. XIV-22. 23.
HELP. —to or from a brother.
XX-4.
—to relations. XX-5.
To be—ful to others. VI-22.
To be of much—to the public.
XVI 5.
HELPMATE. To bo distresserl
and wretched without wealth
or—. XXVII-6
HENPECKED. To be—. IX-4.
HERBS. 11-16, 37 ; XVIlI-3.
HERETIC. 11-33; XXV-16;
XXVII-5.
HERETICAL. To be— VI-41.
HERMAPHRODITE. X-5.
planets. 11-27; IV-3.
HERNIA. XIV-6; XXI-54.
HEROISM. XVI-28.
HIBUKA. 1-12.
HICCOUGH. 11-33.
HIGH ESTEEM. XI-10.
HIGH-MINDED. To be-. VIIIHIGH POSITION. To hold a—.
HIGH-80ULED. To he -. VIHILLS. To go to forests and—.
IX 6:
HINDRANCE. To do—to others.
IX-ll.
HIPS. XI-5.
HOARDED GOODS. II-G.
HOLY ORDER. XXVII-8.
HOLY SHRINES. V-3.
HOMAGE. VII-10.
HOMAS. II-1
HOME KEEPING. IX-3.
HONEY. 11-16.
HONOUR 1-15; II—5; XIXHONOURED. To be—. XVI-9.
. To be—by one’s own people.
To be —by one’s sovereign IXHOR\PABALA. IV-1.
HORASARA, XXVJII-1-4.
HORNED. Danger from—ani¬
mals. XIV-2; XXV-23.
HOROSCOPE. XI-1.
TIOROSCOPY XXVIII-1-4.
XXV- 30.
HORSE-BACK. To travel on—.
HORSE-GRAM. 11-28.
HOSPITALITY XXI-23.
HOSTILE. VIII-25; XX-28.
HOT WORDS. XXVI-13.
HOUR. IV-1.
HOUSE. Ill; III-8; VI-20,
XVITI-5: XX-5; 16; XXI-
—less. To be—. VIII-22.
HOUSE-BUILDING. To be en¬
gaged in—. XXI-4
HUM.\N BEINGS. Period of life
for-. XIII-7.
To have one’s future birth to be
that of a— XIV-28.
HUMAN BODY. XXVI-35-41.
HUMILIATION. 1-13; II-7;
HUMOURS XIV-4. 6, 7,17.
HUNDRED YE.ARS. XIII-24.
HUNGER. To bo pinched with—.
VIII-23.

INDEX
INIMICAL
HUNTER
HUNTER. 11-20.
HURT. XXI-73.
HUSBAND. 1-13, II-5; VI-15;
XXV-12.
HYPOOEITB. XXVII-6.
IDLE. IT-14; Vin-12,16.
IDYA. II-5.
IGNORANT. To be—. VIII-6.
lliljS. XIV-9.
ILL-BEHAVED A woman to
be -. XI-6
ILL-HEALTH. XXVI-10.
ILLNESS. XIX-18: XXI-30.
ILL TEMPER. To display an
abundance of—. XXV-10.
ILL-WILL. XXVI-18.
ILLUSTRIOUS. To come of an
—family VI-25.
IMPARTIAL. To be—in one’s
argument. IX-7.
IMPASSIONED. To speak in
an—manner. VI-30.
IMPATIENT. To be-. VIH-l.
IMPEDIMENT 1-14: XXVIIMPETUOUS. To be—. VIII-1.
IMPORTANCE. To be every day
growing in—. VI 45
IMPORTANT PERSONAGE. To
become an - . XVIII-13.
IMPOTENCY. XIV-3.
IMPREGNATION. XII-34: XIIIIMPRISONED. To be—. XXIMPRISONMENT. 1-16; XIV5; XXI-79: XXV.24
IMPROPER ACTS. To be weari¬
ed by fatigue caused by doing—.
To do—. VIII-9 ; XIX-25.
IMPUDENT. To be—. VIIIIMPURE. To be—. VI-11;
VIlI-32.
To be—acts. VIIT-26.
IMPURITY. 1-14; 11-7; XIVINACTIVE. To bo—. VIII-13,
To be most —to do any work.
VIII-1, 7.
INAUSPICIOUS. XX-41; XXIINCANTATIONS. XXVI-49.
INCLINATION. 1-15.
INCOGNITO. To lead the life
ofan—. XX-15
INCOME. 1-15; V-3 ; VIII-24 ;
INCONSIDERATE. To be—. VIINDEPENDENT. To be-. VI¬
GO.
INDIA. XIV 25.
INDIGENCE. To suffer from—.
VlII-20.
INDIGENT To be—. 111-14;
INDIGESTION. XIV-S.
INDOLENT. To be— VI-41;
VIII-20; IX-10.
INDRA. III-9.
INDRA-CHAPA. IV-S; XXVINDRA-DHANUB XXV-1, 29.
INEXTREMIS. III-3.
INFANCY III-3.
INFLUENCE XV-16; XVI-27,
INIMICAL. VIII-2; IX-20; X-

INIMICAL
INDEX
XXII-20 ; XXIII-IO, 23 ;
XXIV-10; XXVl-30, 32.
INIMICAL HOUSE. XXIV-30.
INIMICAL KASI. IV-7.
INIMICAL SIGN X-4.
INJURY. A little to a precep¬
tor or elder- XXI-40.
Childlessness due to an—caused
bo a virtuous lady* XTI-2I
—from fire. XXI-79.
—from poison- XXI-22-
—to father should be guessed
from the Oth house from the
Sun. XV-23.
—to one’s friends and elders*
XXI.34
Saturn causes—to the ribs.
XIV-8*
To meet with—from a weapon*
VTII.3I.
INSANITARY. To dwell insurroundings- IX-IS*
INSANE. To \ye— XXV-15.
INSANITY* Death through—.
XIV-17.
INSECT. 11-20INSECURITY. XXVI 45, 46*
INSIGNIFICANT. To be a
very—man. VI-17, 58, 67 ;
XVI-5.
INSINCERE. A woman to be—•
XI-2
INSULT. 1-14; XIX-14.
INSULTED. To be-. VIII-?,
INrELLBOr. tI-33 ; Vt-2 ; VIII,
INTELLECTUAL PRECISION.
VMS.
INTELLECTUAL PURSUITS.
XIX-12.
INTELLIGENCE. 1-12 ; VI-59 ;
INTELLIGENT. 11-12; III-8IX. 4; XI-6; XVI-15; XVIII—
INTBROHANGE. VI-32.
ITCHES
INTERCOURSE, —with another
man's wife. XXI-30.
—with females. XXI-31.
To have—with wielded women.
XIX.13.
INTERESTS. To be intent on se¬
curing one’s own—. VI-52.
INTERPRETING.To bo clever in
-- xvin -2
INTERRUPTIONS. To havein one’s undertakings. Vr-33.
INTRIGUES. To have—with an
aged female. XIX-23.
To have—with bad women.
Vril 18.
To have—with low females XIX
To have—-with wicked women.
To have—with women not one’s
own. VI-4.
To lose one's v%’ealbh through—
with women. VIII-2f).
IRASCIBLE. To be—. XVIIIIRAVATA. III-7, 9.
IRON.II-7, 30;XVTII-7.
IRON INSTRUMENTS. XVIIIIRRELIGIOUS. To be-*. VIIRRITABLE. XXV-8.
IRRITATED XXVI-9.
ISLANDS. XIV-23. 2o.
ISSUE A woman whose—will
all die early. XI-5.
The number of—one may have.
To be blessed with —or have no
—at all. XII-15.
To determine the number of—.
XII-13.
To have few—. VI-7, 59.
To have no—• VI-62.
To have limited—. VIII *26,
ISSUELESS. To be—. X-5.
ITCHES. XIV 5.

JACKAL
INDEX
J0PITEB
JACKAL. 11-18.
JAIL II-7. "
JALADHI YOGA. VI-44. 48.
JALODARA. XIV-14, 19.
JAMITRA. 1-13.
JANMA. I-IO :'XXVI-29.
JANMAL.AGNA. XXV-14.
JANMA RASI. 'X-11 ; XX-23,
JANM.\RKSHA. XXII-lf).
JAPA. 1-14: XII-23.
JATAKA. IV-20.
.TATRA 1-12.
JAUNDICE XIV-3. 18: XXI-9.
JAYA. I-15.
JE.4LOQSY. Time when one’s—
will arise. XVI-34.
To suffer from—. XX-18.
JEBVA. —(aminal) Basis. 1-9.
JEEVANA. 1-15.
JEEVASARMAN. XXII-20. 25,
JEWEIjS. Acquisition of—XIX
Purchase or sale of—. XXI-19.
To have good . VIII-17.
To own , IX-14.
JHASHA, 1-4.
JNATI, 1-13.
JNEJYA DRIGBALA. IV-6.
JOURNEY. XIX 6; XXVI-9, 10.
JOY. XXVI-12.
—sof life. VI-7.
JUDGE. To bo a—. VIII-12.
XVIII-12.
Ashtaka Varga of—. XXIII-7;
XXIV-10,11.
J
Aspect of—is necessary for con¬
ception. XI 1.1,
Dasa period of—. XIX-2, II,
Eflect in—'s latta. XXVI-46.
Effect of Gulika being associated
with—. XXV-16.
Effect of—l>eing in the Ist, 2nd,
3rd or 4th hotise, VIII—14.
Effect of—*8 Dasa happening as
the sixth XX-24.
Effect of—*s transit in the .3rd
house from the Moon. XXVIEffect of—'s transit over the
several houses from the Moon.
Effect of—*8 transit over the
12th. 8th and ist from the
Moon. XXVI-33.
Effect of Moon in 's Trimsamsa in a female horoscope. XIEffect of Moon in the several
Amsas aspected by—. XVIIIEffect of Moon in the several
signs aspected by—. XVIIIEffect of Mars conj —. XVIIIEffect of Mercury conj.—.
XVIII-4.
Effect of Moon conj.—. XVIII'2.
Effect of Saturn conj.—. XVIIIEffect of Sun conj.—. XVIIIEffect of Venus conj.—. XVIIIIn producing effects. Yomakantaka is like XXV-20.
In the case of a planet whose
Bhukti is good, the good effect
will be manifested when—
enters (in transit) the planet’s
exaltation sign. XX-38.

INDEX
JUPITER
In transit.-—becomes effective !
when he is in the middle of a
sign. XXVI25.
—and acquisition of children.
—and the Moon in a Kendra,
aspected by Venus ushers a
King. VII-18.
—if owning a Kendra, is power¬
ful to cause evil. XX-50.
in a Kendra identical with
Swakshetra or Swochclia causes
Ilatiisa Yoga. VI-1.
—in conjunction with Mandi in
tlie 5th causes son-lessness.
XII-22.
—in the 5th causes distress to
the Bhava. XV-26.
—in the 5th, 6th. 7th or the 8th
house. VIII 15.
— in the 9th lOth, 11th or the
12th house. VIII-16.
—in the 9th with bright rays,
aspected by or in conjunction
with friendly planets ushers a
King. VIM 4.
—in the 7th and in depression
causes loss of wife. X-3.
—in the 6th or Sth causes con¬
sumption. XIV-11.
—in transit gives good results
in the 2nd, 5th, 7th, 9th and
11th from the Moon.XXVI-2, 7.
—is the Karaka of 2nd, 5th, 9th,
10th and 11th. XV-17.
—strong in the Lagna can ward
off many of the evils. XIII-22.
—will bring about death in a
happy manner or through
phlegm. XIV'14.
—*8 Antardasa in Ketu’s Dasa.
XXI-72.
—*8 Antardasa in Mars* Dasa.
XXI 33,
- *8 Antardasa in Mercury’s
Dasa. XXI 64.
-^*8 Antardasa in the Moon’s
Dasa. XXI-16.
—*8 Antardasa in—*s Dasa.
XXI-39.
.TUPITBR
—*8 Antardasa in Kahu’s Dasa*
XXI-31.
—'s Antardasa in Saturn’s Dasa.
XXI-56.
—*s Antardasa in the Sun’s
Dasa. XXI--7.
- *8 Antardasa in Venus’ Dasa.
XXI-SO.
— *8 aspect over the Moon makes
the child long-lived and happy.
XVl-24.
—’s (Iraha factor. XXIV-26.
““’s position in the general order
of piecedence in Dasas-XX 11-27.
—’s special power IV-11.
Lord of the 2nd if connected with
makes the native a proficient
in the sacred scriptures and
code of laws. XVI 6.
Lords of the 2Qd, 7th and 12th
aspected by—-and occupying
Trikona or Kendra positions
usher a King. X-10,
Mars, Saturn and—quartered in
the 10th, 11th and the Lagna
will usher a King. VII-24.
Naisargikadasa period of --XX1IOne out of the lords of 11th, 9th
and the 2nd houses occupying
a Kendra with respect to the
Moon and—happening to own
the 2nd, 5th or the 11th will
usher a King. VII-25.
Particular Yoga and the position
of—therein that causes the
native to attain emancipation.
XXVII-l.
Pindayurdayadasa period of—.
XXri-21.
The good effect of a Bhava is
realised when—in his transit
comes in trine to the Bhava.
XVI-32.
The kind of asceticism caused
by—. XXVII-5
The Moon in the Amsa of a very
friendly planet and aspected by
—will usher a King. VlI-23,
The particular division tn a Basi
of which—is the lord in an

JUPl TER
INDEX
KESARI YOGA
Ashtakavarga. XXIII-18,
The 6th asterism from that of—
is termed his Forward Ijatta.
XXVI-42.
The 3rd and 11th houses and—
if associated or aspected by
Saturn and Mars will cause the
native to sufifer from eardisease. XIV-10.
Time of marriage guessed
through—'s transit. X-14.
Transit by—over certain specibed places or their Trikonas
brings about
(a) the demise of the native.
(b) the demise of the father
and mother. XVII-7.
(c) the death of the son.
XVII*8.
Venus aspected by—or—occu¬
pying a sign (other than
Makara) identical with the
Lagna will usher a King.
VII-20.
Venus,—and Saturn in Meena,
Moon in Vrishabha. Sun as*
pected by Mars and Mesha
as Lagna usher a King. VIIWhen-“is in a Kendra, middle
I portion of the life is good,
i XX*33.
I JYKISHTA. Xr-9.
! JYESHTA BHRATllD. 1-15.
K
KAHALA-YOGA. VI-35. 3G.
KAILASA. XlV-23.
KALA-CHAKBA. XIII-25: XXII-
-2,4; XXVIII-1-4.
KALA-BALA IV-l.
KALAMSA. III-l, 2.
KAEAPUBDSHA. 1-4; XVI-1.
KALINGA. 11-28.
K.^LIYUGA. XXri-2G.
KALYA. I 10.
KAMA 1-13.
KAMA YOGA. VI-44. 51.
KAMALA. 11-27.
KANTAKA. 1-17.
KANYA. 1-6, 7; IV-5 ; IX-G ;
XI-4; XII-3 ; XIV-18; XVIII8; XlX-26; XXIV-25.
KAPHA. II-ll.
KARA. 1-12.
KARAKA. III-17 ; XV-6, 17, 21,
XXIH-14,15; XXVIII-1-4,
The—B of the several Bhavas
when posited in their respective
Bhavaa will cause distress.
KARMAJEEVA. V.
K.^RMARKSHA. XXVI.26.
KARTIKEYA. XII-20.
KASHTA. VI-18.
KATAKA. 1-4, 6, 8; IV-5; VII7; XII-5; XlV-17; XVIII 7;
XXII-12; XXIV-25.
KEDARA. VI-39, 40.
KEEKATA 11-28.
KEEN-WITTED. Vl-49.
KEBTA. 1-7.
KEMADRUMA-YOGA. Vl-5, 7.
62; XXV-30; XXVIH, 8.
KENDRABALA. lV-8.
KESARI YOGA. VH4.16.

INDEX 41
KBTtI
XXVI-2
KETTLE DRUMS. VI-38.
KUALA. 111-19.
KH.ALA YOGAS. VI-32, 33.
KHABA. X-1.
KMABAMSTJ. 11-21.
KHYATl YOGA. VI-44, 54.
KILLEB. XX-55.
KILLING. XVllI-12.
KIND. VI 36
KINDLY DISPOSED. VI-12.
KINDRED, 11-3.
XXV-17 ; XXVII-7.
KING’S ADVISER. VIIM5.
KINGDOM. 1-12; XX-25.
KINGSHIP. III-9.
KINNARAS. XlV-3.6.
KINSMEN. XVIII-iO.
LABHA. 1-16.
LABLAB. 11-28.
LABOUR. Anyihing done by
one's own bodily—becomes
fruitless. VI-67.
LADY. XII-21.
LAGNA. I-IO : IIMl, 16: VILAONA.
KITH AND KIN. XX-12; XXVI
KLESA. 1-14.
KNEES. lX-8.
KNOWLEDGE. 11-4, 6 ; VI-18;
XV-16; XVI-5.
KODANDA. XXV 1, 14. 29.
KODAYA. 1-8.
KONA. XVI-2. 17, 27.
KR.ATU. 1-15.
KRISHNA. XII-16.
KRtSHNAPAKSHA. IV-1.
KRITTIKA. XI-9; XIX-2;
XXII-7; XXVI-20.
KRIYA. 1-6.
KSHATA. 1-13.
KSHATBIYA. 11-24; XIV-9.
KSHAYA. 1-16.
KSHEMAD.ASA. XXII-16.
KSHETRA. .T-11;III-1.
KSHITIBHU. 11-32.
KSHITISUTA. 11-24.
KUBERA. VI-46.
KUDHANYA. V-8.
KUUU YOGA. VI-57. 61.
KULIBA. 1-4.
KUMARA. 11-27.
KUMBHA. 1-7; IV-5; IX-ll;
XIV-19; XVIII-II: XXIV-25.
KUSEEDA. V-6.
KUTUMBA. I-IO.

LAONA
INDEX
LIFE
XXVII-6; XXVm-1-4,
Effect of planets owning the—
decanate ,—Hora,—Dwadasamsa and—Trimsamsas occu¬
pying own, exaltation or
friendly house. 111-15.
LAGNA DASA. XXII-17.
LAGNA AYUS. XXIl-19, 22. 25.
LAGNA BALA IV-6.
LAKSHMI. 11-27.
LAKSHMI YOGA VI-21, 24.
LANCHANA. 11-32.
LAND I-n; XX-5. 16 ; XXI-9.
LANDS. III-8; V-4; VI-66;
16: XVI-14; XVIIl-4: XIX-7,
LANDED PBOPERTY. XXI-21;
XXVI- 16.
LAPISLAZDLI. IT-29.
LATTAS. XXVI-42-44. 46. 46.
LAUDATION. Vni-4.
LAWS. To be proficient in the
code of—. XVI-6.
LAZINESS. XXI-48.
LEADER. VI-2.
—of men. VI.45; XVI-13.
—ship. XX—4.
XVIII-13.
LEARNED. A woman to have a
husband who is—. XI-3.
Association with the—. XXIMercury governs places frequen¬
ted by—men. 11-15.
To be praised by the—. VI-2.
To get fame through the ap¬
plause of the—. XIX- 10.
LEARNING. I-IO ; II-4. 5; VI28; XV-16: XVin-4; XXILECTURES. XX-3.
LEENA STTHANAS. I-lO.
LEFT EAR 1-16.
LEFT EYE, M6; 11-26; XXILEFT HAND. XXVI-35, 36. 37.
LEFT LEG. XXVT-39. 40.
XIV-8. 9 ; XVI-3; XlX-14.
—pain. XIX-25.
LEGITIMATE EXPENDITURE.
Vl-Sfi.
LENDING. V-6.
LEO. Same as Simha.
LETTER. I-IO.
LIAISON. Yogas leading, to a—
with other people’s wives X-4.
LIAR. VI-62.
LIBERAL. VI-9. 40 ; VIII-2, 6.
—minded. XX-7.
LIBERALITY. VI-18; 1X-14.‘
LIBRA. Same as Tula.
LIFE. XIII 3, 7 ; XXI 22, 42,'
Danger to—. XXVI-27, 28. 33,
—period of a man. XXII-26.
—, short, medium and long.
XIIl-16.
Rabu’s transit through the 8th
house causes danger to—.
XXVI-24.
The full period of—in the case
of different animals. XXIl-31.
To lose one's—when a ^nt
transits a Basi void of bmefio
dots in his Ashtaka varga.
XXIII-ll.

LIGHT
INDEX
LOTITS.LIKE
LIGHT. 11-16
LIGHTNING. Danger from—.
XXI-14.
XVIII-10; XIX-23; XXI-66,
LIQUOK 11-16.
LISPING. To be—. XVI-6.
LTTER.AKY WORKS. To lie the
author of good— X'VIII-12.
LITIGATION. XXI-21.
LITTPIRS. To be accotnpained
by . VI-38
LITTLE. To know only a—.
XXV-12.
LIVELIHOOD. 1-15; V-2;
XXVIII 1-4.
It ia Saturn that settles a
person’s—. XV-16.
To assume the dress of an ascetic
to gain a—. XXVIl-5.
To earn one’s—as a menial.
VIIl-15.
Widening of the scope for—.
XXI-28.
LIVER DISEASE. XIV-17.
LIVING. To have a miserable—.
LOFTY-MINDED. A woman to
be—. XI-6.
LOINS. To have round—. IXLOKA. 1-13.
LONG-LIFE To be gifted with -.
III-I2; VI-2: VIII-17, 29;
XII-32; XIII-21.
To enjoy—. VI-43 ; VIII-6.
LONG-LIVED. To be—. III-IL
LONG SPAN OF LIFE. To have
a—. VIII-24.
LONGEVITY. II-7; XIII-1:
LORD. VI-20. 34; VIII-19;
IX-16. XVIII-14: XXI-74.
LORD OP THE EARTH. To
become the—. VI-36.
LORD OP MEN. To become a—■.
VI-43: XVIIMl.
LORDS OP THE SIGNS. 1-6.
LOSS. 1-16.
—in cattle and agricultural
operations. XXI 74.
—in finance. XXVI-23.
— of children. XII-3, 9 ; XXV-
—of Elders XXI-22. 42.
— of friends. XXI-10, 42.
— of house and corn. XXI-11.
—of lands and vehicles. XXI-58.
-of life. XXI-55.
—of monov. XIX-19: X XI-73 ;
XXVI-19.
—of one's appointment. XXI-78.
—of one’s relations, lands,
happiness and wealth. XIX-
— of position. XX-28 : XXI-
—of property and—among re¬
vered seniors. XIX-18.
— of relations. XIX-14 : XXI-22.
—of things connoted by Bhavas
XVI-30.
—of wealth. XIX-20. 25: XXI-
—of wife. X-1, 7. 15; XXITo have pecuniary—es. IX-11.
To meet with unnecessary—es.
To suffer—es. XXI-88.
To suffer—of honour. XX-19;
XXI-63; XXVI-16. 34.
LOTUS-LIKE. To have a—face.

LOVE
INDEX
MALEFIC POSITIONS
LOVE. Information regarding
one’s—affairs. XV-16.
To be exceedingly—ly. VIII-6.
To be exceedingly smitten
with—. VIII-9.
To be-^d by a beautiful damsel.
To be-d by all. VI 30.
To have a~ ly face. VIII-14.
To have—of relations. III-IO.
To know about one’s father’s—
and passion. XV-23.
LOW. Even a—born to become
a king. VII-7.
To associate with the—VI-10.
LOW BEHAVIOUR A woman
to be of—Xl-7.
LOW-FEMALES. To have intri¬
gues with—. XIX-9.
LOW MORALITY. To live by
the earnings of men of—. . V-8.
LOW ORDER. To be very in¬
significant and of a—. XIV-5.
LOW PEOPLE. II-7, 15. 16;
LOW WOMEN. To resort to ihe
society of—. XIX-20; XXVLUCARIA. XIV-2.
LUCK. To have no—. VMO.
LUCKY. To be very-. IHLUNGS. XlV-3.
LUST To be—ful and depraved.
XXV-B.
To be without— XVIII-14.
LUSTRE. To shine with Brahminicai—Vl-31,
M
MACHINATIONS. Trouble
through secret - of enemies.
MACHINERY. To be skilled in—.
XVIII-1.
MADA. 1-13.
MADHYA —Dasa. XX-56.
MADHYAMA. in-14; VI-18.
MADHYAMAYUS. XIII-6, 14.
MAGADHA. 11-28.
MAGNANIMITY. II-5.
MAGNANIMOUS. VI-29; VIIIMAHABHAGYA. VI-14. 15.
MAHA DASA XIX-1,10 ; XXIMAHAPDEU8HA YOGAS. The
five—stated. VI-1.
MAHA YOGAS. VI-32. 34.
MAHEEJA. II-3,10.
MAHBYA. 11-29.
MAHISHA. 1-12.
MAID SERVANT. XT-7.
M.AKARA. 1-6, 7, h; VIT-20;
IX-IO; XIV-19; XV-29;
XVIII-10.
MALARIAL FEVER. XIV-3.
MAL.AVA YOGA. VI-1, 3.
MALE—-8. XII-11, 12
—Navamsas XII 10.
—planets. 11-27; IV-3 ; XII-
—Signs. 1-9.
MALEFIC. 11-27; XIV-11,20;
M.ALEFICS. VII-11, 24; X-2. 4.
MALEFIC PLANETS. XIII-9,
MALEFIC POSITIONS. XXIII-

MALICE
INDEX
MARS
MALICE. To be free from—.
MALICIOUS 11-34.
MALINA. M4.
MAN. XXII.26. 31.
MANA. 1^16.
MANDALA. XXIV-2S.
MANDTJKAGATI. XXII-12.
MANDI. III-J6; Xll-R, 22;
XXVIIM.4
MANES XIM8, 20.
MANGALYA. 1-14.
MANHOOD. To lose one’s—.
VIII-26
MANITTHA. XXII-24.
MANNERS. To possess
amiable—. VI-6.
MANSION. To have a beauti¬
ful— VT-48. I
MANTRAS. V-2. 6 ; XTII-S.
MANTRESWARA. 1-2; XXVIIL
MARAKA. XX-50.
MAR AN A. A term for the 8th
house. 1-14.
MARCHES To endure long—op
roads. IX-11.
MARGA. 1-13,
MARKS. 11-32.
MARRIAGE. Information about
—should be sought for through
Venus. II-6.
—activities. XlX-12.
Time of-. X-12, 14.
To perform—s. XX-8.
MARROW. II-IO; XIV 4.
A woman in whose nativity the
7th house or setting Navamsa
is owned by—will have a dis¬
eased womb, XI-4.
About a brother, the effects of
the 12 Bhavas are to be deduced
counting from—. XV-24
All planets except—lose a third
of their Ayurdaya when they
are in inimical houses. XXIIApahara of — in Jupiter’s Dasa.
XXI-46.
Apahara of in Moon’s Dasa.
XXr-13.
Apahara of-~in Rahu’s Dasa.
Apahara of—in Saturn’s Dasa.
XXI.54.
Apahara of—in Sun’s Dasa.
XXl-5.
Ashtaka varga of—. XXni-S.
Bhavas for which—is a Karaka.
Certain Rajayogas formed by^—
and other planets. VI1-9, 10,
Courage, disease, younger bro¬
thers, etc. are to be ascertained
through—. XV-15.
Dasa of—. XIX-9. 20; XXIDasa of—happening to be the
5th in the order of main Dasas
will prove dangerous. XX-24.
Effect of Gulika being in con¬
junction with—. XXV-15.
Effect of—being connected with
the lord of the 2nd. XVI“6.
Effect of—being in the several
houses. Vin-8. 9, 10.
Effect of—in conjunction with
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, or
Saturn. XVlII-3.
Effect of Moon being in a Trimsamsa of—. XI-6, 7.
Effect of Moon in conjunction
with—. XVIII-2.
Effect of Moon in the several
signs, Navamsas, aspected by—.
In an ascefcio yoga,—makes the
native an ascetic of the Bud¬
dhist class. XXVII"6.
In transit—produces effect when
lie is in the first 10 degrees of
a sign. XXVI-25.

INDEX
MAYA
MARS
Ketu is similar to— in giving
effects, VTII-34
—and the Sun in the 4th cause
the house of the native to he
burnt. XVI-14*
—and the number of brothers
one may have. XVI-9.
— in conjunction with the Sun
makes the native do sinful
deeds. XVIIM-
— in the 9th and its lord in a
Dussthana or betwixt two malefics causes the demise of the
father soon after the native’s
birth. XVI-22.
—in the 7th house identical
with Meena causes loss of wife.
—in the 10th makes the native
a great and mighty personage.
XVI-28.
'—in the 3rd causes distress to
that Bhava. XV-2G.
— in transit in the 7th brings
loss of honour and wealth and
in most cases danger to life
also. XXVl-34.
—in transit in the 12th, 8th or
the 1st house from the Moon
brings about danger to life.
XXVI-33.
—owning the Lagna occupying
Simha or Meena identical with
the 5th liouse will give a son
very soon. XV-10.
—posited in an Urdhvamukha
Kasi identical with the 10th or
11th will secure to the native a
Kingdom. XX-25.
Menses of a woman is caused by
the aspect of—over the Moon
in Anupachaya positions. XISee also under Kuja.
The effect of transit by—over
the 12 houses, XXVI-13, 14.
The Graha factor of—. XXIV-26
The Moon in Saturn’s decanate
.and aspected by—and Saturn
will make one an ascetic.
XXVII-3.
The particular division in a Basi
of which—is the lord in an
Ash taka varga. XXI11-18. 19.
The particular houses where
when—transits, he gives good
results. XXVI-2, 5.
The two luminaries in trine to
Saturn and—cause the child to
be abandoned by both the
parents. XV1-24.
The years for the Dasa of—.
XIX-2.
The years of—under the Naisargika Dasa. XXIT-17.
To find the year of calamity or
disease from—in the Ashtaka
varga. XXIV-42.
To guess the number of one’s
brothers from the Ashtakavarga
of—. XXIV 9.
Venus and the Moon in opposi¬
tion to—and Saturn make the
native wifeless or issuoless.
Venus in a Varga of—or having
his aspect makes the native to
have a liaison with other peo¬
ple’s wives. X-4
M.ASA. n- 24 .
MASAPA BALA. IV-1.
MASCITJilNE. A woman to be—
in her bearing. XI-2.
A woman to f)e of a—disposi¬
tion. XI-7.
MATEBIALS. V1II.33 ; XXI-43
MATERNAL AUNT. The planets
playing the role of—. 11-26.
MATERNAL OBAND-FATHER.
The planet through vfhora one
ought to guess about his—.
MATERNAL UNCLE. I-ll; II4; XIII-S; XV-15, 21; XXIV-9.
MATRU. 1-11.
MATHEMATICAL HALL. 11-15
MATSYA REKHA. VI-3.
MATULA I-ll.
MAXIMUM. XX-30.
MAYA. XXII-20, 24.

MAYOR
INDEX
MAYOR. VIIT.20. 27.
MEALS. VI-3; XX-3.
MEANS IX-11.
MEAN ACTS To do—. VI-52.
MECHANICAL ARTS. II-4;
XVIII-13.
MEDICINE. To earn one's liveli“
liood tin'ough . V-2 ; XIX‘9.
MEDITATION IT-4.
MEDIUM LIFE. VIIT-11 ; XIII10; XVIir-11; XIX-IG; XXIlMENDICANT, XXVII-S
MENIAL. A woman to be a—
Xl-f).
To boa—. VI 68; VIII-16.
To be drudging aa -B. VI-7.
To do -work. IX-18.
To earn one’s livelihood as a—.
VTlI-15.
MENSES. XMl.
MENTAL ACITATION. Sun’s
transit in the 5fch house
causes—. XXVI-10.
MENTAL ANGUISH XIV-8 ;
MENTAL ANXIETY. The Sun
in transit in the 6th house
dispels all—ios. XXVI 10.
To suffer from—. XX-15MENTAL DIGNITY. 11-3MENTAL DISEASE XIV-5.
MENTAL HAPPINESS. XXVIMENTAL PAIN- 1-14.
MENT.AL TRANQUILLITY. II-2
MERCHANDISE XVlII-L
MERCHANT. II-9.
MEROIBTJL. To be—. IIMS.
MERCILESS. To be . IX-7.
Ashtakavarga ofXXIII-6.
Cause of sonlessness in the case
of—being badly placed. XII-20.
MERCURY
Diseases brought on by—•. XIV’
During transit,—produces effect
throughout his entire passage
in a Rasi. XXV1-25.
Effect of—being in conjunction
with the Sun and other planets.
XVIII-l. 2. 3. 4.
Effect of—being posited in the
several houses. VTII 11, 12, 13.
Effect of—owning the 5th Bhava
or its Amsa. XVI-15.
Effect of the lord of the 2nd
Bhava being related to—.
XVi-6.
Effect of the Moon being posited
in a Rasi owned by—in a
woman’s nativity. XI-6, 7,
Effect of the Moon being posited
in the several Navamsas and
aspected by—. XVIIM2, 13,
Effect of the Moon in the several
signs being aspected by—.
Effect of transit in—’s latta.
XXVI-45-46.
Effects when—'s Dasa is opera¬
ting. XIX’IO, 24.
5th house owned by—and as¬
pected by or associated with
Mandi or Saturn make the
native acquire a son by adop¬
tion- XIT-8.
If Gulika be associated with -in
a nativity, the person concern¬
ed will be insane. XXV-15In producing effects, Aidhapruhara is like—. XXV-20.
—in<licates Vaikunta as the re¬
fuge of the departed XIV 23.
—in the 5th identical with Kataka will not give many children.
XIt-5.
—in the 7th identical with
Vrishabha causes loss of wife.
—in transit through the 4th
brings about loss of honour
and wealth, and danger to life
also. XXVL34.

MERCURY
INDEX
mischief
—’s Bhukti in Japiter*s Dasa.
XXI.41.
■—'s Bhukti in Ketu's Dasa.
XXI-74
—’a Bhukti in Mars* Dasa.
XXI-25.
—*s Bhukti in Moon’s Dasa.
XXM7
—*8 Bhukti in Rahu’s Dasa.
XXI-33.
—’a Bhukti in Saturn’s Dasa.
—*s Bhukti in Sukra’s Dasa.
XXl-82.
—'s Bhukti in Sun’s Dasa.
XXI- 9.
—’s Dasa and its Bhuktis. XXI-
—’s Dasa in the order ef Dasas.
XXII- 27.
—*9 Gialia factors. XX1V*26.
Power of—in doing evil. XXThe agency used by—for causing
death. XIV. 14.
The Bhavas for which—is Karaka. XV-17.
The country in one’s past and
future births pertaining to—.
XIV-26.
The effects of transit hy —over
the several houses. XXVI-17
The kind of asceticism caused
by—. XXVII-5.
The particular division in a Easi
of which—is the lord in an
Ashtakavarga. XXIII-18. 19.
The particular hsuses where—
during his transit gives good
results. XXVl'2, 6,
The 7th Star from that of—is
termed his Prishta Latta.
XXVI-42-44.
The things that may be divined
with respect to a person’s life
by means of . XV-15.
The years for—in the Nisargayurdaya eystem. XXII-17.
The years for—in the Pindayurdaya system. XXII-21.
The years for the Dasa of—.
XIX-2.
To guess the number of maternal
uncles (vom the Ashtakavarga
of-. XXIV-9.
Venus and—in the 7th with
Jupiter in the 5tli and malefics
in the 4th, lead to family extin¬
ction. XI1-6.
MERIT. To become a store of—.
To become renowned for
one’s—8. Vl-2.
MERITORIOUS DEEDS. T o
perform—. XX-10*
MERRIMENT. To have—with
relations. XX-6.
VII- 9.15; VIII-1;1X-1;XIV17; XVIII-6; XXII-1. 22;
XXIV-6. 24.
MESHURANA. 1-15.
METALS V-2, 4 ; XVIIM.
METEOR. XXV-2B ; XXVI-29.
MJDDliE AGE. XIII-7.
MIGHTY. VII-29.
MILD. To speak—ly. III*12.
MILITARY. To get honour from
the—or Police. XXI-81.
MILK. II-2 ; V-7,
MIND. Dejection of the—.
XXVI-13.
Gross contemptibleness of the—.
XXI-33.
Perturbation of the —through
enemies XXV—26.
To have a ruffled—• XIX-14.
To have disturbfince of — XXI-18
To have one’s— eanf used. XXVIMINERAL SIGNS. 1-9.
MINIMUM. —influence of plan¬
ets. XX-. 30 .
XVlII-13, 14.
mNSTRELS. To be praised by
hards and—, VI‘38.
MISBEHAVE. XXVI—16
MISCHIEF. Ketu or Dhumaketu
causes a lot of -to the world.
XXV 29.

MISCHIEF
INDEX
MOON
To be -ous. VI-41.
To become unhappy as a result
of one’s own—ous doings. VITo do—to others. VI-67.
MIRRRABLR. To be—. VI-7;
VIII-13; XVIII-3; XXVI-19.
To have a—living. VI 62.
To lead a—life. XVIIM5.
MISERLY To be very—. VIIIMISERY. Decrease of one’s—ies.
XXI-4.
During the Sun’s latta,—will
result. XXVI"45—46.
Effect of Upakebu in the 4th
house is -. XXV-26.
Houses with dots lower than 25
will cause sorrow or—. XXIVOne’s father’s—should be deter¬
mined from the 8th house from
the Sun. XV-23.
One’s—ought to be guessed
through Saturn. II-7.
The planets engendering—to the
native. XX.55.
Tlie 1-th house signifies—. ITo be afflicted with sorrow
and—. VIII-20.
To he a receptacle of much—.
To be free from—ies XVI 21.
I'o endure much—. VI-33.
To expect— XXI 69.
To have much—. XX 37; XXITo leave the happiness or—unaflooted. IX-l'J.
To suffer incalculable—ies. XXTo suffer—. VIII-7; XIX-9;
MISFORTUNE. 11-7; XIV-8;
XX-15 • XXI-47
mishap! " When Venus transits
the 6th house from the Moon,
there will be—. XXVIiJl.
MISUNDERSTANDINGS. XIXMITHUNA. 1-7,8 ; IX-3; XIV17; XVIII.7; XXIV-24.
MrrBA. i-n.
MIXED. II 31.
MIXED EFFECT. XV-2.
MODEST. To be -. ITI-8.
MODESTY. VI18; VIII-2;
XXV 8
MOLES. II 32; IX-2.
MONEY. V-6; VI-20. 69; VIII
Advent of—s. XXVI*9.
Attempts of—making. XIX-20.
—making by cruel acts. XIX-18.
To be—ed. VI11-24.
To be—less. XVIII-9.
To be robbed of one’s— s. XXVI
MONKEY. 11-18.
MONTH. 11-24; IV-1; XXIIIMOOLA. Xf-9; XIII-8.
MOOLATRIKONA. 1-7; XV-11;
—Bhavana. III-6, 18.
—Rasi. IV-7.

MOON
INDEX
NADIR
—*8 strength. IV-11.
MORAL. Success in—duty. XXIMORALITY. Devotion to • duty
conformable to religion and—.
XXT.59.
To maintain oneself by the prea¬
ching of^. V-6.
MORBID IRRITATION. XIVMOSQUITO. 11-20.
MOTHER. A woman to lose her
—soon after marriage. XI-Q.
Acquisition of wealth from—■.
V-l.
All about one’s father’s - should
be sought for from the 4th
house from the Sun XV-22.
All about one’s—should be
guessed through the Moon.
All about one's—should be
guessed through the Moon and
the 4th Bhava. XV-25,
Childlessness due to the displea¬
sure and anger of the—.XTI-20.
Death of a child within the first
four yeai*s is because of the ’s
sins. XIII-4.
Death of the -- very soon after
birth of a child. XIII-8.
—’s welfare. II-2
The happiness or otherwise of
one’s—depends upon the lord
of the 4th and the Moon occu¬
pying good or bad positions.
XVI- 10.
The 4th house denotes—. I-ll.
The Moon determines everything
about one’s—. XV-15.
The planet playing the role of—.
Time of the demise of one’s—
XXIV-7.
To be bereft of—. VI-61; VIIITo be disobedient to one’s—.
XVllI-2.
To be obedient to one’s—. TX-6.
To cause distress to one’s—.
XX-16; XXV-15.
To live with one's—. Vin*l4.
To perform the funeral rites of
one's—. XV1-11.
To satisfy one’s—’s desires,
XXM2
MOTIONAL STRENGTH, —of
planets. IV-1.
MOUNTAIN REGIONS. XIV 26.
MOUNTAINS. XIX-6.
MOUTH. II-2G : VIIL25.
!iIOVEABLE SIGNS. XVL3, 25,
milGX. 1-6, 7.
MKIGASTRAS. XXII-7, 9.
MRIT.A. —Avasttha 111-3, 10.
MRIIT YOGA. VI 57. 60
MRITYU BHAGAS. XIIT-O. 10.
MUD VESSEL. 11-35.
MUDITA. Avasttha. Ill-18.
MUL'riPLICATlON. XXII- 20 .
MUHURTA. II 24;IV-20;X-XVMULA. (Vegetable)—signs. 1-9^
MUNIFICENT. To be more—
than one’s father. VIII-15.
MURDER. XII.22.
MUSALA YOGA. VI 44, 56
MUSCLE. IT-14.
MUSIC. VI-40; IX-3; XVIII-
—cal instruments VI-53.
—ician. II-19.
MUTUAL ENMITY. IL23.
MUTUAL FRIENDSHIP. 11-23.
N
NADEE. 142,
NADIB. 142.

NAGARAJA
INDEX
NORTH-EAST
NAGARAJA. Xll-ie, 18.
NAIDHANA. 1-18.
NAILS. II 14 ; XXI-77.
NAISARGIKA. - friendship or
enmity. 11-2.3.
—.\vurdaya. XXII-28.
NAKRA. 1-8.
NAK8HATRA U.ASA. XIX;
XXVIll 1-4.
NAKSHATRA METHOD. XXTINAKSHATRA PADA. XXII-IO.
NAMES. To have two—. IX-7.
NARRATIVE COMPOSITfON.
To he skilled in . VI-27.
NARAYANA To have in one’s
bodv marks of God—. VI-30.
NATAL STAR. XXV1-2G.
NATIVE COUNTRY. To leave
one’s— VIII-29.
NATIVE PL.ACE. To have one’s
birth in his own—. XIA^-29.
To live in his own—. XVl-3.
NATURAL ENMITY OR
FRIENDSHIP. IV-10
N.ATURAL FRIENDSHIP. IINATURAL STRENGTH. lV-3.
NATURE. IX-13.
The—and characteristics of the
several planets II-8-14.
NATURE OP PLANETS. IINAVAMI. XIM7.
N.AVAMSA. IIl-l, 4, 11.16; IVXXVII-3.
The efifect of a— is equal to that
of a Rasi. III-2.
NECK. To have a fleshy—.
IX-4.
To have a long face and—. IX-9.
To have severe pain in the—.
XXI-61.
NEECHA. 1-6.
N E:E C H A B TI A N G A RA.TA
YOGAS. VII-26-30.
NEECHA GRIHA. T-6.
NEPHEW II-4.
! NERVES. I-ll.
NERVOUS DISEASES. XIV-11NEUTR.AL. 11-21; IX-19: XIVNEWS Hearing of agreeable—■.
XX-4.
Good—. XXI-79.
NIECE. II-4.
NIG ALA DECAN.ATES. Ill-13.
j NIGHT. VIM6; XVII-21,25:
XXV-2.
—birth. XVr-23.
—blind. VIII-1.
—signs. 1-8; IV-6.
-Time. IV-1, 5.
NINTH HOUSE. VII-9, 14, 25:
NIPEEDITA. III-19.
I NIRBHAGYA YOGA. VI-57, 66.
I NISARGA DASA. XXII-17.
I NISARGA MITRATVA. 11-21,
NIS-SWA-YOGA. VI-57, 69.
NISHEKA LAGNA. XII-31.
NOBLE. To be—. VI-36.
—family. 1-14.
—minded. To be—. IX-14.
NOCTURNAL SIGNS. 1-8.
NOOSE DECANATES. IH-IS,
NORTHERN SIGNS. 1-9.
NORTH-EAST. 11-16.

NORTH-WEST
INDEX
PAKSHA.
NORTH-WEST. 11-15. XIV-4, 5.
NORTHERN QD.4RTER. 11-15. NRIYUK. 1-7,8.
o
OBEDIENT. To bo —bo one’s
mother. IX-5.
OBLATIONS. Offerings of—.
XTir-5.
OBSCUEB. To become—. VI-7.
OBSERVANCES. To abandon
one’s religious duties and—.
XXV-13.
OBSTACLE. 1-14; XVI-21 ;
XXVI 18, 23
OBSTINATE. To be-. XXVIOCCUPATION. 1-15 ; XIII-8 ;
OCEAN. To earn by sellinS
pearls and other produce of
the-. IX-12.
ODD HOUSE. XV-ll.
ODD RASi. xrr V; xvr-9.
ODD SIGNS. 1-9; XI 2.
ODIOUS. To be—to others.
VIII 7.
ODIUM. II-3; IX.I9.
OFFENCE. XiV-6; XXI-61.
OFFICE. Dismissal from an—.
XIX.14.
OILS. XVIIl-3.
OIL MONGER. 11-20.
OJARKSHA. 1-9.
OLD AGE. IM4.
OLD CLOTH. VI-66.
PADMA REKHA. VI-3 ; IX-8.
PAIN XIV-9; XXI-ll, 29, 34.
To have a—ful death. XIVOLD WOMAN. IX-IO ; XXI-48.
OPEN AREA. 11-15.
OPEN-HEARTED. XVI-15.
OPPOSINGLY. To speak—.
vni-27.
OPPRESSING. A king - his peo¬
ple. V1M9.
OPPRESSION. To earn by acts
OPULENT. To be—. VI-40.
ORBIT. X-12. 13 ; XXIII-16.
ORGANS. XXVI35.
XXVr-13.
-ed. XI-2.
OSTENTATION. XXV-10.
OTHERS. Doing good to—•.
XlX-iO.
To be interested in the work
of—. XVIIM.
OUTCAST. 11-24, 34 ;
To bo an—. VIlI-28.
To reside amidst—s. XVI—4.
OVERHEAT. XIV 8.
OVERPOWERING. To be-.
XVIIl-2.
OYSTER SHELL. II-4.
PAINTING. To be skilled in—
XVIlI-6.
PAKSHA. 11-24.

PAESHA BALA
INDEX
PERTURBATION
PAKSHA BALA. IV-1, 4, 21.
PAKSHI DRBKKANA. III-13.
PALANQUIN. VI-24, 38. 53;
XVI-13 ; XIX-16.
PALPITATION. Bahu causes—
of the heart. XrV-9.
PAMABA YOGA. VI-57. 62.
PANA. 1-10.
PANAPHABA. 1-18; VI-14;
XIII-15.
—bala. rV-3.
PAPA KABTARI. VI-8,11,13.
PAPA VASI. VI-8.
PAPA VEDHAS. XXVI-48.
PAPA VESI. VI-8.
PAPOBHAYACHABI VI-8.
PAR. To be on a—with the King
III-8.
PARABHAVA. 1-14,
PABAMAYTTS. XXII-4, 14,
PARAMA NEECHA. 1-6.
PAR.AMOCHCHA 1-6.
P.ARASABA. 1-2; XIX-1; XXPABAVATA. III-7. 9.
PARENTS. Loss of one of the—.
XIX-18; XXI-3.
Separation of—. XIX-26.
The pairs of planets playing the
role of—during day and night.
To bo abandoned by both the—.
XVI-24.
To separate from one’s—. IX-8.
PABIDHI. XXV-l, 5, 24.
PABIJATA. —Varga. III-7. 8.
—Yoga. VI-SS.
PABIVARTANA YOGAS. VI-82.
PARIVB8HA. IV-5 XXV-6.
PARROT. IMS, 19.
PABTNXIB. To have a goodnatured woman as one's—.
PABVA. XI-ll.
PABVATA. IMS.
—Yoga. VI-35, 36.
PARVATI. 11-16, 27.
PASA DRBKKANA. HI-IS.
PASA YOGA. VI-39. 40.
PASSION. XV-23.
PASSIONATE. VI-6; IX-1.
PAST BIRTH. XIV-24. 27. 28.
PATALA. 1-12.
PATERNAL GRANDFATHER.
PATERNAL RELATIONS- XVPATERNAL UNCLE. 11-25.
PATHA. XXIV-30; XXV-l.
PATI. 1-13.
PATRIKA. I-IO.
PATRONAGE. XVI-3.
PAUTRA 1-14PEACOCK. 11-19.
PEARL. II—2, 29; V-3: IX-12.
PENANCE- 1-14; H 5; XVIIIXXVII-6PENUBY. XX-19XXVI-37To ijocome— iouB. VIt7PEOPLE. 1-13; VI-24; IX-6.
XVI- 28; XVIII-10; XIX-14;
PERDITION. XIV-22.
PERFIDIOUS. Tobe—. VIIIPERFUME. 1-12; IXrll; XIXPERIL. —to one's own life.
XXI- 22.
—from thunder. XXV-25.
PERIOD OP LIFE. XIII-8. 7;
PERIODS (OF TIME) SIGNI¬
FIED BY PLANETS, n-24.
PERPLEXITY. XXI-58.
PERSONAGE. To be a m^hty—.
XVI‘28PERTUBBATIGN. —of mind
through enemies; XXV*26.

POTTER
64 INDEX
PHALADBEPIK4
PHALADEEPIKA. 1-2; XXVmPHLEGM. II-9, 11. 13: XIV-6.
PHLEGMATIC. 11-12; XXI-35.
—complainti. XXI-23.
—troubles. XIX-22, 23, 25;
XXI-8
PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT.
PHYSICIAN. 11-17.
PHYSIQUE. To be of good—.
XVI- 2.
PIGEON. 11-19.
PILES. To suffer from—. VIIITrouble from—. XIX-23.
PILGRIMAGE. —to holy
shrines. V-3
PINDAYUEDAYA. XXII-21.22,
PIOUS. Tobe—. VI-12.
PIPULTREE. 11-16.
PISCES Same as Meena.
PITRU. 1-14; VI-53.
PITTA. II-IO.
PLACE. IX. 13.
—of recreation. II-4.
PLANET. Badly placed—. IIThe nature and characteristics of
the several—«. II-8-14.
Well placed—. 11-36.
XXVII-1, 2. 4, 8; XXVIII.1-4.
^ary factors. XXIV-26, 26.
-ary war. XXIV-80; XXVI-
—ary years. XXIV-27.
XVIII 3.
PLEASANT. III-12.
PLEASING To talk in a—man¬
ner. XXV-9.
PLEASURE. Information regar¬
ding love affairs and s. XVTo be a cause of immense-^to
all people. VI-16.
To undertake • trips. XX-8.
PLOUGHS. XVIII-2.
POEMS. To earn a living through
composing—. V-5.
POET. To be a—. VIII-ll, 17;
XVIII-12.
To be clever in ~ ics. VI-27.
To be the chief of—s. XVIIITo earn by one’s—ic talents.
POETRY. II-6; VI-27.
POLICE. XXI-8].
POLICE SUPERINTENDENT.
POLITICS. To be clever in—.
XVI-6.
POOR. A woman to be—. XITo be foremost among the—.
To be—. VI-11, 62; VIII-9.
POSITION. 1-16 ; VI-69 ; VIIIPOSITIONAL STRENGTH, -of
planets. IV-1, 7, 21.
POTTER. XVIII-4.

INDEX
POURNAMI
POUKNAMI. XII-18.
POWER. II-l; 1II-8; VI-34.
XXV-13.
POWERFUL. VI-2,20; VIIIPRAB[I.4KARI. n-25.
PRADEEPTA. III-18, 20.
PRADAKSHINA. XXII-1.
PE.AISFi. A—by others of one’s
various good qualities. XX-4.
To be—d by important people.
VIII-10.
To be—d by the good. VII-22.
To receive —s from great men.
PRANG NATHAS. 19.
PRAPTI. 1-15
PRARNA. IV-20; XX 63.
PRAST.\R.-\. —Ashtakavarga.
XXIiM7
PRAVAYA. III-3, 10.
PRAVRAJYA YOGAS. XXVII ;
XXVIII 1-4
PRAVRITTI. 1-15.
PRAYER. 1-14: XIX.19; XXVIPRECEPTOR. 1-14; 11-16: IXPRECIOUS STONES. 11-29; IXPREDICTIONS. X 7.
PRESENTS. Money through
acceptance of—■. XXI-72.
Offering of acceptable—. XXITo be solicited by eminent men
with various kinds of—in their
hands. VI-38.
To receive rich—from one’s
sovereign. VI-34.
PRIDE. Loss of—. XX-16.
To be distinguished by—. XXVPRIEST. To earn money by
playing the role of a—. V-6.
PUBLIC
PRISHTA LATTAS. XXVI-42PRISHTODAYA. 1-8; XIV-22,
PRIVATE PARTS. XIV-7, 10,
Jl; XX-18.
PROFESSION. 1-15; V-1 ;
XXVIII-1-4.
PROFIT. M5: XXI-45.
PROGENY. XII-3, 24,29; XXIVPROMINENCE. To soon come
to—. XVI-4.
PROPERTY. Danger to one’s—.
XXVI-20.
To have self-acquired—. VI-6.
To lose all one’s paternal—. VITo spend away one’s paternal—.
VIII-2.
To suffer loss of —. XIX-18.
Theft of—by thieves XXI-27.
PROPITIOUS. To be— VI-36.
PROPORTION. The body and
limbs of a person to be commen¬
surate in their—s with the
Lagoa and other Basis. XVI-1.
PROSPERITY. 11-5,6; VI-33;
PROSPEROUS. VI-3, 9, 20. 27,
—life. XXI.44.
PROSE COMPOSITION. To be
clever in—. VI-27.
PROTECT. To-others. VIIIPROUD VlII-1, 25.
PROWESS. I-ll: II-3.
PRUDENT. Tobe—. VI-20.
PSORIASIS. XIV-4, 5.
PUBLIC. To bo cursed by the—.
To be insignificant in the eyes
of the—. VI-67.
To be of much help to the—
XVI-6.

tmm.
RAINBOW
fi6
yaiA.
PUJA. 1-14.
PULMONAEY DISEASE. XIVPUMAN RASI. 1-9.
PUNGENT. 11-31.
PDEANAS. To maintain oneself
by raoiting—V-6.
PURE. To be always—. Illlb.
To be- VI-66.
PURNABALA. IV 22, 28.
PURNAYUS. Xni-6.
PDRO-LATTAS XXVI-42-44.
PDRUSHASUKTA. XII-16.
PURVABHAGYA. 1*14.
PURVASHADHA. XIII-8.
PUSHKALA YOGA. VI-19, 20.
PUSHYA. XI 9; XIII-8.
PUSS. XXVI15.
Q
QUADBUPED. Danger from—.
XIV-2.
Death through—s. XXV-33.
—decanates. Ill-14.
—signs. 1-7.
QUALITY. 1-15.
QUAEEEL. XXI-37, 58 ; XXVIAcquisition of wealth
through—s. XlX-6.
A tendency to always—with
one's sons and wife. XXI-50.
Cessation of—s. XX-9.
—caused by enemies. XXI-71.
—with a great Biahmin. XXI-
—with enemies. XXI-73.
—^with one's brothers, sons and
friends. XIV-4; XIX-20.
—with one's friends. XXVI'
—with one's own relations.
XXI-36. 64; XXVI-14,
—with one's wife and children.
XXVI-17.
—with the members of one's
own family. XXI-70.
To apprehend—with enemies.
XXI 66
To be drawn to a—. IX-19;
XXVI-IO.
To be found of promoting—s.
To engage oneself in—s. VIIITo promote—. XlX-5; XVIIITo—with one's friends. XXITo - with one's wife. XIX-9.
QUAEBELSOME. To be-. VIQUAETEE. 1-9; XlV-24; XXIVSee also under * Direction.’
QUEEY. XlI-34; XX-63.
R
RAIN. XXV-39.
RAINBOW. XXV-29.

RAJANKA
INDEX
renown
RAJANKA. M2.
RAJA YOGA. VI-37, 38; VIIXXVIIT.1-4.
RAJYA. M2.
RAMAYANA. XII.I7.
RAMBLING. To have fruit¬
less—. XX.18.
RAMESWARAM. XII.24.
RANDHRA. 1-14.
RANK. 1-15.
RASH. To be—. VI-56 ; VlII-8.
To commit—-acts. IX-18.
9 ; XXVII l; XXVIIM-4.
RASI CHAKRA, XXIII-2.
RASI GUNAKARA. XXTV-24.
RASI-MANA. XXIV-23, 24, 25.
RATRI SIGNS. 1-8.
RAVI-SUTA. II-7.
REALISATION. —of one’s de¬
sires XXI-39.
REASON. To have lost one’s—.
VIII-22.
RECREATION. II-4.
RECREATION GROUND. 11-15.
RECTUM. Bleeding from—.
XIV- 10.
REDUCTIONS. XXII-20, 26 ;
REFUGE. To ascertain the—of
the departed. XIV-23.
REGIONS OF THE SIGNS. 1-6.
REKHA. VI-3.
RELATIONS. Ml; 11-4; IIIThevuearest—signified Jay Mars,
Jupiter and Mercury. IT-25.
REIjATIVE. Death of a—who
was equal to a father. XXVIHarassment from—-s. XlX-26.
Honor to or from—s. XXI-79.
Sickness among—s. XIX -S.
Time of death of the—signified
by a particular Bhava. XX-58.
RELIGION. Devotion to duty
conformable to—. XXI-69.
RELIGIOUS BELIEFS. To be
free from the—of others. VIRELIGIOUS DEVOTION. Suc¬
cess in-—. XXI-64.
RELIGIOUS DUTIES. Perfor¬
mance of one’s various—.
XXI-80.
To abandon one’s—and obser¬
vances. XXV-13.
RELIGIOUS FAITH. II-5.
RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTIONS,
To maintain oneself by—. V-6.
RELIGIOUS MATTERS. To be
interested in all—. IX-10.
RELIGIOUS MERIT. Loss of—.
XXI-65.
To ascertain all about one’s
father’s—. XV-24.
To be bereft of—. VIII-24.
REMARRY. A woman to be
got““ied. X-8.
A woman to—. XI-3.
To be the son of a widow— ied.
XVIII-2.
RENOWN. A king widely—ed.
VH-l; XXV-30.
To ascertain about one’s father’s
prosperity and—. XV-22.
To become a—*ed King. XX-25.

INDEX
ItENOWN ROAD
To become—ed. VI-2, 9 ; Vlir
To bo highly—ed. VI-16.
To be—od for one's virtues.
VIII-IG.
To be widely—ed. III-12, 15 ;
VIII-12.19, 32; XVI-27; XIXTo ha^ a—ed brother. VIIIREPINING. A woman to be—.
XI-6,
REPROACH. 11-7 ; XXM4.
REQUIREMENTS. To be
successful in obtaining all
one's— VIII-33.
RESIDENCE. —in a foreign
country. XXI-27.
To stick up to one’s—without
moving anywhere. IX-15.
RESOLUTE. To be—. VI.3.
RESPECT. A woman to be—ed.
XI-6,
To be highly—ed. XXV-30.
To be-able. III-8.
To be—ed by other men. VITo command great—. XX-11.
To command intense—. XIXTo command—from the best of
kings. VI-27,
RETINUE. To have—. XIXRETROGRADE. IV-2, 6; IXREVERENCE. II-5.
One thalf does not command—.
XXVII-8.
To be eager in showing—to¬
wards those that worship God
Narayana. VI-30.
To have no—for Brahmins. VIREVERED. Loss among—seni¬
ors. XIX 18.
To be highly—by one's soverei¬
gn. VI-12.
To be—by all. XVI-27. '
REVERSES. To be full of—.
VIII-9.
To suffer—. XX-17.
REVILING, To be—others. VIRHEUMATISM. To bo troubled
by-. XTX-13.
BIBS. Injury to the—. XIV-8.
RICH. To be—. VI-2; VIIITo be happy and~VI-ll.
To suffer trouble from the—.
XIX-25.
RICHES. A king endowed with—,
IIM7 ; V1L29
The 10th house signifies—. ITo be devoid of—, VII1-2, 3,
To be endowed with—. VI-65 ;
To have no—. VIII-IS.
RICKETS XIV-7.
RIGHT EYE. II 25.
'RIGHT HAND. XXVI-35» 36,
RIGHT LEG. XXVI-39-40.
RIGHTEOUS COURSE. VI-53.
RIHPHA. 1-16.
RIKSHA SANDHI. 1-4.
RINA. 1-13.
RING WORM. XXI-61.
RISING DECANATE. XX-32.
EISING SIGN. XIII 21; XVl-1;
XVII-6,14.
RITES. To perform propitiatory
—. XXVI-49.
To rigidly observe prescaribed—.
RIVALRY. Yoga under which
and time when—will arise to
the native. XV1-S4.
RIVER. 1-12.
ROAD. MS; VMS, 64; VIII.

ROAMING
INDEX
ROAMING. To be—about. VIIITo be—on the roads unperoeived.
VI.G4.
—through forests. XIX-6.
ROGA. 1-13.
ROGUE. To be a—. XVIII-9.10.
To deal with—8. V-8.
ROHINI XXIT-l, 7. 8.
ROOTS. To deal in—. V-8.
ROSARIES. To be decked
with—. VI-29.
ROUGH INSTRUMENTS. To be
a dealer in—. XVIII'2
ROYAL DISPLEASURE. To in¬
cur—. XX VI-10.
ROYAL FAMILY. VII-2, 4, 20.
ROYAI. FAVOUR. It is the Moon
that deterniines—. XV-15.
To become prosperous through—
VI1M9.
To maintain one-self through—.
SANKHYA YOGAS
To receive—. XIX-19 ; XX-10 ;
XXI-3; XXVI-19.
ROYAL HONOURS. To get—.
ROYALTY. VIII-3.
RUOHAKA YOGA. VM. 2.
RUDDY (iOOSE. IM7.
RUDRA. II 27.
RUDRA PUJA. XIM7.
RUIN. —of every business.
XX VI-45.
To sillier—of one's business.
XXV-25.
RULE. To—the entire world,
XXV-30.
RULERS. Danger from—. XXIRUPA. I-IO ; II-2G.
S
SABDA 11-26.
SACKED ASHES. To besmear
one’s body ■with—. VI-29.
SACRED PLACES To resort
to— XXI-23.
SACKED PEECEPTS. To be
skilled in the exposition of—.
SACRED SCRIPTURES. To be¬
come a proficient in the—.
xvr-6
To earn le living by the study
SACRED SHRINES. «o be a
traveller visiting— XXVIISACRED TEXTS. Disputation
regarding the meanings of
holy—. XXI-81.
SACRED THREAD. Planetary
positions at the time of the
investiture of—. XII-34.
SAOBIPICE. IM, 4, 6.
—ial rites. XXVII-7.
SAFETY. XXVI-21.36.
SAGES. VI-6.
I SAGITTARIUS. See under
Dhanus.
SAINTS. XXVII-5
SAKATA YOGA. VI-14, 17.
SAKTA. One of the ten avastthas
of a planet. 111-18.
SALTISH. 11-31.
SALUTED. An emperor to be—
by other kings. VII-30.
To be sainted by eminent men.
SAMA-(NBUTR,AL). 11-21, 22;
XIV-28.
—(Yoga). VM4,18.
SANKHA. VI-3, 30.
SANKHA YOGA. VI-37.38.
SANKHYA YOGAS. VI-39.

SANERAMANA
INDEX
SATURN
SANKEAMANA. XXVI-29.
SANTA. One of the ten Avastthas
of a planet. 111-18.
SANYASABOGA. XIV-3.
SANYASI CHIEF. 11-19.
SAPHIEE. 11-29.
SAPTAMSA. 111-1,2,6.
SAPTASALAKA V E D H A .
XXVI-26.
SAPTAVAEGA. III-2; XX-59.
8APTAVAEGAJA BALA. IV-3.
SAEALA YOGA. VI-57, 65.
SABASWATI YOGA. VI-26, 27.
SAEAT. 11-24.
SAEAVALI. XX-63.
SAEVASHTAKAVAEGA. XXIIISAEVATOBHADEA CHAKEA.
XXVI-48.
SASAYOGA. VI-1,4.
SASIJA. 11-18.
SASTEAS. 11-5; V-6: IX-6:
XXV-8.
SATABHISHA. XI-9.
XII-4, 21; XIII-18; XIV-8.
Ashtakavarga of—. XXIII-9.
Astangata redaction does not
apply to—i. XXII-18.
Bhukti of-—in Jupiter’s Dasa.
XXI-40.
Bhakti of—in Eetu’s Dosa.
XXI.73,
Bhukti of—in Mars’Dasa. XXIBhukti of—in Mercury’s Dasa.
XXI-66.
Bhukti of—in Moon’s Dasa.
XXI-16.
Bhukti of—in Bahn’s Dasa.
XXI.32.
Bhukti of—in Sukra’s Dasa.
XXI-81.
Bhukti of—in the Sun’s Dasa.
XXI-8
Demise of oneself, his father,
mother, etc., to be guessed
through the transit of—-.
During transit,—bears fruit
when in the last portion of a
sign. XXVI-25.
Effect of Gulika being in conjunc*
tion with—. XXV-16.
Effect of Mars and—in Kataka
identical with the 7th house.
Effect of Mars conj— XVIII*3.
Effect of Mercury or Jupiter
conj—. XVni-4.
Effect of Moon and—occupying
the 7th. X-8.
Effect of Moon conj. —. XVIIIEffect of Moon in the several
Navamsas being aspected by—.
Effect of Moon in the several
Basis occupying the Trimsamsa
Effect of Moon in the several
signs being aspected by—.
Effect of—and Mars occupying
each other’s Basi or Amsa, and
the Lagna, Moon and Venus
being also associated there.
Effect of—being in the 4th
XVI-14.
of—being well*placed and
ted by benefics in a nightEffect of—in the 8th house.
VIII-28.
Effedt ef-“in the 4th, 6th, 6th
and 7th bouses. VlII-23.
Effect of - in the Lagzia. Vni-20.
Effect of—in the 9th, lOtb, 11th

SATURN
INDEX
SATURN
and 12th houses, YIII>24.
Effect of—in the 2nd and 3rd
house. VIII-21.
Effect of the Sun conjunction—.
XVIII-1.
Effect of the Sun and Moon being
in trine to—and Mars. XVIEffects of transit by—over the
12 houses. XXVI-22, 23.
Effect of the lord of the 2nd being
connected with—. XVI-5.
Effect of Vs^nus and the Moon
being in opposition to Mars
and-. X-5.
Effect of Venus conjunction—.
XVIIl-6.
Effect of Venus occupying a
Varga of—or having the aspect
5th house, owned by and aspected or occupied by—or Mandi
causes the native to have a son
by adoption, XTT-8.
Full life-period of a man is the
time taken by —to make three
complete revolutions. XXIIGulika IS sinoiilar to—in produc¬
ing effects. XXV-20,
If the 4th Dasa belongs to—, it
will prove dangerous. XX-24.
Latta of—. XXVI-42-44,
Pindavurdaya years f o r—.
XXII-21..
Rahu is similar to—in giving
effects. VITI-34.
Bahu,—and Ketu in the 10th
make the native do sinful and
wicked acts. XVI-28.
—and the Virinchi Yoga. VI-28,
—’s aspects. 11-23.
—*B gem is Saphire. 11-29.
•—governs touch. I.I-26.
—*8 grain is Sesamum. 11-28.
~in the 5th house identical
with Kataka gives many child¬
ren. XII-5.
—in transit in the 1st brings
about loss of honour and wealth
and in most oases danger to life
alse. XXVI-34.
—in transit in the 12th, 8th or
the 1st house from the Moon
brings about danger to life.
XXVl-33.
—is a eunuch. 11-27.
—occupying a Kendra identical
with his exaltation or Swakshetra causes Sasa Yoga. VI-1.
—owning the 9fch identical with
a chara sign and unaspected by
benefics makes the child live
under the care of a foster-father
XVI-25.
—plays the role of a father or
paternal uncle. 11-25.
The abodes of—. 11-16.
The animals that have to be
assigned to—. 11-20.
The appearance and characteris¬
tics of—. 11-14.
The Ayus of the native to 1)0
deduced from the Ashtakavarga
of—. XXIV—15.
The caste of—. IJ-24.
The flavour belonging to—. IIThe friends and enemies of—.
The 9th house or its lord being
in a moveable sign and occupied
or aspected by—and i2th house
strong makes the native to bo
adopted by another. XVI-26.
The particular division in a Basi
of which ~ is the lord in an
Ashtakavarga. XXIII-18, 19.
The particular houses where
when—transits, he gives good
results. XXVI-2, 5.
The substance ascribed to—.
The things that ought to be
guessed through—. II-7.
There is no Vedha between the
Sun and—. XXVI’3.
To find the year of calamity or
disease from—in the Ashtaka
Varga. XXIV-41
Udu Dasa period of—- XIX-2,

INDEX
SATURN
When will—-’s Dasa prove fatal?
Years of—in the Ealachakra
system. XXlI-3.
Years of ■-under the Naisargikayurdaya system. XXII-17.
SATVA. 11-24,
SAURASHTRA. 11-28.
SAURYA YOGA. VI 44. 47.
SAVOURY FOOD. To eat—.
VIII-11.
SAVYA. XXII.l, 2. 7. 14.
SCAB. XIV-5
SCANDAL. To be despised
and—ised. XX-17.
To be subject to a—due to a
breach of decorum. XIX-14.
SCENTS. Information regard¬
ing—should be sought for
through Venus. II-6.
To earn through—. V-7,
To have good—. VIII-17.
SCORPIO See under Vrischika.
SCRIBE. To earn a living by
being a—. V-5,
SCRIPTURE. To have access
to—. XIX-19
SCULPTURE. To earn through
SEA BATH. II-2.
SEA VOYAGE. XXI-51
SEASONS. The—represented by
the planets. 11-24.
SECOND HOUSE. VII-24. 25;
6; XX-S. 15; XXV-9; XXVISECOND WIFE. To have
children by a—. XIL5.
SEDUCTION of a young
female. XXI.78.
SEETAGU. II-21. 29.
SELF. One ought to divine about
one’s own—through the Sun.
SELF CONTROL. XXVI-50.
SERPENT
SELFISH. To be highly—. YlSELF RESPECT. To be possessed
of—. VIII-22.
SELF-WILi:.ED. A woman to
be-. XI-7.
To become—. VIII-26.
SEMEN. XIV-7.
SENIORS. Adoration of rever¬
end—. XXI-59.
Loss among revered—. XIX-18.
SENSE. To possess clear organs
of—. VI-3.
To suffer from want of—. XXSENSES. Re: conquering of
the—, information should be
sought through Jupiter. II-5.
The planets denoting the five—.
To have a desire to please the—.
XXI- 6
To have one’s—under control.
Who keep their—under controL
XXII- 32.
SENSUALIST. Re: a—, one
ought to ascertain through
Venus. 11*19.
To be a-. VIII-5. *
SENSUAL PLEASURES. To indulge in—. VIII-6.
SEPARATION. Mental anguish
caused by the—of one’s parents
and elders. XIX’26.
—from one’s brothers. XXI-21.
—from one’s children. XXI-8.
—from one’s kith and kin.
XXVMl.
—from one’s relations. XXVI-
—from one’s son. XXI 69.
—from one’s wife. X-4.
To suffer—from one’s beloved.
VIII-26.
To suffer the—of one’s dear
friends. VIII-31.
SERPENT. Childlessness due to
the curse of a—. XII-22.

SERPENT
INDEX
SHOULDER
Coining in sight of a veno*
mous —. XXI-30.
Danger from—. XIV-2, 3, 9;
Dark holes occupied by—s
belong to Itahu and Eetu. IIDiseases engendered by—s. XIVInstallation of tljjj—deity. XII-
—decanates. Ill-14.
To propitiate the lord of—s.
xii-ie.
SERVANT. Acquisition of—s.
XX- 9; XXI-69; XXVI-22.
Acquisition of wealth from a—.
Anything about a—should be
ascertained through Saturn.
Desertion of—a. XIV-8; XIXDestruction of—s. XIX-18:
XXI- 32.
Increase in—s. XXI-48.
Loss of—s. XXI-27.
Misunderstandings with
one’s—8. XXI-42.
To ascertain tlio well-l)eing, etc.
of one’s—. XV-21.
To be a—. XVIII-6.
To be a—under a woman.
XVIII-13.
To be endowed with—s. VIII 7.
To bo possessed of—s. VIIITo be served by—s. XX-12.
To have good—s. VI-4.
Trouble to or from—s. XXITrouble to—s. XXI-18.
SERVICE UNDER GOVERN¬
MENT. II-l.
SERVILE DUTIES. To do—.
SERVITUDE. II-7.
SESAMUM. 11-28.
SEVENTH HOUSE. VIII-3,6,
SEVENTH STAR. XX-23.
SEVERITY. XrX-6SEXUAL ENJOYMENT. VIIISEXUAL GRATIFICATION.
XVI-13.
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE. II-6.
SEXUAL PLEASURES. XXVSHAD BALAS. IV-22, 23.
SHAD VARGAS. ITI-2.11.
SHAKING. To have -in the
body. XXI-58.
SHAKY. To have one’s position
tobe—. VI-58.
SHAME. To bo devoid of—. VISHANTIS. XXVI-49.
SHARP-WITTED. To be—.
VIII-11.
SHASHTI. XTI-16.
SilASHTYAMSA. III-l, 2, 3, 5.
SHEEP The full period of life
in the case of a—. XXII-31.
SHEPHERD. To bo a -. XVIII-3.
SHODASAMSA 111-3,6.
SHORT. To be-in stature. IXSHORT LIFE. XIII-7, 15.
To have a—. VIII-25; XIIISHORT-LIVED. To be—. VISHORT SIGHTED. To bo—.
XXIII-5.
SHOULDER. Marks on one’s—.
To have one’s—s drooping. IX-6.

INDEX
SIXTH HOUSE
SHBINES
SHBINES. To make one a trav¬
eller visiting holy—.XXVII-6.
To resort to sacred places and
SICKLY. To be—during one’s
early years. VITI—22«
SICKNESS. Freedom from—.
XXI-64;XXVI-9. 16.
One’s brothers and children to be
troubled with—. XXI-49.
One’s—ought to be guessed
through Saturn. II-7.
—arising from wind and bile.
—to elders. XXI-10, 52.
—to one’s children. XIX-14;
—to one’s dear friends. XX-16;
XXI- 16.
—through heat and wind. XXITo have—among 'one’s relatives.
XIX-6.
To suffer from—, XX-18;
SIGHT. The Sun and Mars
govern—. 11-26.
To possess clear organs of sen
hearing etc. VI*3.
SIGN. Quarters represented by
the—s. I’9
SIKHIN TI-16, 26, 28.
SILKEN FINEEIES. Income
through—.V-7.
SILLY. To become—. VIII-26.
SILPA. V-8.
SILVER. II-2, 30; V-7.
SIMHA. 1-7; VIL9; VIII-1;
IX.5 ; XI-4-7 ; XII-3 ; XIV-IS;
XV-10 ; XVJn-8, 14 ; XXIVSIMHASANAMSA. 111-7,8.
SIMHA VALOKANA XXII-12.
Early destruction of a child in
consequence of the—ful acts
of the parents. XIII-3.
Childlessness due to a—ful
deed to people that ought to
be revered. XII-21.
To be afraid to commit- -ful
acts. VI-63.
To be intent in committing—ful
acts secretly. VIII-27.
To be intent on doing what is—
ful. XVTII-ll.
To be intent in doing—ful deeds.
XVIII-1.
To be—ful. VIIM5, 16.
To commit—.^ VIIl-14.
To commit—ful actions. VI-33 ;
XXI.48.
To commit—ful deeds. VI-41.
To do a—ful deed. XXVI-23.
To do—ful and wicked acts.
XVI-28.
To do—ful deeds. IX-18.
To entangle oneself in ““ful
actions. VI-68.
To follow a—ful course. VTIT-32.
To secretly commit—ful acts.
VII- 33.
To secretly commit—ful deeds.
To ward off the several—s al¬
ready committed. XX-13.
SINDHU. II-2R.
SINISTER LOOK. To have a—.
VIII- 28.
SINNER. XVIII-11.
SIRSHA. I-IO.
STRSHODAYA. L8 ; XIII-2 ;
SISTERS. To be without
brothers or—. XXV-10.
SITUATION. To be without a—
having lost the one already got.
SIXTH HOUSE. VII-16. 24. 28;

SKANDA
INDEX
SOVEREIGN
SKANDA. XII-18.
SKILFUL. XVIII-3.8,
SKIN. IHl.
SKIN DfSKASE. 11-33; XIV-2,5.
SKY. XXV-27, 29.
SLANDEB. To—the good. VIIITo be a—er. V.EII-10.
SLAVE. A woman to be a menial
or—and unchaste. XI-6.
To he served by servants and—s.
SLEEPlNCi DISEASE. XIV-3.
SMAIJi POX. XlV-lo.
SMETiLING. IT-20.
SMRITI. 1-12; 11-L.
SNAKE, XIV.20.
SNAKE CATCHEll. TI-20.
SODIIYAPiNDA. XXIV-l, 3. 5.
SOL Ail YBAll. XIX-4.
SON. A woman to boar good
About one’s—s, information
slaould be sought for by refer¬
ring to Jupiter. XY-, 16, 21,
Acquisition of a good—. XXIAcquisition of a—. XV-10, 29.
Adoption of a—. XIT-34.
Birth of a—•, XX-6 ; XXI-79.
Birth of a very good—. XXIDanger to—s and vvifo. XIX-5.
Information regarding one's—s
should he sought through Jupi¬
ter. II-5.
Mental anguish caused through
one's—. XXVI—14.
Mercury denotes the adopted—.
Quarrel with—s. XIV-5.
Separation from one's—. XXIThe time when one’s son's death
may happen. XVII“8.
Time when one will lose
Time when one’s wife and—s
will suffer from sickness.
XXVI-23.
Time when the Inrth of a may
be expected. XII-25, 26, 27,
To bo endowed with a good wife
and—s. Vi-30.
To be in the company of one’s
wife,—s, etc. XX-iO.
To bft the—of a widow remarried.
xvni-2.
To liave a — by adoption. XI[-8.
To have quarrels with one’s bro¬
thers and—s. XIX“20.
To havo-s. VI-20. 33 ; VIII-4.
To have —s and grandsons. VI*
To have—s in plenty. XII—3.
To have—s of good character.
Vl-25; VTII O; IX-16.
To live with one's mother,—s
etc. VlTI-14.
To i)o8sess good—. XXV-11.
To possess very few—s. IX-4.
To possess wife and—s. VI-31,
To quarrel with one’s wife
and—XXI-50.
To secure the comfort of
one's—s. XXI-82.
To suffer distress through—s.
VIir-15.
When a—is born, the first thing
to he done is to determine his
longevity. XIII-1.
SON'IN'LAW. Distress to
one’s—. XX-18.
RONLESS. To become—. X-2.
SOKBOW. 1-14; 111-12; VIIIXX-18; XXI-58, 69; XXIIISOVEREIGN. Danger from
the—. XIV-2; XXI.38, 71.
Though a friend of the—, to be

SOVEREIGN
INDEX
STATE
hated by others. VIII-10.
To be a friend of the-^. VI-25.
To be honoured by the—. VlTo be revered by one’s—. VI-12.
To be the favourite of the—.
VI-9.
To fear one’s—. XX-15.
To get trouble from the—. VITo get wealth through the—.
VIII-25; XIX-20.
To incur the displeasure of
the—. VIII-3; XlX-5, 21;
To meet with death through the
displeasure of one’s—. XIVTo receive presents from one’s—.
VI-34; XIX-12.
Trouble from the—. XIV-4 ;
SPABSA. 11-26.
SPAWNS. XII-20,
SPEAK, To - opposingly. VIII*
To—kindly. IX-6.
To—woundingly. VI-33.
SPEECH. An appellation for the
2nd house. I-IO.
Information regarding one’s
charming—should be sought
for through. Venus. II-6.
It is Mercury that induences
one’s dexterity in—. II-4 ;
Mercury is pleasant in—. II-ll.
The Moon is soft in—. 11*9.
To be affable in one’s—. VI-12.
To be eloquent in one’s—. VITo be equivocal in one’s—.
VIII.25.
To be gentle in one’s—. VI-31.
To be harsh in—. VIII-12.
To be of good—. VI-49.
To be witty in—. VIII-11.
To have confidence in one’s—.
XIX-10.
SPELLS. The employment of
magical—. XIV-14.
To be conversant with charms
or-. VIII-12.
Working—^for the injury of
another. XXI-71.
SPEND. To—money on vile
things. VIII-33.
To—much. VIII-27, 33; XXSPIRITS. XII-21, 22, 24.
SPITE. Mutual—with another.
XIX- 5.
SPLEEN. XIV-11, 18 ; XXI.29,
SPLENDOUR. Time %vhen one
may exj^eot—. XXI-39.
To have bodily— XXI-75.
To have wealth, — , etc. VI-63 ;
VIII-19.
To live in all—and prosi)6rity.
To lose one’s—. VI-10.
SPOIL. To—other’s work. VISPORT. Information regarding
one’s—should be sought
through Venus. II-6.
To obtain facilities for one’s—
and happiness* XIX-12.
To be ever—ing with a damsel
of a very amiable disposition.
SPRUE. XIV-18.
SPY. I-J6.
Income through—ing. V-4.
SRAVANA VRATA. XII-17.
SRI. The Goddess-. VI-34. 45.
SRIKANTA yoga. VI.28, 29.
SRINATHA YOGA. VI-28. 30.
SRIPATI. XIII-25.
SRUTI. 1-12.
STAMMERING. Tobe—. VITI-2.
STAR. XIX-2. 3; XXlV-13;
XXV-28; XXVI-26. 48.
STATE. To be fully engrossed in

STATE
INDEX
SUCCESS
—affairs. VI-47.
To serve the—. VIII-2.
STATIONARY. To be—in one
place. XVI-3.
STATURE. To be short in—.
To be tall in—. VIII-1 ; IX-7.
STATUS. Effects should be so
declared as to suitably fit in
with one’s—. XXl-84.
To get higher—. XX'5.
STEAMER. Time when a—may
be purchased or sold. XXI-19.
STIGMA. To get a—to one’s
family XIX-17.
STOMACH. Death by—a c h e .
XIV-19.
Disease in the—. VTII-30;
XXVI-10.
To have illness affecting the—.
XIX-18; XX.17.
To suffer from—ache. XXVI-15.
STONE. To be hit by a—. XXVTo bo skilled in—work XVIIIWound caused by a blow from—.
XIV-8.
STORIES. To be intent on hear¬
ing—of great people. VI-55.
STOUT. To bo not XXV 8.
STRANGURY. XIV-7.
STRENGTH. IT 3 ; TV-1-8, 21To attain power and—through
the help of a wealthy i^ersonage.
To be devoid of—. VI-60.
To have exceeding--. IX-10.
IX-9.
STRIFE. XXVI-14.
STRONG. To bo—. III-12 ; VITo be—willed. VIII*25.
STTHANABALA. IV-1, 21.
STTHIBA KARANAS. XIM5.
STUMBLE. XVI-6.
STUPID. To be—. VIII-24;
XXV-8.
A woman to have a—husband.
XT-3
STURIDY. To be—. III-12.
SUBHA, A name to denote the
9th house. 1-14.
—planet. XX-41.
SUBHA KARTARI. VI-8, 11.13.
SUBHA MALA VI-21.
SUBHA STTHANAS. 1-17.
SUBHA VAST. VI-8.
SUBHA VEDHAS. XXVI'48.
SUBHa VESI. VI-S.
SUBHOBHAYACHARI. VI-8.
SU^^JECTS. A king protecting
his—by following a course of
conduct approved by all. VIA king to be worshipped by
his—like a deity. VII-14.
A king who will do good to
his—. VIII-19.
SUBRAHMANYA. God—. XIISUBSTANCES: The—pertaining
to the planets. 11-30.
SUCCESS. A term to indicate
the 10th house. 1-16.
Conditions for predicting the—
of a Bhava. XVI-31. 35.
—in agriculture. XX-5.
~ in religious devotion. XXI-64.
The planets that are declared to
bring—to a Bhava. XV-7. ^
Time to have—in business. XIXTime when one has—. XXITime when one ought to pre¬
dict—to the family. XX-3.
To achieve—in a business at the
very outset. VI-65 ; VIII-7.
To be—ful in whatever one
begins to undertake. VlII-18.
To gain—through one’s friends.
To have—in all undertakings.

SUCCESS
INDEX
SUN
XXVM4.
To have—in everything. XXIIITo have one’s—over his oppo¬
nents praised by one and all.
SIJDKA. Acquisition of much
money tlirough a person of
the—‘caste. XXI-48
Harassment through the enmity
of a Sudra. XXI-25.
Mercury is the lord of the—
community 11-24.
SUPFEEINGS. One’s—should
be guessed from the ()th house.
xv-2;i
STJGANDHA. 1-12.
SUICIDE. Eahu causes unnatu¬
ral deaths such as—. XIV-15.
SUKHA. 1-12
SUKHITA. One of the ten Avastthas of a planet. 111-18.
SUKLAPAKSIIA. IV-1.
See also under Venus.
SUKETTA. 1 14
SUKUNTALAMBiV^ XXVITI-6.
RUJiA YOGA. VI 39. 41.
SUMALA YOGA Vr-22.
SiniANGALI. XII-20.
XTII-18, 23 ; XVI-9 ; XVIl-7.
About one’s father, the effects of
the 12 Bhavas are to be deduced
counting from the— XV-21,
Ashtavarga of the—. XXIII-3.
Bhukti of the—in J u p i t e r’s
Dasa: XXI—44.
Bhukti of the - in Kotu’s Dasa.
XXI 68.
Bhukti of the—in Mercury’s
Dara. XXI 60.
Bhukti of the—in Eahu’s Dasa.
XXI-36.
Bhukti of the—in Saturn's Dasa.
XXI-52.
Bhukti of the—in the Dasa of
Mars. XXT-28.
Bhukti of the—in the Moon's
Dasa. XXI-20.
Bhukti of the—in the Dasa of
Venus. XXI-7G.
Cause of sonlossness wlien the—
is badly placed. XII-20.
Conception may take place when
the—transits through an
Apachaya Easi. XII-12.
Diseases brought on by the—.
XIV-2.
Effects during the Dasa of the
Effect of Gulika being associated
with the—XXV-15.
Effect of the Moon in the several
Navamsas being aspected hy the
Effect of the Moon in the several
sigfis being asimted hy the—,
Effect of the—being connected
with the lord of the 2nd. XVi-5.
Effect of tlie—being posited in
the 12 houses. VIH-l, 2, 3, 4.
Effect of the—being well-placed
and aspected hy benefics in a
day birth. XVl-23.
Effect of the—in conjunction
with each of the other planets.
XVlII-1.
Effect of the—’s transit through
certain asterisrns in the Saptasalaka Chakra. XXVI-2G, 27,
Effects of the—*s transit through
the 12 houses. XXVI-9. 10,11.
If the 7th house or its lord be
eclipsed by the—'s rays loss of
wife is certain. X-4.
If the 7th house or the setting
Navamsa belongs to the—, the
woman will have a diseased
womb XI-4.
In a day-birth, time of demise
when the Lagna is in the Easi
occupied by the—. XVII-26,
In the case of an auspicious

SUN
INDEX
fiH
SUN
Bhukti, the good effects will be
manifested when the—-enters
the planet’s exaltation sign.
Information that can be ascer¬
tained through the—and other
planets. Tl-1-7.
Lord of the 5th, Jupiter, Mars and
the—, all in male Navamsas
lead to the birth of a good
number of children. XII-10.
Mars and the—in the 4th cause
the house of the native to be
burnt. XVI-14,
Mars and the ^produce effect
when they are in the first ton
degrees of a sign. VXVI—25.
Parivosha is a halo or disc round
the—. XXV-28.
Pindayurdaya to be adopted when
—^is strongest. XXII-28.
Reduction to be effected when a
planet is within the range of
the-. XXIV-30.
The bhavas for which the—-is
Karaka. XV-i7.
The birth of a child and the—’a
transit. XII-31.
The country in one’s past and
future births, pertaining to the
The function of the—in the
matter of the possibility of
progeny. XII*~14, 15,
The general order of the—*s
Dasa in a person’s life XXII-27.
The houses where—'s transit
gives good results. XXVI 2,3.
The kind of ascetic caused by the
—. XXVII-5.
The lord of the 6th in a Dusstthana
and the—in the 9th cause des¬
truction of the enemies. XVI-18,
The moon in an odd Rasi or Amsa
in the dth and aspected by the
—lead to barrenness. XII-7.
Tbe 9th house from the—is
i^^^med the father’s. XXIV-1.
particular division in a Rasi
of which the—is lord in an
ashtakavarga. XXIII-IS, 19.
The-^, alone in the 5th identical
with Kataka may give children
by a second wife. XII-5.
The - -and Moon in trine to
Saturn and Mars will cause the
child to be abandoned by both
the parents. XVI-24.
The—and Rahu in the 7th cause
loss of wealth through the asso¬
ciation of women. X-'2.
The—and the lord of the Lagna
make one long lived if they are
friendly; of medium life, if
neutral; shnrt-lived, if inimical.
Xril-15.
The—-causes death through fire,
bilious fever, bile or weapon.
XIV-14.
The even if he be the owner
of the 8th house will give only
good effects. XX-41.
The—in the 5th identical with a
childless sign causes a child to
bo born* late in life. Xll-4.
The—in the 9th and its lord in
a Dussthana or betwixt two
maiefics cause the demise of
father soon after birth. XVI-22.
The—in the 9th will cause dis¬
tress to that bliava. XV-26.
The—in the 6th or 8th will cause
danger from fever. XIV-11.
The—-in the 10th makes the
native a great and mighty per¬
sonage. XVI-28.
The—indicates Kailasa as re¬
fuge of the departed. XIV-23.
The—’s transit and the father’s
demise. XXlV-5, 8.
The things that may be divined
with respect to a person’s life
by means of the—. XV-15.
The I2bh and the 2nd if occupied
or aspected by the Moon and
the—will make the native
suffer from eye-disease. XIV-10
Udu Dasa period of the—XIX-2,
Upagrahas and the—*s position.
XXV-6.
"When the “"transits the Rasi and

BUN
INDEX
TEMPLE OF 8A8TA
Navamsa occupied by the lord
of the 8th house, death may
take place. XVII-5, 20.
When the transits the 6th, 7th
or 12th place from Venus,
death may happen. XVII-27.
Years of the—in the Kalachakra
system. XXII-3.
Years of the—'under Naisargikayurdaya system. XXII-17.
Years of the—under the Pindayurdaya system. XXII-21.
SUN'S LATTA. XXVI-45, 46.
SUNAPHA YOGA. VI-5, 6. 13.
SUPAEIJATA YOGA. VI-44.
SURALOKAMSA 111-7, 9.
SUREDYA. 11-12.
SURROUNDINGS. To dwell in
insanitary—. IX-18.
SUSSTHA. 11-36; XII-1.
SUSSTTHANAS. 1-17.
aUSUBHA YOGA. VI-8,13.
SUTA. 1-12.
SUVASI YOGA. VI-9.
SUVESI YOGA. Vl-9, 13.
SWA. I-IO.
SWAKSHETRA. -III-6,18 ; VI23;XXV-30; XXVl-31.
SWARGA. XIV-23.
SWASTTHA. One of the 10
Avastthas of a planet. 111-18.
SWEATING LABOUR. To live
by V-8.
SWEET-SPEAKING. To be—.
vii-n.
SWEET SUBSTANCES. II-2.
SWEET-TONGUED. To be -.
VI-20: XVIIl-2.
SWOCHCHA. III-6.
SWOON. XIV-6
T
TALL. XXV-28.
TAILOEING. To be an adept in
—. XVIII-2.
TALE-BEARER. A designation
for the 12th house. 1-16.
To become a—. VI-52 ; XVIII
TALES TO OTHERS. To bear
TALK. To—through the nose.
TALKATIVE. To be-. VIII-14.
TALL. Rahuis—. 11-33
Saturn has got a—body. 11-14.
To be—in stature. VIIl-1 ;
IX-7.
TAMAS. Another name for Rahu.
Mars and Saturn own—as
their distinguishing character¬
istic. 11-24.
TANKS. To sink wells and—on
the road. VI-48.
TAPAS. A name for the 9fh
house, 1-14.
I TARUNA. Ill 3. 10.
TASTELESSNESS. XIV-3, 17.
TATKALIKA-SATRU SUHRITTAURUS. See Vrishabha.
TEACHING. II-5.
TEASE To—others. VI-23.
TEETH. Illness affecting—.
XIX-18.
Saturn has got large— 11-14.
To have bad—. VI*69.
To suffer from a disease due to
an inflammation in the—•
XXI-77.
TEMPER. Warmth of—XXITEMPERAMENT. To be of an
excited—. VI-60.
TEMPLE OP SASTA. II-6.

INDEX 71
TEMPLE MATTERS TROUBLE
TEMPLE MATTEES. Trouble in
connection with—. XIV-6.
TEMPOEAL STEENGTH. IV-1.
TENDERNESS. 11-2.
TENETS. XXVII-5.
TENTH HOUSE. VII-9,16, 24;
THEFT. Income through—. V-4.
—o( property. XXI-27.
XXV-8.
THIEVISH. XVni-6.
THIGHS. IX-2; XXI-9.
THIRD HOUSE VII-16. 24;
THIRST. XIV-4.
THOUGHTS. To be skilled in
interpreting ocher people’s—.
IX 3
THRIVE. To~well. VI"36.
To be—^ing. III-IO.
THROAT. XIV-4.5.
THUNDER. XXI-26; XXV-25.
THUNDFJl-STORM. XXI-14.
THWART. To—everything.
VIII-33.
THYAJYAKALA. XXV-17.
TIGER. 11-17 j XIV-20.
TIGMAKIRANA. A name for the
TIMID. To be—. VI-23,
TIME OP FRUITION. XXIII-16,
TINNEVELLY. XXVIII'5.
TITHI. Xn-15.18.
TONGUE. 11-34.
TOOTH ACHE. To suffer
from—. XIX-26.
TORMENT. To—other people.
VIII-IO.
TORTURE. XIV-6.
TORTURED. One of the ten
Avastthas of a planet. III-19.
TOUCH. 11-26; VI-3.
TRADE. XIX-26.
To be a—r. XVIII-9.
To be clever in—ing. IX-7.
TRANQUILLITY.—of mind. XVTRANSIT. XII-26 : XVI-31, 32,
TRAVEL. XXVl-39, 40.
TRAVELLER. XXVlI-5.
TRAVELLING. XXVI-22.
TREASURE. IX-14; XVlII-14;
TREASURE HOUSE. II-5.
TREASURY. II-16.
TREATMENT. To be won only
by kind—. IX-9.
Character of—s generated by
tbe planets. 11-37.
TREMBLING. To have—of the
body. XXI-34.
TRIPLES. To bo angry at—.
IX 5.
TRIJANMA. XXVI-29.
TRIKONA. 1-18; III-6; VI-21,
-reduction. XXlV-16, 17. 18.
TRIMSAMSA. III-l, 4, 15, 17;
TRIPLE SYMPHONY. II-6;VTROUBLE. V-4;XIX.14; XX-

TEOUBLE
INDEX
UN8TAEDY
TEUE. To be—to one’s word.
XX-16; XXV-9.
TRUTH-SPEAKING. 11-4.
TRUTHFUL. To be—. 'VIIITULA. 1-6, 7 : IX-7; XI-6; XIV18; XVIII-9 ; XXIV-24.
TURAGA-GATI. XXn-12.
TWELFTH HOUSR VII-28;
TWINS. To be the father of—.
XVIII-9.
TYPHOID. XIV-14.18.
u
UBHAYA. 1-9.
UBHAYA SIGN. XIII-14.
UBHAYODAYA. 1-8; XX-33.
UCHCHA. 1-6.
UCHCHAJA BALA. IV-l, 2.
UDAYA. I-10.
UDU DASA. XIII-25 ; XIX 4 ;
XX-63 ; XXVIII-1-4.
UGLY FACE. To have an—.
VIII 21; XXV-26.
UKSHA. Name for Vrishabha 1-7.
ULCER. Danger from—. XIV-11.
ULKANIPATA. XXVI-29.
UMBRELLA. II-2; VI-38; VIIUNASSAILABLE. To be—.
VIlI-8.
UNBIASSED MIND. XXI-57.
UNCHASTE. A female to be—.
UNCLEAN. To be—. VIII-23.
UNCONSCIOUSNESS. To sufler
from—. XX-18.
UNCONTROLLED. A woman to
be—. XI-7.
UNDERSTANDING. XV-16.
UNDERTAKING Ashtakavarga
system is declared to be effec¬
tive in all—s. XXIV-36.
Evil counsel will prevail in
one’s—s. XX.16.
To accomplish large—s. XVITo bring to a snccessful termina¬
tion any—originated by one¬
self. XX-ll.
To complete a mighty—. XXVITo have disappointment in all
one’s—s. VIII-31.
To have interruptions in all
one’s—s. VI-33.
To have success in a 11—s.
XXVI-14.
UNDISCRIMINATING. To be-.
I UNFAVOURABLE. To haveeffect. XX-22.
UNFORTUNATE. To become—.
UNFRIENDLY PEOPLE. Asso¬
ciation with—. XXI-58.
UNGOVERNABLE. A female to
be—. XI-2.
UNGRATEFUL. To be—. VI23; VIII-28; XXV-12.
UNHAPPY. To be—. VI-11.
29; XXVI-9.
UNHAPPINESS. III-IO.
UNIVERSE. VI-31.
UNLUCKY. Tobe—. VIII-32 ;
XXVI-19.
UNPOPULAR. To be—. VIII-17.
UNRIGHTEOUS. To commitdeeds. VIII-27.
To incline towards—conduct.
UNSTEADY. To be—in mind.

UNSTEADY
INDEX
VENUS
To have—wealth VI-56.
UNTOWARD. X.7 ; XX-18. 19.
27; XXIV-39, 42; XXVI-P8.
UNTOWARD BHAVA. XXVI-31
UNTOWARD EFFECTS. XV.29.
UNTO WORD EVENTS. XlV-4;
UNTRUTHFUL. To be--. XVIII
UPACIIAYA. 1-18 ; TV-6; VIUPAGRAHAS. XVIMO; XXVUPAKETU. XXV-1, 25. 26.
UR AS. I-ll.
URDHVA. 1-8.
URINARY. DISEASES. XTV'7.
UTENSILS. XXI-S, 43, 81.
UTPANNA DASA. XXII-16.
VIM3.
19; XI-11 ; XX-Cl ; XXITI-IO.
UTTAMA VARGA.
VADHU. \ name for Sign Kanya.
VAGEESA. tT-37.
VAHANA. I-ll.
VAIKUNrA. XIV-23.
VAISESHfK.VMSAS. 111-7; XVI
VAAYA. 11-21.
V.\K. MO.
VAKRA. rV-2,5.
V.\KBABH./\. 1-8.
V.\KYAKR.\.MA. XXII-11.
VALTANl’. 11-8: VIi:i-l.
VALLAKt YOGA. Vl-39.
VALOUR, 1-lT; Vf-lO. 47;
Vll-10; [XU; XVI-28 =
XVIII-U; XX-4.
VAIXIEOUS. XVI-7VANQUISHED, VI-GO.
VARA YOGA. VI-lS.
VARAHAMIHIRA. XX-63 ;
XXII-24.
VARGA. X-4.
VARGOTPAMA. Ill-l, 6;VIIVARGOTT.AMAMSA. IX-20; XX
VARIEG.4TED COLOUR. 11-13;
VARSHAPA BALA. IV-1.
VARSISHTA YOGA, VI-14. 18.
VASTRA. M2.
VASUMAT YOGA. VI-19 20.
VATA. II-J1.
VEDAS. ir-5; V 5; VI-31;
XXV-8.
VED.INTA PHILOSOPHY. XXVII-5.
VEDADHYAYANA. V-5.
VEDIIA. XXVI-3; 4, 5, G, 7, 8
VEDHA ASTERISM. XXVI-28,
VEENA YOGA. VI-39,40.
. VEGETABLE SIGNS ; 1-9.
■ VEHICLE I-ll; II-G ; III-9 ;
XXV-11.
VEINS. 11-14.
VENER.^TION. I-lo.
VENBRI.4L COMPLAINTS. XIV
VENOMOUS BITES. VIV-IG.
A malefic in the 4fch.—in the 7th
and the Moon in the lOth ; or
—and Mercury in the 7th,
Jupiter in the 5th, and malefios
in the 4th; lead to family
extinction. XII-6.
Ashtakav.vrga of—. XXIII-8,
Bukthi of—in the Dasas of tlie
several planets. XXI'll, 19,

INDEX
VENUS
Conception may take place when
the Sun and—in the case
of males are strong and transit
through Apachaya Easis or
Amsas. XII-12.
Dasa period of—. XIX-2. 12,
Effect of the lord of the 4th and
—‘well-placed in the Lagna and
the 4th. XVI-13.
Effect of Gulika being associated
with—. XXV-16.
Effect of the planet owning the
2 nd bhavii being connected with
— XVI-6.
Effect of the transit of—over
the several houses from the
Moon. XXVL-2I.
Effect of—being in conjunction
with each of the other planets.
Effect of—occupying the Lagna
and the other bhavas. VIlI-17.
Graha factor of— XXIV-26.
Information about one’s wife
and progeny that may be
guessed through the Ashtakavargaof-. XXIV-12.
Information to be sought Cor
through—. XV-16.
The bhavas for which—is a
Karaka. XV-17.
In transit,— becomes effective
when he is in the middle
portion of a sign. XXVI-25.
Jupiter and—if they own Ken¬
dras become powerful to cause
evil. XX-50.
Lord of the 7th and—in a dual
Rasi or Amsa make the person
to have two wives. X-5.
Moon in the several Amsas
aspected by—• XVIIl-12, 13,
Moon in the several signs aspecttedby—. XVIlI-6. 7. 8. 9,
Naisargi^la Dasa period of—.
XXIM7.
VIBHAVA
Pindayurdaya Dasa period of—.
XXTI.21.
The Astangata reduction does not
apply to—. XXTI-18
The 5th asterisrn reckoned from
that of—-is termed his roar
Latta. XXVI-43.
The kind-of asceticism caused by
—. XXVII-5.
The pa ticular division in a Hasi
of which—is the lord in an
Ashtakavarga. XXlII-18, 19.
The position of— in the general
order of precedence in Dasas.
XXlI-27.
There will be quarrel in the LaLta
of—. XXVI-46,
—alono in the 5th identical with
Kataka may possibly give chil¬
dren by a second wife. XEt-5
—and the Moon in opposition
to Mars and Saturn make the
native wifeless or issueless. X-5.
—hemmed in between two
malofics causes loss of wife.
—Ill conjunction with a maletic
in the 7th, 5th or 9th makes
the native bereft of a wife. X-4,
—in the 7th causes distress to
the bhaav. XV-26.
—in the 6th brings abodt los^ of
honour and wealth and in mosf
cases danger to life also. XXVI
—in transit gives good results
in all places other than the
loth, 7th, and 4th. XXVl-2,8.
—in Vrischika identical with the
7th, causes loss of wife. X-3.
When the Sun toansits the 6th’
7th or I2th house raokoned
from—at birth, death is sure
to happen. XVII-27.
VERSES. To be reciting char¬
ming—containing the name of
God Narayana. VI-30.
VERSIFYING, To be clover in
VIBHAVA. A term for the 11th
bouse. 1-15.

VICTORIOUS
VICTORIOUS. VI- 2 ; VII-4 ;
VICTORY. XXI-41; XXVI-14.
""in war. II* 1 .
VIDYA. A term to denote the
2 nd house. I-IO.
VIDYADIIARAS. XIV-0.
VIEWS. To be crooked in
one’s—. IX-4.
VIGHNA. A term to denote the
8 th house. 1-14VIGOUR. XV.15.
VIKALA. One of the ten Avastthas of a i)lanet. Ifl-lO, 20 .
VIKRAMA. A designation to
denote the 3rd house. I-Il.
VIKRAMARKA. IX-14.
VILE. One’s speech to be
very—in quality. VI11-28.
To be engaged in doing—acts.
VIII-32.
To be—in character. Ill—14.
To reside amidst—people. XVITo spend money on—things.
VIII-33.
VILIFY. To unjustly—other.
VILLAGE. To be the headman
of a—. VI-4.
To live in a good—. XVI-3.
VIMALAYOGA. VI-57,69.
VIOLENCE. Wealth got
through—XXl-28.
VIRGO. See Kanya
VIRILE POWER. 11-13.
VIRINCHI YOGA. VI-2‘5. 31 ,
VIRTUE. 1-14; XXI-57.
To be renowned for one’s—s.
VIII-16.
VIRTUOUS. Holding views
quite antagonistic to—conduct.
XXV-26.
One who has stored wealth earned
through—means. XXV1-50.
To be anxious to do—acts.
VIIH6.
VYOMA
To ho engaged in the practice
of—actions. XXIt-32.
To be of a—disposition. VI-45 ;
Xl-5.
To be-. VI-9. 12; VHI-7;
To bo—ly disposed. VI-70 ;
XVI-2. 20 ; XVIIM4.
To help the—. VI-29,
To make one—ly inclined.
XXVII-7.
To i)erforin some —deed. XIX-11.
To recite in company with the—
the chai'ming v<M*ses finnfcainiiig
the name of God Narayana.
To win tiio appio!)ation of the—.
VISAKHA. XI-8.
VISlIAGHATl KALA. Xlll-8.
VISHTI KARANA. XII-15.
VITAL POWER. To lose one’s -.
VIII- 31.
Decay of XXV-26.
VITTA. A term denoting the
2 ncl house. I-IO.
VORACIOUS. To bo a—ea'er.
Vin-22.
VOWS. XII-24 ; XXVI-49.
VOY'AGE. To ol)taia facilities
for one’s —. XIX-12.
Augmentation of wealth b y
lucrative—8. XIX-2r).
VRISCHIKA. I'4; IV o. 6; IX18; XV1II.9; XIX-i6; XXIIVRISHA. 16.
VRISHABIIA I-G, 7. S; TV-5 ;
XIV.17 ; XVIII-G ; XXlV-24.
VRITTI. V-l.
VULTURE. IM8.
—faced Decanates. IJI-13.
VYAPARA. 1-15.
VYATIPATA. XXV-1.5,23.28.
VYAYA. 1-16.
VYOMA, 1-15.

WAITEDDPON
INDEX
WEALTH
w
WAITED UPON. To be-by
faifchful attendaaks, VI-?.
WALK. To-gently. VIII-G.
To be fast inking. IX -4.
WANDER. To—in the roads.
VIII- 9.
WANDERING To be—’without
a wife. Vrri-3.
To ha-. IX-7; XIX-5; XXInclination to be always—.
XXV-26.
To lead a—life. XXI-3.
WAR. IV-2;XXI-28.
WARRIOR. To be a—. XVIII-7.
\VASHERMAN. TI-17; XVIlI-9
WATCHMAN. To be a-of a
city. XViri'12*
XXV-24.
Danger from horned and—ani¬
mals. XIV-3
Death due to—or by some ~ y
diseases. XIV-19,
Income through trade on—products. V-3.
The Moon brings on death
through—y diseases. XIV-I4.
To be afraid of—. XXV“24.
To have a body similar to a—pot.
To suffer from a—disease. VHTTo suffer from a~y disease
XIV-11; XXV-24.
—y signs. 1-7; XT\MJ.
WAY. A designation for the 7th
house. 1-13.
WEAK. To be—in the lower
limbs IX-10.
WEAK KNEED. To be-. IX-L
WBAE-MINDED. To be—. VIIIWE.AKNESS. To haye bcrdily—
To have one*3 gait retarded due
to bodily—. XXVM5.
WEALTH. A woman to be with¬
out—, XI-9.
A woman to possess—. XI-5.
A woman to have a husband who
has lost all his—. XI-3.
Accession of—. XXI-4.
Acquisition of—. XIX-6 ; XXAddition of—from a host of
enemies. XXI-46.
—. An appellation to signify
the 2nd house. I-IO.
—an expression to denote the
nth house. 1-15.
Augmentation of—by trade.
XTX-26.
Danger from fire to concealed—.
XIX-5.
Destruction of—. XXT'66.
Gain of—. XXIIMl; XXVIIncrease of—. XXI-51.
Influx of—XXI-81; XXIV-43.
Information regarding one’s—
should be sought for through
Venus. 11-6
Ketu in the 3rd house confers—
on the native. VIir29.
Ketu in the 12th house will
destroy—. VIII-33.
T^ss of-. X-2 ; XTX-13, XXIOne ought to conjecture / about
one’s—through Jupiter. XVOstentation in the acquisition
of—. XXV-10.
Phenomenal increase of—. XXIPlanets are always favourable to
one who has stored—earned
through virtuous m ea ns,
XXVI.60.

INDEX
WEALTH
Steady accumulation of—. XIXTo acquire immense—. XIXTo acquire—XXI-3.
To acquire —hy doing many
daring deeds. VI-2.
To attain—. XVI*5.
To be a king endowed with much
To be a mine of blessing from
the Goddess of—. VI-24.
To be bereft of—. VI-10.
To bo blessed with abundance of
To be devoid of—. VIII-8, 22 ;
XXV-11.
To be endowed with—. II1-8,
XlI-32.
To be prepared for lose of—.
XXI-8.
To be renowned for one's'^.VITo bo robbed of one’s- by his
enemies. VI-59.
To l)« the owner of immense—.
VIIM8.
To be without—. III-14 ; VIXXVII-6
To become the lord of much hoar¬
ded—.VI-55.
To become the owner of—earned
with much difficulty. VI 50.
To command VI-34.
To enjoy continuous happiness
and—. XX-IO,
To expect loss of—. XXI-JO,
To enjoy other people’s —. IXTo freely utilise other’s—. IXU.
To get-. XIX-22
To get—through fire, king and
fightibg. XIX.9.
To^^-^^rougl^. the Soyereigm
pll,
WEAPOK
To have an uninterrupted influx
of— XX-12.
To have everlasting-—. VI*36,
To have lasting—. Viri-24.
To have Joss of—-,XIX-20, 25 ;
To have one’s— augmented
through a young woman. XVIil
To have one’s—destroyed. IMTo have-VI-63; Vin-4.11. 13,
To lose one’s—. VII>3, 26.
To posses much—. VI-31.
To posses no—or corn. XXVTo possess—. IX-15 ; XVIIITo secure—. XIX-19.
To usurx) other’s—. VI 4.
Unexpected Joss of—. XXI-69.
—to l>e poor. XXIV-12.
WEALTHY. About a—man, one
ouglit to ascertain through
Venus. IT-19.
To be a—man. IT I-10,
XXIV-38.
Yoga for tlie husband of a woman
to be*”. XI-3.
WEAPON. Danger from—. XIV
Income though—s, V-4.
It is through Mars that one should
ascertain about a—. 11-3.
To be wounded by“^s. XXVTo earn money by the use of—s.
XVIII-1.
To meet^ with injury from a—.
VIII-31.
To from wounds caused by.
a—. XXl-42.
tAw A

78 INDEX
WEAPON
WIFE
Trouble from—s. XIX-14, 17 ;
WEAKINESS. XIV-8.
WEARISOME. To suffer fatigue
by—journeys. XXVl-19.
To undertake journey. XXVIWEAVER. Anything about a—
ought to be ascertained through
Venus. 11-19.
WEAVING. To he an adept in—.
WEIGHT. One’s words to have
—. XXVI-IS.
WELFARE. To ascertain a
woman’s—. XT*1.
WELL-BEHAVED. To be—.VIWELL-DRESSED. To be—. VIWHITE CHOWiUES. II-2.
WHOLESOME DIET. XXII-32.
WICKED. A woman to become
One to be—in his disposition.
Vl-4.
To associate with the—.V-4;
vrii-28.
To be despised by the—. VITo be—ly disposed, VlII-14.
To be—ly inclined. VI-7.
To become—. VIiI-30; XVIIlTo befriend the—. VI-10.
To do—acts. XVI-28 ; XXTo get remarks from—people.
XXI.71.
To have intercourse with—
women. XIX-i3.
To have intrigues with - women
To have mental anguish through
—l)eople. XXl-30.
To have misunderstandings
with-. XlX-19.
WIDOW, A woman tn become a
To be the son of a—remarried.
XVIII-2.
\7IFE. A designation for the
7th house. 1-13.
A malefic in the 7th if he owns
the place will do good to the
wife. X-6.
A tendency to quarrel with one’s
. A woman to become the—of a
King. XI-7.
A Yoga under which the—of a
person will command all happi¬
ness. X-10.
A Yoga by which one’s wife will
he:virtuously disposed. XVl-20.
Acquisition of wealth from one’s
—VII.
Acquisition of XIXI7 ; XXI
Danger from—. XIV-2
Danger to—. XlV-8 ; XlX-5.
Destruction of one’s— IX-19.
Effect of one’s—being born
under certain asterisms. XL9.
Exit of one’s—. XXI 26.
Happiness to one’s— .XIX-10.
Information about one's—and
progeny through the Ashtakavarga of Venus. XXlV-12.
Information regarding one's—
should be sought for through
Venus. II-6; XV-16.
Intercourse with another man’s
—XXI-30.
Lobs of one’s—. XXI-37; 53;
XXVI-22.
Meeting of—and children. XIXMisunderstandings with one’s—
XXI-32,67; XXVI-15.
One’s—to be troubled by gout.
XIX-13.
Sickness to*—in an intense form.
XXM1.16; XXVI.23.
Suffering and diseases to one’s
Suffering to—and children XIXTime of acquisition of a—. X-

INDEX
WIFE
To ascertain the direction of the
country of one’s—. X-12.
To ascertain the Janma Rasi of
one’s—. X-11.
To be addicted to other peopie’s —ves. XVlII-3, 11, 12.
To bo ])eroft of—. VI-ll.
To be blessed with a good—.
To he endowed with—. VI-3,
27. 31, 54; VIII-lO; IX-IG;
Te be fond of one's—. XI-12.
To be happy with one’s—. VITI21; XXi-Sl.; XXVI-J9.
To be the husband of many—
ves. XXV—12.
To be wandering without a—.
vm-3.
To be wedded to a bad—. VIIITo"be-less. VIFM?; X-5, 8.
To be without a—. VH1-10.
To cast a look at other peo¬
ple’s—ves, VI*51.
To enjoy the company of one’s—
and children. XXI-80.
To enjoy continuous prosj^erity
in the company of one’s—,
Te have a rich lady as one’s—.
VIIM2.
To have an excellent—. VI-48,
Tolhave children by a second—.
XIl-5.
To have two—ves. X-5.
To live in the company of one’s
—and childi*en. XXI-56.
Te live with one’s—-and be
happy. VIIM4, 29.
To lose one’s—and become
addicted to other people’s—ves.
To lose one’s—. VIII-9 ; X—1,
To lose one’s—and children,
XIX'21.
WOMAN
To possess wealtli and—. XVIIITo (luarrel with one’s—, XIX9; XXVI-17.
To suffer loss of—. VITI-Sl '
Trouble to children and—. XIXTrouble to—. XXVI-21.
Trouble to—and children. XXIWILT) Death due to-.
XlV-18.
W^IND DISEASE. Vni.26 ; IXWINDY. disorders. XXI-35.
WISE. To he very—. VIIM8.
Troubles arising from serious
offences done to—men. XIV-6.
WISE MAN. To be a—. XVUIWISDOM n.5; VI-6.
W1.S}IES. To rea.li.se one’s—.
Attainment of one’s cherished—.
XXVl-12.
WITCHES. XIV-?.
WITCH CRAFT. XlV-14.
WITTY. To be-. XVIII-ll, 14.
To Ixj —in speech. VIII-11.
WOMAN. II-2; V-7.
Acquisition of—. XXI-43.
Death through—. XIV-18.
Ijobs of wealth through—. X-2.
Menses of a—. XI-11.
One fond of—not his own.
XVIIMl.
To he a dealer in—. XVIII-2.
To be a servant under a—.
XVIIM3.
To be fond of wicked—. XVIITTo be fond of young—. IX-2 .
To be inteni on sporting with—

WOMAN
INDEX
ZODIAC
IX-3.
To come to grief through—.
XXI-41.
To divine the number of—that a
person may associate with. X> 6 .
To have intrigues with bad—.
VIII-18;XIX-13.
To have intrigues with—^not
one’s own. VI-4, VIII-26.
To long for—. IX- 1 .
To resort to the society of low—.
XIX-20.
Troubles from—. XIV-3.
WOMB. A woman to have a
diseased—. XI-4.
WOOD. Danger from—. XIV-2.
Death due to a—. XIV-19.
To deal in—en materials. V- 8 .
Wound as a result of a blow
from a piece of—. XIV- 8 .
WOOL. To earn one’s livelihood
through—. V-2.
WOED. A person not true to his
—. XX-IS ; XXV-9.
One whose—s have no weight.
XXVI-18.
WOEK. To spoil other’s—. VIWOEMS. Death through—. XIVWOBN OUT. To wear—cloths.
WOESHIP. I-I4; VI-29; XIIWOESHIPPEE. 11-17.
WOUNDS. 1-13: II-3; XIV -8
WEATH. XX-195
WEATHPUL. II- 8 ,10: Vin-25.
WEESTLEE. To be a—. XVIIIW^EETOH. To be a mean-. VIIIW'EITING. To bo skilled in—.
XVIII-5.
y
YAGNAS. II-l.
YAKSHA. XIV-3, 6 .
YAMA. XII-21; XIV- 2 . 3.
—’8 world. XIV-23.
YAMAKANTAKA. XII-25; XVIIYAVANAS. 11-28; XXlI-17.
—'s strength. IV- 1 .
YOGAKABAKA. XX-48.
YOGABISHTA. XIII- 6 .
YOUNG. II- 8 .
YOUNG FEMALES. VIII-18.
j YOUNG WOMAN. XVIII-5.
YOUNGEE BE0THEBS:XV-1S.
YOUNGEST BEOTHEE. XI-9.
YOUNGSTEES. XII- 26 : XXIYOUTH. II10.
YUDDHABALA. IV 2 .
YUGAYOGA. VI89,4i.
YUVATI (Basi). 1-9. ‘
Z
ZENITH. 1-15.
ZODIAC. XXVm-1-4,

5rT5T ?r5T|T snfrr?T?T 3rf.i?rjft, 5^«rTH*T
Lai Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration Library
MUSSOORIC
sr^iftfT ?to
Acc. No....
f^'nn ^rr
Please return this book on or before the date last stamped
below.
Date
^TSRrf
qft ?i«3n
Borrower’s
No.
Date
^T^icrr
Borrower’s
No.
Si'^/s
•J
lu/i
mi ^
J
MAN

laan
PJCC^^-’V ■
Class No.
I33S
rw
IIBRAR
LAL BAHADUR 8HA8TR|/^^*’3
National Academy of Administration
MU8800RIE
Accession No.
1. Beolw ar« InumI for 16 days only but
nm hova to bo rooallod oarlior if urson*
Oy ranulrad.
Z, An ouar>diio tdiarga of 26 Paisa par day par
voUinio will bo obargod.
S. Booksmaybo ranawod on roqooat. at Ow
diaorstion of tbo Librarian.
4 1*ariodi«da.llara and Rafsronoo books may
not ta naiiod and may bo oonsultod only
tntboUbrory..
N itNT lll^
