READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: prasna_marga_2.json
Dataset number: 318 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 556,785 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Prasna Marga 2
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Prasna Marga 2
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: PrasnaMargaBVR
  • total_pages: 242
  • total_words: 97899
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.961
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRASNA MARGA
WITH ENGLISH TRANSLATION AND NOTES BY
BANGALORE VENKATA RAMAN
Editor, The Astrological Magazine
PART II
[Chapters XVII-XXXII]

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
The first edition was published in 1985. The demand was so great that it went out of print
within a short period.
The first edition carried only the English translation with my critical notes and
illustrations without the original Sanskrit text in Devanagari. This was because, the text on which
my translation was based, secured from the Oriental Library, Madras, was in Kannada script.
However, after the publication of the first edition, it was possible to get the text of the
Part II copied in Devanagari script from the Oriental Library, Mysore. But this text did not
contain many important slokas given in the earlier text in Kannada script.
Therefore it involved much time to compare both the manuscripts and make it complete.
Because of delay in getting ready the original text and because of my former publishers
having suspended their publication business, the second edition could not be brought out earlier.
I am happy that this edition has been made complete by the addition of the Sanskrit text.
I am thankful to Mr. J.P. Jain of Messrs Motilal Banarsidass for coming forward to
publish the new editions of both the parts of this great classic on astrology in an attractive form.
Bangalore
17-4-1992 B.V. RAMAN

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
Of late interest in the study of astrology has been increasing not only in India but all over
the world. Strangely, a certain section of the educated public in the name of "Scientific outlook"
continue to snipe at astrology dubbing it as superstition. But no serious attempt has ever been
made by these critics to examine scientifically the claims of astrology.
Crores of rupees expended on the so-called scientific evaluation of the composition of the
stars and their life cycles etc. are sheer waste of public money, unless the astronomers and
astrophysicists engage themselves in an intensive study of the correlations between planets, the
celestial bodies and life on earth. Our ancients did not study astronomy as a venal occupation. To
them a logical corollary was to link the study of astronomy with our affairs. The greatest
astronomers of yore like Varahamihira were also great astrologers. They did not waste the
knowledge of the celestial sphere on sheer scholastic pursuits. If Indian astronomers, proficient
in western astronomy, shed their prejudices and predilections and take a new approach to
astrology, highly developed by ancient savants, they will find truths full of significance to human
life and relevant to modern times.
Prasna Marga is perhaps one of the most important treatises on predictive astrology,
revealing methods peculiar to the genius of Kerala.
The first part (Chapters I to XVI) was published in 1980 and the reception extended to it
has been more than expected as could be gleaned from the sale of the book and the spate of
letter's of appreciation received by me.
A tentative translation of the second part (Chapters XVII to XXXII) was also made in
1942 along with the first part. Revised and re-written several times, the final version of this
translation emerged in 1977.
Most of the educated persons who read the book are not acquainted with Sanskrit.
Therefore, in deference to the wishes of such readers, the original text in Devanagari script has
been omitted. However, in due time, it will be made available at a reasonable price, to those who
ask for the text.
Copious notes have been added to explain obscure and tough passages and wherever
necessary, examples have been given to enable aspiring students of astrology to understand the
principles clearly.
I am thankful to my daughter Mrs. Gayatri Devi Vasudev for her assistance in the
revision of the manuscript and writing the notes, to my esteemed friend Dr. R $. Sastri for
preparing the technical index and to Mr. G. K. Ananthram of IBH Prakashana for coming
forward to bring out this book in an attractive form.

Bangalore
B. V. RAMAN

INTRODUCTION
My English translation of the second Part of Prasna Marga presented herewith is not
literal in the sense of word for word translation but liberal. It gives the summary of each stanza
as made out by me. It is therefore likely that in regard to some stanzas I may not have been quite
successful in conveying the intended meanings of the original author.
One great difficulty I had to face in translating Part II into English was the absence of an
authentic original text, printed or written, in Devanagari script.
Two versions of the original text of Part II were obtained, one from the Oriental Library,
Madras, transcribed in Telugu script and the other, copied in Kannada script from the Oriental
Library, Mysore, each differing from the other in regard to the wording of some slokas and the
number of slokas in a chapter. No commentaries were available and I had to fall back on my own
humble understanding and the assistance rendered by some Kerala friends well versed in Prasna
Marga.
With regard to part I, I had no such difficulty because of the availability of an authentic
printed edition with commentaries by the great scholar Punnasseri Neelakanta Sarma. Therefore
for any translational errors, the responsibility is solely mine though the translation has been done
as faithfully to the original as possible, keeping in view that in such a work it is the spirit of the
author that matters.
In a way, the second Part is more important than the first, as it deals with some of the
most significant events bearing on human life, such as marriage, children, occupation etc. The
peculiarity is that it throws light not only on the Prasna chart but also embodies important and
rare combinations bearing on the birth horoscope also.
No extant classical work on astrology appears to have gone so deeply into the subjects of
marriage and marriage compatibility; birth and death of issues, childlessness, etc., as Prasna
Marga.
Some of the methods given for timing events bearing on these matters are practical and
novel offering wide scope for research.
The chapters on predicting rainfall, locating under-ground water and the existence of
submerged wells etc., open a new-vista of astrological knowledge which is relevant to modern
times and conditions if only our so-called men of science could shed their prejudices and avail
themselves of this knowledge.
The other equally important subjects dealt with pertain to political astrology, installation
of Deities in temples and discovering flaws after the installation.
Transits based mostly on Varahamihira's Brihat Samhita will be of more than casual

interest. The chapter on Nashta Jataka expounds rules for casting horoscopes when birth details
are not available.
Prasna Marga appears to be the only classical text covering thoroughly every aspect of
human existence and throwing light on remedial measures to be adopted to neutralise afflictions
causing different types of diseases, etc.
Now a Summary of the Book: Chapter Seventeen deals with the question of marriage.
The longevities of either party to a match are of the utmost importance. Thereafter, the Vivaha
Prasna must be carefully read. The author refers to various authorities such as Prasna Sangraha,
Madhaveeyam, Prasna Ratna and, of course, Brihat Jataka on various combinations for happy
marriages, unhappy unions, thwarted matches, early or delayed marriages etc. Certain
combinations given also suggest early death of husband or wife or both. All these combinations
are on the chart for the time of query.
Chapter Eighteen takes up the topic of children, their birth and longevity. A Santhathi
Prasna or query bearing on children is applicable to both husband and wife. The 5th house is
important in the case of a man and the 9th, for a woman. Combinations for the birth of limited or
many issues, childlessness and for adoption of a child are given. References are made to
celebrated treatises such as Madhava's Muhurta, Santana Deepika, Prasna Sangraha, Gnana
Pradeepika Brihat Jataka, Shatpanchasika and Vidwajjana Vallabha to emphasize certain
combinations. In some instances, Swara Sastra is also employed to divine whether one will have
issues or not. Certain periods depending on the Moon's position in relation to the woman's natal
Moon and the benefic aspects it receives are shown as good for sexual union to be fruitful.
Several numerical methods to determine the question of children are also given.
Different kinds of Yogasphutas, Yamakantaka, Arudha-lagna, the nature of sign of certain
yogasphutas being Prushtodaya or Urdhwodaya all influence the birth as well as the sex of the
desired child. The method to fix up the time for sexual union to result in conception using the
positions of planets at question time is also outlined. When an adoption is successful, when not,
and what happens to the father or mother in certain cases are also detailed. Under certain
combinations, the child may also die due to curses or abhichara (spells cast by enemies). Signs
(lakshanas) and combinations to determine whether a woman is pregnant or not, her health, if
there will be an abortion, sex of the unborn child, birth of twins and time of delivery, remedial
measures for planets unfavourably placed are all described.
Chapter Nineteen continues with the subject of progeny — their number, their times of
birth, etc. Reasons for childlessness are also discussed. Beeja and Kshetra sphutas are to be used
in determining the virility of a man and the fertility of a woman respectively. Different methods
to calculate these factors are explained. The subject of progeny, says the author, is very important

because only a son can redeem the debts of his forefathers.
In Chapter Twenty the author delineates how the life and career of one's spouse may be
examined from the horoscope. Marriage is absolutely necessary if one is to be entitled to perform
ordained Karmas. Similarly, the 7th house and Venus in a woman’s chart reveals all about her
husband. How the time of marriage may be determined is also dealt with here.
Chapter Twenty one relates to marriage compatibility. Quoting several authorities such as
Sarvasiddhi, Madhavacharya, Brihaspati, Muhurta Sangraha, Madhaveeya, Muhurta Ratna and
Muhurta Abharana, the author says how the count is to be made for matching charts. Friendships
of planets are also given.
Chapter Twenty two deals with the results of the transits of various planets. It also gives
details of precious stones and articles governed by the different planets and ceremonies
associated with them to be resorted to as remedial measures under adverse transits. Vedha and
Vipareeta vedha, essential to interpreting transit results, are also described.
Chapter Twenty three, drawing from the classical treatise Karma Vipaka, deals with the
primary causes of disease and remedial measures appropriate to them. These causes are basically
related to acts of omission and commission.
Chapter Twenty four is a comprehensive one and covers matters relating to the Deities
(Deva Prasna), ruler (Raja Prasna), war (Yuddha Prasna), and hunting (Mrigaya Prasna). How
the Deity is to be installed and measures to set right flaws in the images or performance of
traditional rituals are explained. Measures to ensure general prosperity are also given. Whether a
marching army will invade or retreat and whether on attack will be successful or not are dealt
with under Raja Prasna. Signs in nature and omens pointing to war and also natural calamities
are also listed.
Tips on when to travel and when to avoid certain directions follow next. Hunting and the
kind of game one will find under different planetary dispositions are dealt with in Mrigaya
Prasna.
Chapter Twenty five deals with the subject of rainfall. What planetary combinations
cause heavy rainfall, how rains in the first 15 ghatikas of certain lunar days give an indication of
the rainfall for the entire fortnight in question, omens indicative of rainfall, how the first letter of
a question bearing on rainfall, rainbows, asterisms, etc., maybe used to determine if there will be
rains, storms and cyclones, are dealt with. These are based primarily on the Brihat Samhita of
Varahamihira. These clues can also be used to answer Koopa Prasna or questions on digging
wells.
Chapter Twenty six details Koopa Prasna explaining whether water can be found or not
for digging a well at a particular spot. How to find whether the water is sweet, bitter, insipid, etc.,

is also dealt with.
Chapter Twenty seven takes up the subject of Bhojana Prasna. How the diner, the food
one eats, rest after meals and the nature of conversation while eating can be gleaned from the
Bhojana Prasna are explained. Proshithogamana Prasna which is strangely included in this
chapter deals with the return of a person who is in exile.
Chapter Twenty eight deals with sexual union and its nature and the place where it took
place.
Chapter Twenty/nine shows how questions can be answered when the querent puts his
query in vague terms. Omens are also to be carefully noted in answering such questions.
Questions on longevity and stolen goods are the most commonly encountered ones in such
circumstances. By a careful study of the Arudha or Lagna, whichever is stronger, and the signs
and planets involved, not only can the nature of the stolen articles be determined but also details
about the thief, his whereabouts, his name and whether he is a relative or a stranger, etc., can all
be known.
Chapter Thirty discusses methods to draw the horoscope of a person who does not know
his birth time and is titled Nashta Jataka or unknown horoscope.
The nature of dreams and their implications on the basis of the time of question are
detailed in Chapter Thirty one. Certain dreams indicate the onslaught of different kinds of
disease and consequent death. The different parts of night in which dreams appear can be used to
forecast the time when the portents of the dream will occur. The interpretation of dreams is quite
exhaustive.
Chapter Thirty two deals with the Ashtakavarga System of Prediction, outlining the
techniques of drawing an Ashtakavarga chart for the different planets and the Lagna. The results
of each planet transiting signs in its own Ashtakavarga containing varying numbers of bindus are
described. How transits of certain planets in the different Ashtakavarga charts may be used for
planning one's secular activity for augmenting positive results and for minimising adverse
indications are enumerated.
Drawing the Samudaya or collective Ashtakavarga and classifying the signs with
different numbers of bindus as sreshta (best), madhyama (middling) and kanishta (least) with
results ascribed to them being respectively proportional in quality and quantity are elaborated.
By adding up the bindus in the different houses in different prescribed ways - one's financial
prosperity, periods of fortune and misfortune, calamitous periods, etc., can be foreseen.
An interesting method by which the Ashtakavarga chart can be applied to Dasa results is
also given. Trikona and Ekadhipatya reductions are next discussed with methods outlined to
show how these results may be used to delineate happenings.

The last chapter of this treatise comes to an end with the author recapitulating what he
has described in the entire text preceded by a brief account of himself. It is interesting to note
that the author also refers to some of his rivals who had tried to underrate his writings.
Thus the two parts of Prasna Marga extending over 2500 stanzas cover the entire gamut
of both horary and horoscopy and can therefore be of immense benefit to all those seriously
interested in the study and understanding of the science of astrology.
Bangalore
13-7-1985 B.V. RAMAN

CONTENTS
CHAPTER XVII (Vivaha Prasna)
Putting the question — 2
About the girl's parents — 4
Possibility of marriage — 9
Death of the couple— 12
Indicative signs — 14
Ugly looking wife — 20
CHAPTER XVIII (Santhana Prasna)
Causes for absence of issues — 25
Adoption — 28
Loss of children — 29
Birth of children — 30
Barrenness in woman — 37
Garbha prasna — 45
Affliction to parents — 46
Ascertaining a woman's pregnancy — 57
Miscarriage — 59
Sex of the child — 60
Time of delivery — 67
Remedial measures — 76
Santhana thithi — 84
How Adoption is denied — 92
CHAPTER XIX (Issues According to Birth Horoscope)
Combinations for progeny — 95
Bija and kshetra sphutas— 96
Death of children— 102
Family extinction — 103
Childlessness— 105
Father's death before son's birth — 111
Adoption— 113
Number of issues — 122
Planetary rays — 125
When children are born — 129

CHAPTER XX (Seventh House Through Horoscope)
Factors to be considered — 134
Yogas for wife's death — 135
Character of wife — 136
Role of Venus— 137
Number of wives — 142
Birth star of wife— 146
Period of marriage — 150
CHAPTER XXI (Marriage Compatibility)
Rasi agreement — 153
Different views — 154
Sexual compatibility — 155
Planetary friendships— 158
Different kootas— 159
Gotra vichara — 165
Vihanganukoolya— 166
Bhootanukulya— 169
Ashtakavarga agreement — 171
Mental compatibility— 172
Important items of concordance — 175
CHAPTER XXII (Effects of Transits)
Transit of the Sun — 177
The Moon's transits— 178
Transit of Mars— 179
Transit of Mercury — 180
Transit of Jupiter — 180
Transit of Venus — 182
Transit of Saturn — 183
Propitiation of planets — 184
Vedha and Vipareeta Vedha — 186
Vedhya signs — 189
CHAPTER XXIII (Diseases: Causes and Remedies)
Remedies as per Karma Vipaka — 192
Consumption— 192
Leprosy— 193

Serpis —
Leucoderma —
Dysentery —
Piles —
Diseases of the eye —
Ear defects —
Lingual diseases —
Rheumatism —
Colic trouble —
Spleen diseases —
Female diseases —
Dropsy —
Urinary troubles —
Fistula —
Throat diseases —
Headache —
Epilepsy —
Dumbness and insanity —
Fevers —
Thirst —
Ulcers —
Dyspepsia —
Internal troubles —
Gift of health —
CHAPTER XXIV (Deities, Rulers etc.)
Installation of the holy Idol —
Divine presence —
Impairing of divine presence —
Deva Prasna —
Differing views —
Wrath of the Deity —
Questions bearing on rulers —
Planets and portfolios —
Questions on war and invasion —
Indicative signs —

Invasion of the country — 220
Retreat of the enemy — 221
Time of invasion — 224
Peace between parties — 226
Defeat and victory — 228
When to declare war — 230
Evil omens — 231
Ruin of the ruler — 234
When to move the army — 235
Parigha — 240
Effects of weekdays on travel — 243
Journey by water — 244
Advice to rulers — 252
Hunting — 257
Classification of animals — 258
CHAPTER XXV (Rainfall)
Combinations for heavy rainfall — 260
Appearance of mock Sun — 262
When does rain occur ? — 263
Significance of lunar month Ashadha — 276
Venus and rainfall — 278
Mandalas or cycles — 278
Shapes of clouds and rainfall — 280
Animal Prognosticates — 280
Other helpful hints for predicting rainfall — 283
Importance of Solar ingress — 284
Karanas and rainfall — 286
Answering queries on rainfall — 290
Predicting floods — 292
Adverse winds — 294
CHAPTER XXVI (Koopa Prasna)
Hints for discovering water layers — 295
Indicative signs — 296
Dearth of water — 297
Gupti chakra — 298

Existence of submerged wells — 303
Taste of the water — 305
Vastu Purusha — 306
Clues from plants — 306
Depth of the water layer — 307
CHAPTER XXVII (Bhojana Prasna)
Menu at meals — 310
Type of drinks served — 312
Quality of food — 313
Conversation at meals — 314
Planets and tastes — 315
Nature of food consumed — 316
The dining hall — 319
Return home of a traveller — 320
CHAPTER XXVIII (Suratha Prasna)
On co-habitation — 323
Description of the partner — 325
Nature of intimacy — 329
Place of co-habitation — 330
CHAPTER XXIX (Nashta Prasna)
Revealing the nature of question — 335
Questions relating to missing articles — 336
Details about theft and the thief— 336
The location of the article — 337
Planetary indications of theft — 339
Number of persons involved — 342
Nature of the missing article — 343
Sign significations — 347
Planets signifying the thief— 349
The thief s appearance etc. — 351
Recovery of the article — 357
CHAPTER XXX (Nashta Jataka)
Birth star from Prasna chart— 358
Nimittas and the Moon's position at birth — 362
Month of birth — 366

Rising sign at birth — 370
Jupiter at birth — 371
CHAPTER XXXI (Dreams)
Finding the nature of a dream — 374
Results of dreams — 376
Different kinds of dreams — 379
Causes of dreams — 380
Time of experiencing the effects of dreams — 381
Bharata's dream — 382
CHAPTER XXXII
Benefic dots contributed by planets — 385
Adhama, Madhyama and Sobhana — 388
Planets transiting their Ashtakavarga signs — 388
The Sun's Ashtakavarga — 394
The Moon's Ashtakavarga — 395
Mars Ashtakavarga — 396
Mercury's Ashtakavarga — 397
Jupiter's Ashtakavarga — 400
Venus Ashtakavarga — 400
Saturn's Ashtakavarga — 401
Samudaya Ashtakavarga — 402
Maximum and minimum points — 402
Bhanduka, Sevaka, Poshaka and Grutaka — 404
First, second and third parts of life — 405
Ashtakavarga and Dasa results — 408
Trikona sodhana — 409
Ekadhipatya sodhana— 410
Zodiacal and planetary factors — 411
Father's death — 412
Mother’s death — 413
Death of brothers — 413
Number of children — 414
Timing the birth of issue — 416
More than one wife — 420
Period of Marriage — 421

Death of the person — 422
Summary of the Book — 423
Conclusion — 426
Original Sanskrit Text — Chapters XVII-XXXII 439

CHAPTER XVII
Vivaha Prasna (Marriage)
Stanza 1. I shall now deal with the question of marriage after describing matters
connected with longevity. This is the order to be followed.
NOTES
In the first part of this book the different methods of estimating longevity have been
detailed. The author now takes up the question of marriage and deals with it quite exhaustively.
Stanza 2. An astrologer must first examine the longevities of the couple to be
married based on their respective horoscopes. Then the other details of their future life
such as children, etc., should be well studied. Only after this, Vivaha Prasna can be taken
up. After satisfying himself that there is perfect agreement, he can recommend the
marriage alliance which is mainly made for progeny which alone satisfies the Pitris. This is
the view of Prasna Sangraha.
NOTES
It was the belief amongst the ancients that the main object of marriage was to beget
children, so that the souls of the departed could rest in peace. Of course modern ideas are
different, but the birth of children is an important aspect of marriage.
Stanza 3. Marriage contracts can be effected only after a careful examination of the
couple's lives as read from a Vivaha Prasna. So say Brihaspati and Madhava in his
Madhaveeya.
NOTES
The horary chart should form the basis for a thorough understanding of the likely
indications in the lives of the bride and the bridegroom. Then alone comes the question of
according approval or disapproval for the match.
Madhaveeyam is a valuable treatise mostly dealing with Muhurtha or electional
astrology. The treatment of the 'marriage' issue has been quite exhaustive. The book can be of
immense practical interest to all students of astrology. It is available only in Sanskrit. It tackles
tough problems in Muhurtha such as the relative importance of tithi (lunar day), nakshatra
(constellation), etc., and how, under special planetary configurations, certain flaws can be
ignored.
Vidya Madhaveeyam has a commentary by Vishnu, son of the author, and including the
commentary, the book contains about fifteen thousand granthas. The author Madhava is said to
have lived about 600 years ago under the patronage of the Vijayanagar King Bukka.
Stanza 4. The querist must first approach the astrologer with reverence and then

pronounce gently without repetition the names and asterisms of the intended bride and
bridegroom.
Stanza 5. The astrologer must then examine the future of the couple on the basis of
the Prasna chart. The presence of benefics in the 7th house is good.
NOTES
It is to be noted that no planets should occupy the 7th house at the time of marriage while
benefics in the 7th are indicators of good in a horary chart bearing on marriage.
Stanza 6. Suppose a man wishes to make a query regarding marriage. The correct
procedure is to be thus:
Stanza 7. "Can this girl (name and nakshatra to be given) hope to be prosperous
with agreeable and long connubial relations and children, if she is yoked to this person
(name and nakshatra added) ?" This is the form in which the query is to be clothed.
Stanza 8. Sage Brihaspati is of the opinion that the names and asterisms of both
bride and bridegroom should be stated. Of these, the more important is that of the bride. A
careful reading of Lagna reveals the life of the bride, while that of the 7th house gives
details about the bridegroom.
Stanza 9. In this way, the temperament, life history, etc., of the bride can be
understood from the ascendant and the story of the bridegroom can be had from the 7th.
Stanza 10. If the Sun is debilitated or occupies an unfriendly sign and does not
aspect either the ascendant or Arudha Lagna the bride will have no father. Likewise she is
motherless if the Moon is similarly situated.
NOTES
Here the strength of the Sun is to be noted. If he is strong and does not aspect the
ascendant, the girl's father does not look after her. Both Arudha and Lagna should be devoid of
his aspect. In this way one can ascertain the state of the brothers from Mars; of the uncles from
Mercury, etc. The author has given the above details as stated in the Anushtana Paddhati.
Stanza 11. If the 7th house from the Lagna or Arudha is not aspected by the Sun,
who should be debilitated or occupy an inimical house, the father of the bridegroom will
not be alive. The Moon similarly placed indicates the mother will not be alive. Similarly the
state of the brothers can be read from Mars, etc.
NOTES
Let us take an illustration (Chart 1) where the proposed match is brought to an astrologer
at 12 I.S.T. on 3-7-1982 at 13° N, 77° E 35. The chart for the query time would be as follows:

Venus 17-02
Merc. 28-12
Sun18-51
Rahu 21-20
Sun
Rahu
Lagna
Venus
Chart 1 RASI
NAVAMSA
Mars
Saturn
Ketu 21-20
Arudha
Moon 15-48
Jupiter 8-19
Lagna 13-47
Mars 21-49
Jupit.
Moon
Ketu
Mercury
The author says the Lagna or Arudha must be taken into account. How is Arudha
determined? This should, strictly speaking, be determined according to the method outlined in
Chapter 2, Stanzas 7 to 11 (Part 1) which we shall recapitulate briefly here.
"Arudha is a very important factor in Prasna or Horary Astrology..." The 12 signs are
assigned to the 8 directions and according to the direction which the querent faces at the time of
consultation, the Arudha is determined.
In modern times, there is a seeming hitch in this method. The present-day astrologer has
his furniture, particularly his writing desk, arranged in a particular manner, which remains the
same day after day. Naturally any querent on any day must face the astrologer in the same
direction. This means the sign represented by this direction is always the Arudha, no matter who
the querent, and whenever that be. Of course in spite of it, the method is quite effective because
the positions of the planets relative to the Arudha keep continually changing. Only
experimenting with a large number of queries can confirm the method.
Another method suggested seems more feasible in that a circle is drawn and divided into
8 parts where each cardinal point gets 45°.

The common signs each get 45° while the other signs get only 22 1/2°. The querent is
asked to place a piece of gold on any point which is called the Arudha. For instance in diagram 1,
if the querent places the coin between east and south-east, Arudha would be Taurus. According to
the first method the direction he faces would be the Arudha. If he stands facing the north-east,
Arudha would be Pisces. Even if the astrologer has his desk facing the south-east and a chair
opposite for the querent the Arudha being the same northwest sign Sagittarius each time, it
would still work for all querents quite correctly.
Instead of a gold coin (the gold representing the Sun, the, hub of our solar system), a gold
object such as a ring, cufflink, chain, bangle, pendant would be quite in order in present times.
Going back to Chart 1, the Lagna being Virgo, the Sun is in the 10th with Rahu. Arudha,
as the querent was Facing north-west, happens to be Sagittarius. The Sun is aspecting Arudha but
he is not in an inimical or debilitated sign. On the other hand he is aspected by Jupiter trinally
indicating the girl's father is alive.
The Moon is debilitated and does not aspect the Ascendant or the Arudha. Unfortunately
the girl lost her mother some years back. The 4th is sufficiently afflicted, even if the VenusMercury combination aspects the Moon.
The Lagna has two malefics in it. The Lagna and the 7th lords are adversely placed in
respect of each other. The Moon is in an Apoklima (the 3rd, 6th, 9th or 12th), but does not apply
beneficially to Jupiter or Mercury. This indicates it is unlikely the marriage will take place and
even if it should, for argument's sake, the couple may quarrel endlessly.
In actual practice, it is found that even if there is this combination, the aspect of Jupiter
can negate the evil effects.
Stanza 12. Whatever has been detailed earlier should be carefully considered. And if
they are found favourable, the person will be blessed with a good fortune, children and
marriage. Otherwise the results will be unfavourable.

NOTES
The author suggests that in studying the Prasna Chart, due consideration should be given
to hints suggested in earlier chapters. The author has probably in view Chapter II wherein certain
omens bearing on Time, Space, etc., have been dealt with. If the omens are also good, then
marriage takes place and one will enjoy happiness and wealth.
Stanza 13. Certain 'Nimittas' have been given in Chapter 2 and they are specially
useful in questions bearing on marriage. They can be skilfully utilised in this context.
Stanza 14. From the 1st part of the sloka "Kujendu", obstacles, etc., about the
menses and marriage should be ascertained. From the 2nd part should be gleaned the
possibility of marriage, etc.
NOTES
Varaha Mihira has given details about the menses in women in his Brihat Jataka, Chapter
4 beginning with the verses 'Kujendu hetu prathi maasa maarthavam...' In the first part of the
sloka, how marriage ceremonies are obstructed and in the 2nd part, certain signs that bring about
happy marriages are given. In Vivaha Muhurtha, if Mars aspected by the Moon occupies the 3rd,
6th, 10th and 11th, marriage will have to be postponed or stopped because of the monthly
menses (menstrual flow) of the bride. If he occupies even signs from the ascendant as the 2nd,
4th, 6th, 8th, 10th and 12th, marriage will not take place for the same reason. If the Moon
aspected by Jupiter occupies the 2nd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th and 12th (anupachaya rasis) marriage will
take place without any mishap. In the same manner, if he occupies odd signs from Lagna as the
3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th and 11th then also there will be no serious obstruction. If the Moon aspected by
Mars transits the 2nd, 5th and 6th Bhavas, the monthly menses will take place.
When the Moon aspected by Jupiter occupies other Bhavas, sexual union between
husband and wife takes place. In a question bearing on the birth of children (to be detailed later)
the monthly period can be fixed by noting the yoga-sphuta of the Moon and Mars. Conception
can be calculated on the basis of the Yoga — athonyathastha; Chandra Sphuta can be arrived at
from premgrahasthitai. Upaithe kamani gives the time of delivery. Thus we see that this stanza is
rich in meaning and has to be carefully applied in the context. It is said that this stanza indicates
even certain remedial measures to be performed to bring about happy consummation of marriage
as the worship of Sita, Rama, Krishna, Rukmini, etc.
Stanza 15. Marriage will not take place if the afflicted Moon occupies an even sign
from the Prasna Lagna or Arudha and the query is put in the period of the waning Moon.
The Moon in the 8th also indicates some obstacle for the marriage.
NOTES The above combinations are as given in Prasna Sangraha.
Stanza 16. If the querist happens to touch his arm, chest or head, marriage will take

place. If he however touches his feet, knees and knee-caps, the marriage will be delayed. If
he touches his left arm, his back, his hind waist, the marriage will not take place. If the
lords of the ascendant and the 7th or the lord of the ascendant and Venus interchange
houses, or occupy friendly places, or are exalted, or aspect each other, marriage will take
place.
NOTES
Here Arudha and the lord of the 7th from Arudha can also be taken into account for
purposes of predictions. It may be noted that the parts of the body to be touched for favourable
results are specially the erotic areas generally used by young couples. Those, not used, are
omitted.
Stanza 17. If malefics aspected by malefics are debilitated or placed in inimical signs
in the 8th, marriage will not take place for some reason or the other. If the malefics are in
the 6th, marriage does not take place because of disease to the couple. The same disposition
may also be the cause of breakdown of marriage negotiations due to quarrels amongst
relatives. If at the lime of query, animals, birds or serpents are found in the act of
cohabitation, then the girl's character will be questionable.
NOTES
This stanza enables us to anticipate on the basis of the query time whether or not
marriage negotiations will be fruitful.
(a) For the failure of negotiations due to some reason or the other malefic planets
aspected by malefics should be in the 8th, debilitated or in inimical signs, (b) Breakdown of
negotiations will be due to the illness of the couple if the malefics referred to in (a) are in the 6th,
subject to the same afflictions as mentioned supra, (c) The dispositions mentioned in (b) may
also indicate the failure of negotiations due to quarrels of relatives, (d) The girl's character will
be questionable — the author actually uses the word jaarini (adulteress) — if at the time of
query, animals, birds or serpents are found to be in copulation.
Here is a Prasna Chart (Chart 2) which is self-explanatory.
Example: 31-3-1983 at 6-30 p.m. (I.S.T.) at Bangalore.

Merc. 23-32
Mars 4-12
Venus 22-38
Rahu 6-26
Chart 2 RASI
Ketu 6-26
Jupit (R)
Sat. (R)
Moon 25-17
Lagna 18-31
Here (Chart 2) the 8th house is occupied by malefic Mars, though in own sign. Saturn
exalted aspects him. When the question was put whether the proposed alliance would
materialize, it was indicated it would not be successful. Although the 6th house directly is not
afflicted as per (c), the 6th lord Saturn retrograde and afflicted by Mars resulted in the parents of
the bride and groom quarrelling over the gifts to be made by the bride's party. The alliance broke
off because the girl's parents simply could not accommodate the avarice of the boy's parents.
Stanza 18. Both the husband and the wife will die in the 8th year after marriage if
the Moon, conjoined with evil planets, occupies the 8th or 6th house from Lagna. If the
Moon occupies the 6th or 8th house and at the same time if Mars occupies the 6tb or 8th
from the Moon, the husband and the wife will die in the 9th year of marriage without any
issue. If the Moon and Mars occupy the 7th house, death of the couple will be in the 7th
month after marriage.
NOTES
Death of the couple will take place in the 8th year if the afflicted Moon is in the 6th or
8th either from Lagna or Arudha Lagna. The calamity occurs in the 9th year, if in addition to the
combination just mentioned, Mars happens to occupy the 6th or 8th from the Moon. The couple
will pass away in the 7th month if both the Moon and Mars are in the 7th house. Here whenever
Lagna is mentioned, Arudha Lagna is also implied.
Stanza 19. If Yama Sukra (...) or the lord of the 10th house from him occupies the
6th, the 8th or the 12th from Arudha or if Venus occupies the 6th, the 8th or the 12th from
Yama Sukra, marriage will not take place at the time fixed. If Rahu or Ketu or Gulika
occupies or aspects the Yoga Sphuta formed by adding the longitudes of Yama Sukra, the
lord of Lagna, and Venus, the married couple will not have any happiness after marriage.

NOTES
The ascendant rising at ghatis 22, 18, 14, 10, 6, 2 and 26 after sunrise respectively on
Sunday to Saturday gives the position of Yama Sukra. Yama Sukra is said to rise at the times
given above on different weekdays.
The Yoga Sphuta referred to in this stanza is a point arrived at by adding the longitudes of
Yama Sukra, the lord of the ascendant and Venus.
Determination of Yama Sukra: Example: To determine Yama Sukra on 3-7-1982 at
Bangalore at 12 Hrs. I.S.T. Weekday — Saturday Sunrise — 5.55 a.m. L.M.T.
Yama Sukra rises at 26 gh. after sunrise on Saturday, i.e., at lOh. 24m. after sunrise.
Sunrise + lOh. 24m. - 16h. 19m. Lagna at 16h. 19m. L.M.T. = 19° 51' Scorpio Therefore Yama
Sukra 19° 5T Scorpio Lagna at 12h. I.S.T. = 13° 47’ Virgo Longitude of Venus 17° 02' Taurus.
Applying this stanza to the example, Scorpio should not be the 6th, 8th or 12th from
Arudha for the marriage to take place. Here it is the 12th from Arudha in Sagittarius.
The 10th lord from Yama Sukra (Scorpio) who is the Sun should also not occupy any of
the dusthanas from it. Here the Sun is in the 8th from Yama Sukra, again a factor against the
marriage taking place.
Rahu, Ketu or Gulika in Yoga Sphuta do not give happiness in marriage. The Nodes do
not afflict it but the majority of factors are against the marriage being happy.
Stanza 20. Remarriage takes place under the following lakshanas: The appearance
of a person with two women at the time of Prasna, sudden appearance of husband and wife
advanced in age, sight of an ox and a cow at the time, the completion of the Chakra Puja
not by one but by two persons, sounds from a distance; and appearance of all animals
which indulge in promiscuous union.
Stanza 21. Marriage function gets obstructed by the monthly period of the bride, if
red flowers, or blood or scratching of the body with the fingers are seen at the time of
Prasna. The cries of elephants and buffaloes, sight of red flowers and placing the gold-piece
either in the centre (padma) or in the lines in the chakra indicate dissolution of marriage.
Stanza 22. Separation of two persons hitherto clasped hand in hand, seeing either a
dead body or a man dying, and hearing words of dispute or quarrel indicates breakdown of
marriage. Below are given some lakshanas indicative of happy unions.
NOTES
Stanzas 20, 21 and 22 embody the lakshanas or indicative signs or omens which indicate
that marriages do not take place. The stanzas are clear and need no explanation.
Stanza 23. If at the time of Prasna merchants turn up selling clothes, or a person

dressed in unwashed clothes and holding a wasted cloth in his hands is seen; or any living
being engaged in sexual union is seen, marriage will take place immediately. Seeing a man
digging the ground or sawing wood, indicates that the woman in question is a bad one.
Stanza 24. If it is seen at the time of Prasna that the dress of any person is falling
away from his body, then it can be inferred that the girl is not chaste. The same can also be
said if the petty-coat of the girl falls away from her body.
Stanza 25. Marriage will take place soon if any of the following omens are observed
at the time of Prasna: (a) Merchants appear wishing to sell metallic vessels except brass
kettle; (b) a mirror made of brass or thumba flower, or articles made of silver — these are
seen at the time; (c) a person with sacred thread turns up neatly after oil-bath; and (d) any
person touches his eyes with his own hands.
Stanza 26. Early marriage is indicated if at the time of query two things intertwined
or closely bracketed are seen; a married couple comes at the time or is seen at a distance; a
person having woollen strings round his hands and legs is seen; a songster turns up either
singing or otherwise; or any sweet-smelling ointment as sandalwood is seen at the time.
NOTES
Stanzas 20 to 26 deal exclusively with nimittas or indicative signs or omens, on the basis
of which one can predict whether a proposed marriage takes place or whether it will break down.
The listing of these nimittas is significant. What keen observers were our ancient sages becomes
evident when we reflect that in nature nothing is left to chance or accident and that synchronicity
is the basis of events to happen. For example seeing a couple clasping their hands indicates
success. But the 'omen' as such may not influence the event. But an event and a related omen can
be synchronous phenomenon as Carl Jung has explained.
Stanza 27. If Venus and the lord of the 7th house occupy Upachayas, the couple will
be happy after marriage and beget children.
NOTES
The same principle can be extended to predict about issues, etc., thus: If Jupiter and the
lord of the 5th occupy Upachayas, there will be much prosperity after the birth of a child. If Mars
and the lord of the 3rd occupy the 3rd, the 6th or the 11th, there will be happiness after the birth
of a brother. Thus the Karaka and the various lords are to be considered. The above combinations
are as per Prasna Ratna.
Stanza 28. If the strong Moon and Venus occupy even signs and Navamsas and
aspect Lagna, a person will be able to marry the girl in view early.
NOTES
This combination is applicable both to the birth and horary charts.

Stanza 29. If the ascendant is in a female Drekkana and an even Navamsa aspected
by the Moon and Venus, marriage will take place soon.
NOTES This yoga can be usefully applied to a male chart.
Stanza 30. Benefics in kendras and trikonas and the 7th house, owned and aspected
by benefics, bring in a beautiful bride to the person. If the 7th house is owned by a malefic,
the wife will not be good-looking.
NOTES
This Yoga also can be applied in reading the 7th house in the horoscope of a male. The
above is from Prasna Sangraha.
Stanza 31. If the Moon aspected by benefics occupies the 3rd, the 6th, the 7th, the
10th or the 11th from Lagna (or Arudha); or Venus and the Moon occupy Lagna or the 7th,
the Lagna happening to be Gemini or Virgo or Libra or Aquarius; or Mercury, Venus and
Jupiter occupy quadrants or the 7th house, then marriage takes place early.
Stanza 32. If in a horary chart the ascendant, the 5th, the 8th and the 9th are
associated with or aspected by their respective lords and are devoid of malefic aspects or
associations then only good will happen to the couple after marriage. If otherwise, no wise
man should have the marriage celebrated. If the Lagna and the Moon are in benefic
Navamsas, good will result. If they are in the Navamsas of malefics, death may occur.
NOTES
If at the time of query the ascendant, the 5th, the 7th, the 8th and the 9th houses are free
from the affliction of evil planets but are associated with or aspected by their respective lords or
benefics, then the married couple will be happy after the marriage. If none of these are so
situated, marriage will bring only evil. Hence it should not be recommended. If the ascendant
and the Moon occupy the Navamsas of benefics, good will be the result. If they, however,
occupy evil Navamsas, evil alone will happen.
The ascendant in Chart 1 has Mars and Saturn who also aspect the 7th. Mars and Jupiter
aspect the 8th. The 5th is not aspected by any planet while the 9th is associated with Mercury
and Venus. The minus points are more in evidence.
In the Navamsa, Lagna is a benefic sign Taurus but the Moon is in a malefic sign.
Further, the Navamsa may be referred to only when the Rasi is satisfactory. Here since the Rasi
chart itself does not ensure happiness, the Navamsa may be shelved.
Stanza 33. The married couple will die if malefics are debilitated or are in
unfriendly signs in the 1st, the 7th and the 8th.
NOTES
According to Brihaspati, debilitated malefics should occupy the ascendant, the 7th or the

8th; or these houses should be the unfriendly places to the malefics in the Prasna chart. The result
is, the husband and wife will die. The likely periods are the Dasas and Bhuktis of the malefic
planets referred to above.
Stanza 34. A malefic planet in debilitation in the 5th house, aspected by inimical
planets, indicates that the woman is of questionable character or her children will die.
NOTES
If the 5th is afflicted by the presence of a debilitated planet or the aspect of an inimical
planet, the wife is said to be unchaste or her children will die. The author appears to be
somewhat vague. Which result — the woman becoming unchaste or her children dying — will
hold good ? The interpretation is left to the intelligence of the astrologer. What we feel is, if the
5th house is afflicted as per the stanza, but Venus is clean and well disposed, no reflection can be
cast on the character of the woman. One should be very careful in matters of judging the chastity
or otherwise of a woman.
Stanza 35. If the 5th house is afflicted by malefic planets, the woman will not bear
any children. If at all children are born, they will die. If these malefics are debilitated or in
inimical signs, the mother will kill her children.
NOTES
A mother to kill her children must indeed be hard-hearted and cruel. There are of course
some mothers who kill their children for various reasons. Poverty may be one of the reasons.
And questionable character — the mother having extra marital relations — may make the mother
resort to the crime of infanticide. The same combination is expected to result in either the death
of children or the killing of the children by the mother. To judge the latter crime the Moon's
affliction and any combination for adultery should be carefully identified.
The above two stanzas are from Anushtana Paddhati.
Stanza 36. If the lord of the 7th house is strong, the querist will marry in a good and
rich family. If the lord of the 7th is weak or occupies a debilitation sign or an unfriendly
house, he will marry an ugly-looking wife from a poor and bad family.
NOTES
According to this stanza we can say that the person gets a beautiful and good wife and
probably handsome gifts also if the lord of the 7th is well placed and strong: otherwise the wife
will not be good looking, she hails from a bad family and cannot hope to bring in any material
benefits. In these days when acceptance of dowry is illegal, astrological interpretation should be
skilfully done.
Stanza 37. If the female planets are in a friendly sign aspecting Lagna which must
be a male sign, the wife will love the husband. Otherwise the result will be contrary.

NOTES
This stanza refers to ’stree-graha' or female planets and they are the Moon and Venus.
They should occupy friendly signs and aspect the ascendant which should happen to be a
masculine sign. When this combination occurs, the husband gets a loving wife. Here even one
female planet (Venus or the Moon) can cause the yoga. Suppose Sagittarius is the ascendant and
Venus aspects it from Gemini, a friendly sign. The husband gets a loving wife. Applying this to a
male horoscope, if a male planet (Sun, Mars or Jupiter) is in a friendly sign and aspects the
Lagna which must be an even sign, the husband will love the wife.
All such combinations should be skilfully and not literally interpreted in order to arrive at
correct conclusions.
Stanza 38. The effects of Trimsamsa are explained in the chapter on the horoscopy
of women by Varahamihira. These also should be suitably applied to Prasna charts bearing
on marriage.
NOTES
Such importance has been given to Varahamihira's Brihat Jataka by the author of this
work that Mihira is often quoted and referred to with respect.
In the chapter on "Female Horoscopy", the great Mihira has dealt with the significance of
trimsamsas in the horoscopes of women, especially in assessing their character. This same
subject has been dealt with exhaustively in the book Female Horoscopy by the late Prof. B.
Suryanarain Rao. A careful reading of this book is also recommended.
Stanza 39. If at the time of query a girl of marriageable age appears, or a story
about her is heard, the bride will be similar in complexion, shape, conduct, etc., as the girl
seen or heard of. The place of the bride can be known from the stronger of the lords of
Lagna and Arudha. If the girl's radical Moon happens to be the same as the Arudha Lagna
in the Prasna chart, the couple will live long and beget children.
NOTES
At the time of Prasna, it may so happen that a girl of marriageable age is seen or the
voice of a girl is heard. The bride will be similar in colour, shape and conduct to the one you
happen to see or hear. The place of the bride can be known from the lords of Arudha and Lagna,
whoever is stronger. The girl's Rasi or Moon-sign must be that of Arudha. If such a girl is
selected, the married couple will live long and happily. They will have prosperous children.
Stanza 40. The time, when marriage takes place, is to be known thus: When the
Moon transits the Moon's Dwadasamsa Rasi, or its 5th or the 9th or the Chandrabhilasha
Rasi, or the Navamsa Rasi of the lord of the 7th.
NOTES

When the Prasna chart indicates marriage, we can predict that the marriage will take
place when the Moon transits
(a) the sign signified by his own Dwadasamsa position;
(b) the 5th or 9th from it; or (c) Chandrabhilasha sign — this is explained in the next
stanza — or the (d) Navamsa Rasi of the lord of the 7th.
For example let us assume that the Lagna is Sagittarius, and the Moon is 21° Taurus and
Mercury is 15° Gemini which means the Moon occupies Capricorn Dwadasamsa. Lord of the 7th
Mercury is in Aquarius Navamsa. If the Prasna chart shows marriage, then it can take place (a)
when the Moon transits Capricorn; or (b) Taurus or Libra; or (c) Chandrabhilasha sign; or (d)
Aquarius. Here as usual the astrologer's experience and intuition must help him to pinpoint
which of these four alternatives holds good.
Stanza 41. Divide the Moon's longitude (in minutes) by 800. Call the remainder (a).
Multiply (a) by 3. Divide the product by 200- The quotient is the Chandrabhilasha sign.
The remainder multiplied by 30 and divided by 200 gives the degrees. Again multiply (a) by
9. Divide the product by 200. The quotient represents the Chandravela longitude.
NOTES
Chandrabhilasha sign and Chandravela sign are two different factors.
Example: Chart 3: 8-30 p.m. on 24-5-1984 at Bangalore.
Moon = 332° OF in Rasi.
When the Moon transits Pisces (Dwadasamsa) Rasi, or the 5th (Cancer) or the 9th
(Scorpio) from Pisces, marriage may take place. It can also occur when he transits Leo, the sign
occupied by the 7th lord Mercury in Navamsa. Determination of Chandrabhilasha sign:
The Moon's longitude-332 0 OF = 1992F
(i) 19921/800 = 24 and remainder 721

Moon 2-10
Mercury 16Venus 5-20
Rahu 15
Sat.
Sun
Rahu Mars
Lagna
Chart 3 RASI
Venus
NAVAMSA
Moon
Mercury
Lagna 7-03
Jupit.(R)
Ketu 15
00 Mars (R>
Ketu
Jupit.(R)
(iv) Chandrabhilasha Sign - Aquarius 24.45 degrees.
Determination of Chandravela sign: (i) a x 9 = 721 x 9 = 6489
Expunging multiples of 12, we get 10s 6.75 degrees Chandravela = Aquarius 6.75
degrees.
Stanza 42. After studying the Prasna chart in this manner and noting fully the auspicious
or inauspicious nature of Sakunas, if the Muhurtha for the wedding is selected, everything will
end well.
Thus ends the Chapter XVII

CHAPTER XVIII
Sanihathi Prasna (Children)
Stanza 1.1 shall describe in this chapter the query bearing on the birth of children.
All queries should be put at an auspicious moment.
NOTES
Since time plays an important part in shaping the course of actions, the author suggests
that it is necessary that queries are put at auspicious moments.
Stanza 2. A lady cohabiting with her husband at an auspicious moment will be
blessed with children soon. All good actions should be conducted at auspicious moments.
Similarly all queries regarding marriage, wealth, cohabitation, etc., should be made at a
chosen time when the ascendant and planets are beneficially disposed.
Stanza 3. A query regarding children should be made thus: "will this person
named., and born in the constellation of... get a son from this woman named and born in
the constellation of...."
Stanza 4. A santhathi Prasna (query bearing of children) is applicable to both
husband and wife. The Lagna signifies matters pertaining to the husband and Arudha
Lagna reveals everything about the wife. This is the view of Prasna Sangraha.
Stanza 5. If both the lords of Arudha and the 9th from it are in combustion, there is
something wrong in the 'womb' (kshetra) of the wife; in which case the man has to marry
again for the sake of children If both the lords of the Lagna and the 5th from it are in
combustion, there is some trouble in the beeja (seed) of the husband, in which case, worship
of Vishnu and Brahmins should be resorted to.
NOTES
If it is found that kshetra and beeja are afflicted, one can safely predict that the couple
will have no children. What is to be noted is that in a female horoscope, the 9th house is the seat
of children, while in a male horoscope the 5th house governs children.
Stanza 6. When the Moon occupies upachayas from Arudha and anupachaya from
the ascendant; when Arudha happens to fall in a female sign while Lagna happens to be a
male Rasi; when Agni-bhuta rises in the ascendant; and when the tree, governed by the
constellation occupied by Jupiter, bears no fruits at the time of Prasna, the prediction can
be given that it is difficult to have issues.
NOTES
The Prasna chart does not indicate the birth of children under the following
combinations:

(1) The Moon occupies the 3rd, the 6th, the 10th and the 11th from Arudha Lagna and the
2nd, the 4th, the 5th, the 7th, the 8th, the 9th and the 12th from the ascendant.
(2) Arudha Lagna is a feminine sign and the Prasna Lagna is a masculine sign.
(3) Agnibhuta rises in the ascendant.
(4) The tree ruled by the constellation occupied by Jupiter is not yielding fruit at the time
of query.
The various Tatwas, such as Agni, etc., have been explained in Chapter 14 of the first part
to which the reader may refer for details.
The above stanza is from Santana Deepika.
Stanza 7. The combinations for childlessness, adoption, death of children, birth of
few children, and having many issues, etc., are now dealt with.
Stanza 8. If Jupiter, the lord of Lagna and the lords of the 5th and the 7th are all
weak, the questioner will have no children.
Stanza 9. If malefics are in the 5th and the lord of the 5th house is hemmed in
between malefics and is devoid of benefic aspect, then childlessness will result.
NOTES
According to another version the lord of the 5th is to be debilitated (neecha samsthite):
The 9th from Arudha Lagna and the 5th from the ascendant are the houses of issues.
Stanza 10. If malefics occupy the 5th from the ascendant, the Moon and Jupiter, and
they are not aspected by benefics, anapatya yoga results.
Stanza 11. If a sign owned by Mercury or Saturn happens to be the 5th house and it
is aspected by or associated with Saturn and Gulika, one will have to go in for adoption.
Stanza 12. The native will have no natural issue but will have to adopt one if a
strong benefic planet occupies the 5th house without the aspect from the lord of the 5th
house.
Stanza 13. If Pisces or Capricorn happening to be the 5th house is occupied by
Jupiter, the native suffers from sorrow due to loss of children. If Cancer happening to be
the 5th is occupied by Jupiter, he will have a number of female children, so say the sages.
NOTES
Stanzas 5 to 13 list the combinations for birth of children, death of children, childlessness
(or anapat a yoga) and adoption. The stanzas are clear and need no further exemplification.
In stanza 5, there is a reference to Beeja and Kshetra. This subject has been exhaustively
dealt with in my book How To JUDGE A HOROSCOPE Volume I, to which the interested reader
may refer. When Beeja is afflicted, the husband, despite normal functions of the generative
system, lacks the subtle energy in the sperm to impregnate the wife. When the Kshetra is

afflicted, even though the wife's womb, etc., may be normal she lacks the subtle energy to
conceive. A careful study of Beeja and Kshetra theory is very necessary.
While there is the general dictum that Jupiter as karaka of children, placed in the house of
children, destroys the house, the author appears to extend the principle further when he says, on
the authority of ancient sages, that Jupiter in the 5th identical with Capricorn or Pisces makes
one suffer from sorrow due to death of children. If Pisces is to be the 5th, the ascendant must be
Scorpio. If Jupiter is in the 5th, his functions as karaka and lord become identical. He will also
aspect the Lagna. Yet the result is highly unfavourable. Again when one is born in Pisces and has
Jupiter in the 5th (Cancer) he will have a number of daughters. On the face of it, this yoga could
be considered improbable. But the author says it is the opinion of the sages. These combinations
should be balanced in the light of other favourable or unfavourable factors influencing the house
of children.
Stanza 14. If the debilitated lord of the 5th occupies the 8th which should be an
inimical sign devoid of aspects of benefics and the lord of the 8th is in the 5th, there will be
loss of children.
Stanza 15. If Jupiter is hemmed in between malefics and the 5th lord is weak
without being aspected by or associated with benefics, there will be loss of children.
NOTES
In the above stanzas, the affliction of the 5th lord and Jupiter are considered for loss of
children. In the same way, if the 5th house is hemmed in between malefics and devoid of benefic
aspects and the 5th lord is also subject to afflictions, there will be loss of children.
Stanza 16. According to experts in astrology there will be loss of children if the lord
of the 5th is debilitated, occupies an inimical place or is combust; or is associated with the
lords of the 6th, the 8th or the 12th; or if the lord of the 5th occupying the 5th is unaspected
by benefics.
Stanza 17. The native will have children if the lord of the 5th is strong, is in
association with or aspected by the lord of the ascendant and the 5th house is free from
affliction.
Stanza 18. There will be birth of children if Mars occupies the 5th house which must
be Aries, Leo, Scorpio or Pisces and which must have the benefic aspect of Jupiter.
NOTES
The term used in the original is putravaaptim which ordinarily means, a son will be bom.
But I have interpreted the term liberally to imply children in general.
Stanza 19. If the 5th house is hemmed in between and aspected by benefics or
conjoined with or aspected by the lord of the 5th, birth of children occurs.

Stanza 20. If the strong lord of the 5th occupies any house other than the 6th, the
8th or the 12th and has the aspect or conjunction of a benefic planet, 'birth of children' can
be predicted.
Stanza 21. If the strong lord of the 5th occupies the ascendant, the 5th or the 7th and
is without any aspect or conjunction of malefics, there will be birth of issues.
Stanza 22. If strong Jupiter occupies the ascendant or the 5th or the 7th house and is
unaspected by malefics, children will be born.
NOTES
Almost all the above stanzas emphasise the benefic disposition of the lord of the 5th, the
5th notise and Jupiter to ensure birth of children, Jupiter can be considered strong in Pisces,
Cancer and Sagittarius. He gets digbala in the ascendant. But in stanza 21, the 7th house is also
mentioned along with the ascendant and the 5th house to ensure birth of progeny.
Stanza 23. If the lord of the 5th endowed with strength is between benefics or
aspected by benefics, birth of children is indicated.
Stanza 24. Ancient preceptors aver that many children will be born if Venus, Jupiter
and Mercury and the lord of the 5th conjoin or aspect the 5th house. The number of
children depends on the strength of the lord of the 5th.
Stanza 25. The learned say that many issues will be born, if the lord of the 5th is in
exaltation, occupies an odd Navamsa, is aspected by benefic planets, and the 5th house is
free from affliction.
Stanza 26. If the lord of the 5th, the Sun, Mars and Jupiter occupy odd signs and
Navamsas, a large number of sons will be born. If the lord of the 5th is strong, the sons will
be good-natured.
NOTES
The Sun, Jupiter and Mars should no doubt occupy odd signs. But their occupation of the
6th, the 8th and the 12th is not desirable. When the lord of the 5th is strong one begets a suputra
or a son endowed with the best qualities of affection, obedience and sense of duty towards his
parents.
Stanza 27. If the lord of the 5th, the Moon and Venus join an even sign and an even
Navamsa, a large number of daughters will be born.
Stanza 28. If Lagna happens to be the Moon's Hora and the breath of the astrologer
flows through the left nostril; if Lagna is in the Sun's Hora and the breath flows through
the right side, then there will be issues.
NOTES
If the Lagna is in the Moon's Hora and the astrologer at the time is breathing through the

left nostril, a daughter will be born. If the ascendant falls in the Sun's Hora and the breath flows
through the right nostril, a son will be bom.
We give the following extracts from another version of the MSS.
Issues will not be born if the ascendant is in Surya (Sun's) Hora, breath passes through
the right nostril and Arudha and Lagna are in odd signs.
The ascendant is in Chandra Hora. Breath passes through the right side. The Moon,
Lagna and Arudha are in Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio. There will be no issues.
The ascendant is in the Sun's Hora; the Moon, Lagna and Arudha occupy Taurus, Leo,
Virgo and Scorpio. Agnibhuta rises in the ascendant. No issues will be born. According to some,
the presence of Agnibhuta is necessary for all the above yogas to cause the results attributed to
them. According to some others, the presence of Agnibhuta alone constitutes a separate yoga and
denies the birth of children. For our part, we have not tested these yogas and hence we cannot
vouchsafe for their accuracy or otherwise: But the teachings of the masters merit our attention.
Stanza 29. If the lord of the 5th occupies the ascendant, the 7th or the 5th house; or
the lords of the 1st and the 7th join the 5th house; or the lord of the 5th or Jupiter joins the
ascendant; there will be birth of children. In a question bearing on children Jupiter should
also be considered as lord of children.
Stanza 30. The lord of the ascendant and the 5th are in conjunction or they aspect
each other; or they interchange signs. This yoga gives issue to the native.
Stanza 31. If the Moon occupies Anupachaya Rasis from Arudha, children will be
born. If it is in the reverse, no issue will be the result The ascendant governs the husband.
The opposite view is expressed in his work on Muhurtha by Madhava.
NOTES
The translation of these slokas has not been done literally. When there is a repetition in
the original it is generally omitted. According to this sloka, the Moon's situation in anupachaya
signs (other than the 3rd, the 6th, the 10th and the 11th) from Arudha denies birth of children,
which means the Arudha rules the wife and the ascendant has governance on the husband.
Madhava, the celebrated author of the great work Madhaveeya does not accept this view.
Stanza 32. If the menstrual flow happens at a time when the Moon aspected by
Mars occupies Anupachaya Rasis, the sexual union that takes place after this will cause
impregnation. Otherwise the sexual intercourse will be barren of results. The time for
fruitful sexual commerce is the day when the Moon aspected by Jupiter occupies Upachaya
Rasis from the ascendant of the husband. Favourable times for impregnation are the Moola
asterism and other muhurhas. Parva should be avoided.
NOTES

The author gives fruitful or fertile periods for impregnation. The menstrual flow occurs
when the Moon receiving the aspect of Mars occupies an anupachaya Rasi (the 2nd, the 4th, the
5th, the 7th, the 8th, the 9th and the 12th) from the position of the radical Moon in the wife's
horoscope. When the sex congress takes place after this, conception results. If on the contrary the
menstrual flow takes place when the Moon aspected by Mars is in an upachaya place (the 3rd,
the 6th, the 10th or the 11th) from the radical Moon of the wife the sexual union will not result in
conception. Sexual union if done on a day when the Moon aspected by Jupiter occupies the 3rd,
the 6th, the 10th or the 11th from the radical Moon of the husband, or in the constellation of
Moola and asterisms declared to be good for the first feeding of the child will result in
conception. For impregnating the wife, the 8th lunar day, vishti, riktha and athira karanas,
sraddha (annual ceremony) days, etc., should be avoided.
Stanza 33. Many methods are employed to determine the question of the birth of
children. T shall give below a method I got from my preceptor.
Stanza 34. The longitudes of the ascendant and Yamakantaka, correctly worked out,
should be added together. The relative strengths of the resulting Rasi and Navamsa should
be noted and the stronger of the two should be considered for answering the query
regarding children.
NOTES
Example 1: Weekday — Saturday.
Sunrise — 6.15 a.m. (Yamakantaka rises at 18 ghatis after sunrise on Saturdays).
18 ghatis = 18 x 24 mins. - 432 minutes = 7h 12m after sunrise
Sunrise + 7h 12m = 13h 27m.
The Lagna rising at I3h 27m LMT gives the position of Yamakantaka on the day in
question.
Example 2:
Let Lagna be - 143° 20'
Let Yamakantaka be = 136° 15'.
Lagna + Yamakantaka = 279° 35' or Capricorn 9° 35' (Rasi) and Pisces (Navamsa). The
stronger of Capricorn and Pisces is the Yogasphuta and should be considered for answering
questions on children.
Stazna 35. If this Yogasphuta happens to be an Urdhwamukha, Urdhvodaya, or odd
sign and conjoined with or aspected by benefic planets, the birth of a child occurs at a very
early date.
NOTES
Yogasphuta is the sign and Navamsa arrived at as per stanza 34. Urdhwamukha signs are

also called Urdhvodaya or Sirodaya signs. They are Gemini, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio and
Aquarius. These signs, except Gemini, are powerful during day.
If, for example, the Yogasphuta happens to be Leo and benefics such as Jupiter, Venus or
well-associated Mercury join or aspect it, then we may conclude the birth of a child will occur at
a not too late date.
Stanza 36. If the Yogasphuta falls in Prishto-daya, Adhomukha and an even sign
conjoined with or aspected by malefics and neutral planets, no children will be born. If
however the sphuta falls in a male sign and male Navamsa, child-birth is indicated.
NOTES
Adhomukha signs known also as Prushtodaya signs are Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Sagittarius
and Capricorn. These along with Gemini are powerful during night.
Pisces forms a combination of both Urdhwamukha and Adhomukha and is called
Ubhayodaya Rasi with power both during day and night.
For example, if Yogasphuta falls in Taurus which is an Adhomukha sign and also even
and planets such as ill-associated Mercury, the Sun, Saturn, Mars or Rabu-Ketu influence it by
aspect or occupation, no children will be born. However, if for instance, Yogasphuta falls in
Aries 15° 19', a Prishto-daya sign, so that its Navamsa is Leo, both signs being male and other
relevant factors also favourable would indicate birth of a child.
Stanza 37. The Yogasphuta obtained by adding the longitudes of Yamakantaka and
Arudha Lagna treated in the same way as before indicates whether the woman is barren or
can have children.
NOTES
The Yogasphuta referred to here is different from the Yogasphuta dealt with in stanza 34.
But this Yogasphuta should be analysed in the same manner as indicated for stanza 34 to find out
the barrenness or otherwise of the wife.
Stanza 38. Jupiter, the lord of the 5th and Yamakantaka are associated with or are
aspected by malefic planets and are devoid of aspects of benefics; they occupy Anishta
Bhavas in even signs and in even Navamsas; the 5th house is afflicted; Santhana Tithi turns
out to be after the 8th day in the dark half of the lunar month: If all these afflictions are
present, we can prognosticate that no child will be born. If however only some of these
afflictions are found, children will be born after suitable remedial measures.
NOTES
Anishta Bhavas are the 6th, the 8th and the 12th houses. The lunar day on which the
query is put is Santhana Tithi. If all the factors are afflicted there will be no progeny. If some are
afflicted, remedial measures may be resorted to.

As per this stanza, factors favouring no birth of children, are (a) Jupiter, the lord of the
5th and Yamakantaka should be afflicted.
(b) They should occupy the 6th, the 8th and the 12th houses.
(c) They should be in even signs and even Navamsas.
(d) The 5th house should also be afflicted.
(e) The query should have been put after the 8th day of the dark half of the lunar month.
If all the five factors obtain, there will be no birth of children. If only two or three are
present, then one can have issues by performing remedial measures such as gifts, worship, etc.
Stanza 39. If Jupiter, lord of the 5th and Yamakantaka are not aspected by or
associated with malefic or eunuch planets, and associated with or aspected by benefics, and
the 5th house falls in an odd Rasi and an odd Navamsa; and if Santhana Tithi happens to
fall in the bright, half after the 5th lunar day, there will be birth of children.
Stanza 40. If the lord of the 5th from Lagna Dwadasamsa Rasi, occupies the Lagna,
a child will be born within a year. The child will be born in as many years as is signified by
the number of the house the said lord is in, from the Lagna. If he occupies the 6th, the 8th
or the 12th, no child will be born.
NOTES
In this stanza, the author gives the time of the birth of an issue. The lord of the 5th house
from the Rasi signified by the Dwadasamsa Rasi of the Lagna occupies some house. In so many
years the child will be born. Suppose the Lagna is Aquarius 16°. It falls in the 7th Dwadasamsa
which means Leo. If the lord of the 5th from Leo is in Lagna, an issue will be born in one year. If
he is in the 2nd, the 3rd, the 4th or the 5th, then the issue will be born respectively in the 2nd, the
3rd the 4th or the 5th year. If the lord is in the 7th, the 9th, the 10th or the 11th, the issue will be
bom after remedial measures. If he is in the 6th, the 8th or the 12th, no issue will be born.
Stanza 41. When Jupiter transits the 5th, the 7th, the 9th or the 11th from the Rasi
or Navamsa Rasi, whichever is stronger, of the Yogasphuta (mentioned in stanza 34), and
the transited Rasi is aspected by or associated with benefics, there will be birth of an issue.
If on the other hand the transited Rasi is afflicted by malefics, pregnancy will not bear
fruit.
Stanza 42. There will be birth of a child if the point arrived at by adding together
the longitudes of the ascendant, the Moon, Yamakantaka and Gulika falls in an odd sign
and an odd Navamsa and a kendra or a trikona from Jupiter and if Mercury, Saturn, Rahu
or Ketu are not in a kendra or trikona.
Stanza 43. If sexual union takes place when Jupiter is in the Rasi or Navamsa
occupied by the lord of the 5th, the Sun is in the Rasi and Navamsa occupied by the lord of

the Navamsa Lagna, and the Moon is in the Rasi and Navamsa occupied by the lord of
Lagna, the woman will conceive and give birth to a child.
NOTES
I met a Panicker, well-versed in Prasna Marga during one of my visits to Kerala.
According to him, stanza 43 is to be understood thus:
Jupiter's Navamsa must be in the sign occupied by the lord of the 5th. The Sun's
Navamsa must be in the sign occupied by the lord of the 5th from the Navamsa-Rasi of Lagna.
The Moon's Navamsa must be in the sign occupied by the lord of the ascendant. Sexual union
taking place under this planetary set-up results in pregnancy and birth of a child.
Of course I have my own reservations about his interpretation.
Example: Chart 3.
Lagna
Sun
Venus
Chart 3 RASI
NAVAMSA
Moon
Sun
Moon
Mercury
Venus
Merc.
Lagna
The 5th lord. Mercury is in Libra Rasi and Sagittarius Navamsa.
Jupiter in transit should be in one of these signs.
Navamsa Lagna being Virgo, its ruler is Mercury who is in Libra Rasi and Sagittarius
Navamsa. The Sun should occupy Libra or Sagittarius in transit.
The lord of Lagna Venus is in Virgo Rasi and Taurus Navamsa. The transit Moon should
be in Taurus or Virgo.
When sexual union takes place under such a planetary set-up in gochara (transit), the
woman conceives successfully.
Between the Rasi and the Navamsa Rasi, the stronger one is to be considered.
The combinations, given in this stanza, are according to our author, a secret clue given by
his own Guru.

Stanza 44. Ascertain the day on which the Moon transits the Dwadasamsa Rasi of
the sum of the longitudes of the ascendant and the Moon; the month when the Sun transits
the sign signified by the sum of the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon; the year, when
Jupiter transits the sign obtained by adding the longitudes of the ascendant, the Moon and
Jupiter; and the exact Rasi by adding the longitudes of the ascendant, the Sun, the Moon
and Gulika. If sexual union takes place under the above set-up, pregnancy results in the
birth of a child.
NOTES
This stanza enables one to fix up a time for the sexual union to result in conception and
later on in the birth of an issue.
The above stanza is represented by the following formula:
Year: Lagna + Moon + Jupiter - a
Month: Sun + Moon.b
Day: (Lagna + Moon).= c
Dwadasamsa Rasi of c gives the day.
Time: Lagna + Sun + Moon + Gulika = d.
The year Jupiter transits a, the month when the Sun transits b, the day when the Moon
transits the Dwadasamsa Rasi of c and the time when d rises on Lagna is the appropriate time for
sexual union.
Whenever Rasi is mentioned it automatically follows that the Navamsa Rasi is also
implied. Thus if the Sun 4 the Moon is in Aquarius Rasi and Libra Navamsa, the stronger of the
two must be considered.
Here is a method of determining the fertile period for sexual congress. Childless couples
wishing for children can time their unions in accordance with the formula given here.
Stanza 45. The planets that join or aspect the lord of the 5th house (or the sign and
Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 5th) indicate the caste of the woman through whom a
child is to be born. If the lord of the 5th is aspected by Jupiter and Venus, the querist will
have issues through his own wife.
NOTES
The strongest of (a) the planets that join the lord of the 5th, (b) the planets that aspect the
lord of the 5th, or (c) the sign and Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 5th will give the clue to
predict the caste of the woman who begets the child. Jupiter and Venus aspecting the 5th or lord
of the 5th is enough to suggest that the issue will be through the wedded wife.
Most of the classical writers agree on legitimate issue, i.e., through one's wedded wife if
Jupiter is involved.

According to Varahamihira in his Brihat Jataka, the Sun and Mars rule the kingly caste
(Kshatriyas or warrior races) and royalty, the Moon and Mercury indicate Vaisyas (trading
community). Jupiter and Venus indicate Brahmins, Saturn Chandalas or outcastes and Ketu and
Rahu, the demoniacal or the very heterodox, foreigners, non-Hindus, etc. Depending upon the
planet involved, the caste of the woman who will bear one's issue can be made out.
Stanza 46. If the Yogasphuta formed by adding the longitudes of the ascendant and
Yama-kantaka happens to be in a common sign, no child will be born. If the Yogasphuta is
afflicted by malefics, the wife will be barren. If the Sphuta is in Virgo and aspected by
Mercury and Saturn, he will have two adopted children.
NOTES
Stanza 46 gives three combinations for childlessness, barrenness and adoption. They can
be listed serially as follows:
(a) Call the point arrived at by adding the longitudes of the ascendant and Yamakantaka
as x.
(b) If x falls in a common sign, no child is born.
(c) If x is afflicted by the aspect of or association with malefics, the wife will be barren
(d) If x happens to fall in Virgo and is aspected by Mercury and Saturn, two children will
be adopted.
My discussions with some pandits experienced in the techniques of Prasna Marga have
revealed that according to them the combination can deny the birth of a child from the first wife,
which implies (according to the then prevailing custom) that the native would marry a second
wife for begetting a child. What if the second marriage also failed to give a child ? The pandits
say that if x occupies Sagittarius (instead of Virgo), the first wife gets a child after the second
marriage. If x is in Pisces, he marries a third wife from whom he gets an issue. If it is situated in
a common sign and receives the aspect of benefics or benefics conjoin it, all the three wives will
beget issues.
In the light of the modern social set-up, the details furnished here could be of only
academic interest.
Stanza 47. If the Yogasphuta is conjoined with Mars and Saturn and aspected by the
Sun and Mercury, adopted children quarrel. If Jupiter and Venus associate or aspect the
2nd, the adopted child will be cordial towards its parents.
NOTES
If x referred to in the previous stanza has the association of Mercury and Saturn and the
aspect of the Sun, the two adopted children will not get on well. If instead of the Sun, Jupiter and
Venus aspect, the child adopted for the second time will prosper and will not be quarrelsome. In

other words, the adoption will be a success.
When Mercury is in conjunction with x, the Sun cannot aspect it as Mercury can never be
situated beyond 37° from the Sun. It is not clear whether any partial aspect is hinted at.
With stanza 47 the subject of children ends.
Stanza 48. The question regarding the future of the child in the womb is known as
"garbha prasna" it is to be answered thus.
Stanza 49 The Garbha Prasna Lagna (progeny — ascendant) is the Yogasphuta
formed by adding the ascendant and Yamakantaka. Details about the mother have to be
read from this ascendant and the Moon. The 7th house from this point and the Sun
represent the father. The nature of the progeny, etc., should be ascertained from Jupiter.
NOTES
x referred to in the notes under stanza 46 and the Moon enable us to get details about the
mother; the 7th from x and the Sun indicate details about the father. Jupiter's position will reveal
whether or not the pregnancy leads to birth of an issue.
Stanza 50. The ascendant, the Moon, the 7th house, the Sun and Jupiter weak and
aspected by malefics cause the death of the parents. If Jupiter alone is strong, the child
alone will survive.
NOTES
In the query chart the ascendant, the Moon, the Sun, the 7th house and Jupiter should all
be rendered weak (nirveerya) and aspected by malefics (asubhair vilokyate). The above given
factors can become weak if joined by malefics. If malefics aspect or conjoin, then the factors
become weak and the parents and the child in the womb will all die. If Jupiter is rendered strong,
the child survives but the father and mother may die.
Stanza 51. If the ascendant, the lord of the ascendant and the Moon are weak being
afflicted by malefic planets, the pregnant woman will die. If Jupiter is weak, the child also
will die. If the 7th house, the lord of the 7th, and the Sun are all afflicted, the father will die.
Here again if Jupiter is strong, the father will die, only after the safe delivery of the child.
Stanza 52. The Sun in association with Mars indicates illness to father. The Moon
with Saturn denotes illness to mother. If the Moon is aspected by some malefics and
associated with some malefics amongst the three viz.. Mars, Saturn and Rahu, then the
woman will die in her pregnancy. If the Sun is afflicted by the three malefics and is devoid
of benefic influence, the father of the child will die before its birth. The child will die if
Jupiter is afflicted.
NOTES
The death of the mother and the father and the child in the womb and whether the father

alone dies and if so before or after the birth of the child, can all be predicted by a careful
consideration of the combinations listed in this stanza. When the word 'afflicted' is used, it
implies that the planet concerned is either aspected by or conjoined with a malefic or malefics
and is not subject to any benefic influences. The three powerful malefics are Mars, Saturn and
Rahu. The intensity of the affliction depends upon the number of malefics involved. If all the
malefics cause the affliction and if any benefics affect the affliction, then the prediction is to be
accordingly modified.
Stanza 53. If in the query chart malefics occupy the 12th from the point arrived at
by adding the longitudes of the lord of the 12th house and Jupiter, the birth of an issue is
denied. If this affliction is found in the birth charts of the couple, the indicated event is
bound to happen.
If the asterism obtained by the addition of the longitudes of Gulika and
Yamakantaka, happens to be the 3rd, the 5th or 7th from the natal stars of the wife and
husband, there will be no issue.
NOTES
According to some, besides the longitudes of Jupiter and the lord of the 12th house, the
longitude of Arudha Lagna should also be added and the resulting sign considered. The stanza
says — ripha jeevayoga bhavanete — the longitudes of the lord of the 12th (ripha) and Jupiter
(jeeva). How or why Arudha is to be included, is not quite clear.
Stanza 54. If Rahu occupies the 5th house or associates with the lord of the 5th
unaspected by benefics, the child dies due to the curse of the serpent-god.
Stanza 55. If Saturn conjoins with Gulika in the ascendant, the 5th or the 9th
without any aspect of benefic planets, death of the issue is due to ancestral curse.
Stanza 56. The lord of the 5th in association with Mars or the lord of the 6th and
devoid of benefic influences causes the death of the issue due to the curse of the enemies.
Stanza 57. The lord of the 5th in the 5th devoid of benefic aspect but subject to the
aspect of malefic planets denotes the curse of the Devas.
Stanza 58. When malefics occupy the 4th, house, Saturn joins with the lord of the
5th and malefics are in the 12th, death of the child will be due to mother's curse.
Stanza 59. If malefics occupy the 9th, lord of the 5th joins Saturn and Gulika
occupies a trinal place, death of the issue is due to the curse of the father.
NOTES
The above five stanzas culled out by the author from Prasna Sangraha give combinations
which indicate the death of the child due to curses.
Many may not be inclined to believe in the efficacy of blessings and the power of curses

in this fashionable age of the so-called "scientific temper". It cannot be denied that there are
some persons bom with strong passions which mostly find expression in inflicting injuries on
others. When such persons 'curse', it is likely that the curse may harm the victim in the shape of
his not begetting any issues. When children who have been brought up with affection and
consideration let down their aged parents who are in need of care, attention and affection from
them, it is natural that the parents may feel bitter and unhappy. This feeling may express itself as
a parental curse, even when the parents may not have intended it. It is Rahu's affliction of all the
factors connected with the 5th house that gives a clue to the nature of the curse.
According to the above five stanzas:
Serpent-god's curse: Rahu in the 5th, or with the 5th lord, without beneh'c aspects.
Curse of the manes: Saturn with Gulika in the 1st, 5th or 9th, without beneficial aspect.
Curse of the enemies: Lord of the 5th with Mars or lord of the 6th without benefic
aspects.
Curse of the devas (gods): Lord of the 5th in the 5th devoid of benefic aspect but subject
to malefic aspect.
Mother’s curse: Malefics in the 4th, Saturn in association with the 5th lord and malefics
in the 12th.
Father's curse: Malefics in the 9th, the lord of the 5th with Saturn and Gulika in the 1st,
5th or 9th.
Whether or not we attach any importance to blessings and curses, it is clear that when the
house of children is afflicted under the combinations given above, one must be careful in
assessing the "afflictions" before giving out his finding.
Again in the following stanzas some more combinations for death of children due to
curses, are listed, taken from Prasna Sangraha.
Stanza 60. When the lords of the Lagna and the 5th and Jupiter are weak as also the
luminaries and the lord of the 9th, children will die due to the curse of the Devas.
Stanza 61. When the above-mentioned Yoga is present and Jupiter or Venus is
conjoined by evil planets, Brahmins may be the cause of the curse.
If the Sun and the Moon are afflicted by malefics or they are debilitated or occupy
inimical signs, then the source of the curse will be the manes.
Stanza 62. The lords of the ascendant and the 5th and Jupiter are rendered feeble
and occupy the 6th, the 8th or the 12th; the lord of the 10th is associated with or aspected
by malefics; then his own sinful deeds have made him issueless.
Stanza 63. The lords of the ascendant and the 5th and Jupiter are weak, the lord of
the 6th and Mars are strong and associate with the previous mentioned lords; or Mars and

lord of the 6th occupy the 5th house; then the abhichara of enemies is the reason for
childlessness.
Stanza 64. Lords of Lagna and the 5th and Jupiter are strong; malefics occupy the
4th, or the lord of the 4th occupies the 6th, the 8th or the 12th; then the dosha is in his own
residence. If the above factors, viz., lord of Lagna, lord of the 5th and Jupiter join Rahu in
the 5th house, then the wrath of the serpent god is involved.
If Mars also joins the above, then the anger of the serpent is due to the native's own
sinful actions towards the serpent.
Stanza 65. If the three factors referred to above are strong and the Sun is associated
with malefics, or the 9th house is weak and otherwise afflicted, the evils in the horoscope of
the native's father are responsible for the absence of children; and a child will be born after
the death of his father. If instead of the 9th house, the 4th house, and instead of the Sun, the
Moon are afflicted as above, the evil in the native's mother's horoscope causes the absence
of children; the issue will be born after the mother's death.
Stanza 66. If vayubhuta rises in the ascendant, loss of children is due to the curse of
the manes; if agnibhuta rises, it is divine wrath; if akasabhuta rises both pitru and deva
sapas have to be stated. If prithvibhuta or jalabhuta rises, children will soon be born.
NOTES
The rising of the bhutas or elements of vayu (air), agni (fire), akasa (ether), prithvi (earth)
and Jala (water) have been explained in earlier stanzas.
Stanza 67. Breath passes through the left nostril and the ascendant is in the Sun's
hora; breath traverses through the right nostril and the ascendant is in the Moon's hora;
Arudha Lagna is even and the ascendant is odd; the lord of the 5th in the birth chart and
the lord of the 5th from Arudha in Prasna chart are the same; or the two lords are closely
connected; or the tree governed by the asterism in which Jupiter stands at the time of the
query is bearing fruits. These indicate gain of children.
NOTES
Here the author mixes up astrological combinations, biological phenomena and even the
vegetable phenomena. Birth of children is indicated when the following circum stances exist:
(1) Breathing in left nostril and Lagna in the Sun's Hora.
(2) Breathing in right nostril and the Lagna in the Moon's Hora.
(3) Prasna Lagna odd and Arudha Lagna even.
(4) Close connection (association or mutual aspect, etc.), between the lord of the 5th in
the Prasna chart and the lord of the 5th in the birth horoscope.
(5) The tree indicated by the asterism in which Jupiter is placed is yielding fruit.

Frankly speaking we have not tested these combinations. It is for readers to experiment
with them. Depending perhaps upon the presence of one or more of the above combinations we
may have to infer about the birth of issues.
Stanza 68. If the Navamsa arrived at by the addition of the longitudes of the Sun,
the Moon and Jupiter happens to be the 7th, the 1st, the 5th or the 9th from the Navamsa
of Gulika; if Jupiter is in a trine from the Rasi or Navamsa obtained by adding the
longitudes of the lord of the 5th and the ascendant; and if Gulika occupies a trine from
Jupiter, there will be birth of children.
NOTES
The stanza is not only interesting but gives combinations which have been found in our
humble opinion to be fairly reliable. The stanza involves the following considerations:
(1) Add together the longitudes (in the prasna chart) of the Sun, the Moon and Jupiter.
(2) Note down the Rasi and Navamsa so arrived at.
(3) Note down the Navamsa of Gulika.
(4) If these two Navamsas are in mutual trines or samasaptaka or opposition it is a good
sign for getting children.
(5) Next add together the longitudes of the 1st and 5th houses.
(6) Note down the Rasi and Navamsa so arrived at.
(7) If Jupiter is in a trine from the Rasi and Navamsa suggested in (6), it is a good augury
for getting children.
(8) If Gulika happens to be in a trine from Jupiter, it is also a positive factor. Let us take
an example (Chart 5):
Moon
Venus 12°
Gulika 12°
Lagna 12°
Chart 5
RASI
Sun 26°
Jupiter 12°
(1) The Sun 116° The Moon 53° Jupiter 222

Therefore, Sun + Moon + Jupiter = 391 = 31° = x
(2) Rasi (of x) is Taurus and Navamsa (of x) Capricorn
(3) The Navamsa of Gulika is Capricon.
(4) Both the Navamsas are the same. Therefore it is a good augury for getting children.
(5) Longitude of 1st house 312° Longitude of 5th house 72°
(6) The Rasi (of Y) is Aries and the Navamsa of (Y) is Scorpio.
(7) Jupiter is not in a trine from the Rasi or Navamsa suggested in (6).
(8) Gulika is not in a trine from Jupiter.
If more than one factor is favourable the birth of children can be predicted.
Stanza 69. If Arudha is aspected by Mars, the woman can be said to be pregnant. If
it has not the aspect of Mars, then she cannot be impregnated due to excess of blood in her
system.
Stanza 70. In the Ashtakavargas of the Sun, the Moon and Jupiter (in the
horoscopes of the couple) note the sign (in the prasna chart) which should be a trinal place
from Gulika, which has the largest number of marks or bindus. When the Sun, the Moon
and Jupiter transit such a sign, birth of a child takes place.
NOTES
The translation may appear to be a little confusing.
The stanza envisages the consideration of the birth charts of the couple and query chart.
Take the Ashtakavarga of Jupiter, say in the husband's horoscope. Note the sign which should be
a trine to the sign occupied by Gulika in the Prasna or horary chart, which has the largest number
of bindus. When Jupiter transits this sign birth of an issue occurs. That is, the year is shown.
Likewise consider the Sun (with reference to his Ashtakavarga) and the month is indicated. Treat
the Moon in the same manner. The probable date will be known.
Suppose in the birth horoscope, Jupiters Ashtakavarga has the largest number of bindus,
say in Cancer. And in the prasna chart Gulika is in Pisces. Cancer happens to be a trine from
Pisces. When Jupiter transits Cancer, the year of birth is indicated. Suppose in the Sun's
Ashtakavarga, the largest number of bindus is in Cancer. When the Sun transits Cancer the event
can happen. Similarly if in the Moon's
Ashtakavarga, the highest number of bindus is in Scorpio, a trinal sign to Cancer, the
birth of an issue can coincide with the Moon's transit of Scorpio.
The next stanza gives the suchanas (indicative factors) of pregnancy.
Stanza 71. To a query whether or not a woman is pregnant, the answer must be in
the affirmative in case Rahu occupies the ascendant or Arudha or Chathra Rasi.

Stanza 72. If Jupiter occupies or aspects the 5th, the 7th or the 9th from the
ascendant or the Moon.
Stanza 73. If at the time of the query the Sun or the Moon is surrounded by a halo
then the woman is pregnant. The nature of sex of the chiJd should be ascertained from the
planets in the 7th.
Stanza 74. If the Moon is associated with benefics, the woman is pregnant.
NOTES The above four stanzas are from Gnana Pradeepika.
Stanza 75. If the lord of the 5th occupies an odd Rasi and an odd Navamsa and the
lord of the ascendant is in a kendra from Gulika the woman can be said to be pregnant.
The said sign being seershodaya, further confirms pregnancy. If the Moon or Rahu
occupies or aspects the Navamsa of the lord of the 5th, then there are no prospects of
pregnancy. If Mars aspects the Navamsa there will be abortion. If the Navamsa Rasi of the
lord of the 5th is in a fixed sign and is adhomukha having the aspect or conjunction of
Saturn, then the woman is not only not pregnant, but she does not even have regular
monthly menstrual flow.
Stanza 76. If at the time of Prasna, any one of the following 14 signs is observed, the
woman can be said to be pregnant: (1) a pregnant woman, (2) young children, (3) the
roaring of thunder, (4) a male and a female bird pecking at each other, (5) the questioner or
the messenger touching his own legs, or hands or nostrils, (6) something is taken out from
an enclosed thing such as a bag or vessel, (7) Venus occupies the ascendant, (8) Venus
aspects the ascendant, (9) Venus is in Arudha, (10) Venus aspects Arudha, (11) Venus
occupies the 5th house from the ascendant and (12) Venus aspects the 5th house from the
ascendant.
NOTES Item No. 5 includes three lakshanas.
Stanza 77. (1) Gulika and the Moon are in the 5th house, (2) Gulika and the Moon
are in conjunction, (3) Mars aspects the Moon, (4) Mars conjoins the Moon, (5) benefics
occupy the 9th house, (6) the lord of the 5th and Gulika conjoin, (7) Gulika aspects the lord
of the 5th; and (8) the Navamsa of Gulika and the Moon are mutually connected. If any one
of the above eight combinations is present at the time of Prasna, the woman can be said to
be pregnant.
Stanza 78. The sign occupied by the pregnant woman when the question is put
should be noted. From the lord of that sign should be deduced the taste of the woman —
sweet or sour, etc. If the lord is weak, it is to be inferred that the lady suffers from diseases
indicated by the inflammation of the dosha signified by the lord.
NOTES

This stanza gives an idea of the diseases the pregnant woman is likely to suffer from. And
the next stanza gives lakshanas or signs indicative of abortion or disintegration of the Garbha.
Stanza 79. The signs revealing abortion are: The questioner or somebody leaves the
prasna spot all of a sudden; or somebody comes and leaves the place suddenly; or the
astrologer observes some one removing clist from his ear-pit or openings in the body; or the
fifth leaf amongst the betel leaves given to the astrologer is found to be dotted with vermins
either dead or half alive.
Stanza 80. Abortion will result under the following combinations: (a) Mars or the
Sun occupies a kendra; Jupiter is in a non-kendra house. The 8th house is occupied by a
planet; (b) The Moon in a quadrant, a planet in the 8th and Jupiter in a sign other than a
kendra; (c) the Moon in the ascendant and a malefic in the 19th Drekkana from Lagna
Drekkana; (d) Jupiter in a kendra, Mars in the 8th and the Moon in the ascendant.
Stanza 81. As suggested in Jnana Pradeepika, abortion will take place if parivesha is
observed at the time of the question.
NOTES
Pariveshas are haloes round the Sun and the Moon. According to Varaha Mihira "the rays
of the Sun and the Moon formed into a circle by the wind and reflected in the sky with a few
clouds become haloes with colours and shapes. The different hues of these haloes and their
effects on the earth are listed".
Stanza 82. According as the Moon occupies an odd or even sign the off-spring will
be a male or female. Add together the numbers of the weekday, the constellation and the
ascendant. If the resulting sign is odd, a male child will be born. If even, a female child will
be born.
NOTES
According to the 2nd half of the stanza, add together the number of Nakshatras (counted
from Aswini), the number of the weekday (counted from Sunday) and the number of the
ascendant (counted from Aries). Suppose the Nakshatra, weekday and ascendant are respectively
Mrigasira, Thursday and Aquarius. Add them together:
Mrigasira 5
Thursday 5
Aquarius 11
Expunging multiples of 12, the remainder is 9, i.e., the 9th sign or Sagittarius which is an
odd sign and hence indicative of birth of a male issue. According to some, this part of the stanza
can. also be interpreted to mean that if out of the lord of the weekday, the lord of the Nakshatra

and the lord of the sign occupied by the Moon, if at least two lords are males, then a male issue
will be born.
Stanza 83. If the Sun or Saturn occupies the 3rd, the 9th, or the 11th from the
ascendant, a male child will be born.
Stanza 84. If all planets occupy odd signs, a male child is born. If all the planets
occupy even signs, birth of a female child is certain.
NOTES The above three stanzas are from Gnana Deepika.
Stanza 85. According as the majority of the vargas of the ascendant are ruled by
male or female planets, a son or a daughter is born.
NOTES
Find out the rulers of the saptavargas of the ascendant. If the majority of rulers are
masculine planets, i.e., the Sun, Jupiter and Mars, the issue will be male. If the majority of the
planets ruling the saptavargas are female planets, i.e., Mercury, Venus and the Moon, a female
birth takes place.
The above stanza is from Vidwajjana Vallabha.
Stanza 86. All the benefics in the 5th and the 11th houses indicate that the woman is
pregnant. If the ascendant is in an odd sign and the planets the Sun, Jupiter and the Moon
are also in odd signs, the child is a male.
Stanza 87. If the Sun, the Moon and Jupiter and the ascendant are all in even signs,
the child will be a female. If Saturn occupies odd signs, the child is a male.
Stanza 88. The Sun and Jupiter are strong and occupy odd signs, it indicates a male
child. Venus, Mars and the Moon occupying even signs denote a female issue.
Stanza 89. The issue will be a son or a daughter according as Saturn occupies an
odd or even sign. In a question bearing on marriage, if Saturn occupies an odd sign,
marriage will take place soon. Otherwise marriage will not happen.
NOTES
This stanza is from Shatpanchasikha. All the above combinations are to be applied to
prasna or horary charts.
Stanza 90, The Sun, Mars and Jupiter in the 7th house denote a male issue. The
Moon, Mercury and Venus in the 7th house indicate a female. Again if the Sun, Mars and
Jupiter are in the ascendant, the child is a male. If the Moon, Mercury and Venus are in
Lagna, the issue is a female. Saturn in the ascendant gives a son.
Stanza 91. If the questioner or the messenger touches the odd limbs of his body with
his right hand, then the child is a male. If he touches the even limbs of his body with his left
hand, the issue is a female. If he touches the even limbs with his right hand the child dies.

NOTES
The odd limbs of his body are: head, chest, stomach, vasthi, thighs, legs. The even limbs
of his body are: face, heart, waist, sex organs, knees and feet. The sex of the dead child can be
known from the nature of the limbs touched.
Stanza 92. If the Navamsas of Arudha and Lagna happen to be even and they are
aspected by the Moon, Venus and Mercury, female twins will be born.
NOTES Saturn also can be included amongst male planets.
Stanza 93. If Jupiter occupies a trine or a quadrant, the child is a male. If any
doubts arise at the time of query regarding these, one should rely on what one sees or hears
around and also from the signs one observes and then predict the sex.
Stanza 94. If at the time of prasna many males are seen or heard or spoken about, or
if Arudha happens to be an odd sign occupied or aspected by masculine planets, or if the
messenger or questioner stands in the four main Diks (east, south, west and north), or if the
gifts brought to the astrologer happen to be odd in number, or if these presents are held in
the right hand on the right side, then the issue is a male. If otherwise, the child will be a
female.
NOTES
Unexpectedly females are seen or women are heard talking, or stories of women are
being talked about, or even signs happen to be Arudha, and female planets occupy or aspect the
same, or the messenger occupies the remaining 4 Diks (S.E., S.W., N.W., and N.E.) or the
presents brought are even in number when counted or they are held in the left hand on the left
side, then the issue is a female.
Stanza 95. When the questioner puts his query he touches his head or any limb on
the right side of his body; or when the Navamsa Lagna happens to be an odd and diurnal
sign or when Saturn and strong Mercury occupy odd signs, then the child is a male.
NOTES
On the contrary, if he touches any limbs on the left side of his body or when Navamsa
Lagna happens to be an even and nocturnal sign or when Saturn and Mercury occupy even signs,
the child is a female.
The above four stanzas are from Prasna Sangraha.
Stanza 96. When the Sun, the Moon, Jupiter and the ascendant — all strong, are
placed in odd signs and odd Navamsas, the issue is a male; when these four are in even
signs and even Navamsas the issue is a female. When the Sun and Jupiter occupy odd signs,
the child is a male. If the Moon, Venus and Mars are in even signs, the child is a female.
When they are in common signs, the issue is a twin. But if these four have the aspect of

Mercury and occupy odd Navamsa, the twins are females.
NOTES
The above tough stanza is quoted from Varaha Mihira's Brihat Jataka. Whenever the
planets and the ascendant are mentioned it is implied that they should be powerful. The
combinations can be listed as follows:
(a) The Sun, the Moon, the ascendant and Jupiter in odd signs and in odd Navamsas —
male issue.
(b) Above in even signs and even Navamsas — female.
(c) Jupiter and the Sun in odd signs — male.
(d) The Moon, Venus and Mercury in even signs — female.
(e) Jupiter, the Sun, Venus and Mercury in common signs and in odd or even Navamsas,
aspected by Mercury — twins.
(f) The above four in common signs and odd Navamsas aspected by Mercury — male
twins.
(g) The above four in common signs and even Navamsas — female twins.
(h) If the influence for both male and female twins are balanced — one male and another,
female.
All these combinations cannot be present in the Prasna (or conception) chart. If one of the
8 combinations is present, the result ascribed should be predicted.
So far as this stanza is concerned, my personal experience is that it works fairly
satisfactorily.
In the above stanza some versions read mitra-cha, instead of yagrascha.
Stanza 97. When Saturn occupies an odd sign, except the ascendant, the child
belongs to the male sex. Judging the planets previously mentioned and their strength one is
to decide the nature of the sex of the child to be born.
Stanza 98. Fourteen lakshanas each for male and female births have been given.
Balancing the lakshanas the sex of the child should be inferred.
NOTES
Lakshanas are indicative signs or combinations listed in the above two stanzas If the
lakshanas for male birth are more than those for female birth, the child to be born will be a son;
if otherwise, a daughter. Here the astrologer's capacity to analyse the combination decides the
inference.
Stanza 99 The terms Arudha and Lagna are interchangeable. But the strength of the
two should be used when examining the effects.
Stanza 100. If the ascendant falls in an odd sign and in an odd Navamsa, the child is

a male. If the ascendant is in an even sign and an even Navamsa, the child is a female.
Stanza 101. If the Navamsa of the ascendant and Arudha are even and female
planets occupy the same, birth of female twins is indicated. If these Navamsa-signs are odd
conjoined by male planets, then the birth of male twins is indicated.
NOTES
Some astrologers of Kerala opine that both Navamsa and Rasi have to be taken into
consideration to have the necessary effect.
Stanza 102. If the questioner feels with his hands those limbs of the body which are
odd, then male issue can be foretold. If he touches however the limbs which are considered
'even', then female issue will be born.
NOTES
Odd limbs are the nose, mouth, the head, etc., while even limbs are the eyes, ears, hands,
etc.
Stanza 103. If the questioner feels with his right hand limbs of the body which are
on the left, the child, a female, will die. On the contrary, if he touches with his left hand the
left side of his body, the issue, a male, will die.
Stanza 104. If the articles brought by the questioner are kept on the right side of his
person or if they are odd in number; or if his movements indicate those of a man, the child
is a male. If the presents so brought are kept or hidden on the left side of his person or if
they are even in number or if his movements mark him out as womanly, then the child is a
girlStanza 105. Convert the longitude of the ascendant (devoid of signs) into minutes.
Multiply this by 3 and divide the product by 50. The quotient represents the signs and the
remainder, degrees. To this add the number of the Rasi of the ascendant. The sum
represents the Sun's position at the time of delivery.
Multiply the longitude of the Sun by 108. The product represents the Moon's
positional delivery.
Add to the Moon's position so obtained the longitude of the ascendant devoid of the
sign and multiply the total by 9. The Sun's Navamsa is got.
NOTES
This stanza is a bit confusing. Personally I have not
tested this method and would therefore leave it to the readers to test it and form their own
opinions.
The stanza is supposed to enable one to ascertain the month and date of delivery. The
method is as follows:

(i) Convert the longitude of the Ascendant (devoid of signs) into minutes = a.
(ii) Multiply a by 3 = b.
(iii) Divide b by 50.
b / 50 = x (quotient) + y (remainder)
(iv) (x + y) + Rasi of the Ascendant = s which is the position of the Sun at delivery.
(v) Multiply s by 108 = m, the Moon's position,
(vi) m + longitude of Ascendant (devoid of signs) multiplied by 9 gives the Sun's
Navamsa.
Example:
Let Ascendant be 16° 45' Libra,
(iii) b / 50 = 3015 / 50 = quotient 60 (x) + remainder 15 (y).
(iv) s = 60.3 signs + 7 = 67.3 signs = 67 signs 9 degrees. That is, expunging multiples of
12, we get 7 signs 9 degrees or Scorpio 9 degrees as the position of the Sun at delivery.
(v) The Moon's position m = s x 108
i.e., 7s 9° x 108 = 756s 972° = 11s 12°= Pisces 12° as Moon's position = Pisces 12°.
(vi) m + Ascendant longitude (devoid of signs)
- (342° + 16° 45') x 9 Sun's Navamsa = 358° 45' x 9 - 348° 45’ or Pisces 18° 45'.
This will be the Navamsa position of the Sun at delivery.
As the delivery occurs in the 10th month adjust the month by taking the trinal or trikona
Rasis also.
As already suggested above, I have given the method as understood by me. It is for
readers to assess its validity when actually applied.
Stanza 106. When the Moon transits the Dwadasamsa Rasi of the lord of the
kakshya, in which the longitude of Lagna falls, signs of delivery will begin. When the Moon
transits the Navamsa Rasi of the lord of the kakshya, the woman will deliver. The
ascendant at the time of delivery will be that sign in which the lord of the Trimsamsa of the
lord of the kakshya stands at the time of query. If the lord of the Hora of the above
mentioned lord of kakshya is the Sun, delivery will be in the daytime; if the Moon, delivery
will be in the night.
NOTES
In the ashtaka varga scheme, the planets are spread out in the order of (top to bottom)
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon and the Ascendant. There are 8
kakshyas, each being of 3° 45'.

Take the ascendant lord. Find out the kakshya in which he is placed. Suppose the
ascendant is Capricorn 4°. This falls in the kakshya of Jupiter. See which Dwadasamsa is
occupied by Jupiter. When the Moon transits this Dwadasamsa Rasi, labour pains may set in. See
where Jupiter (the kakshya lord) is in the Navamsa. When this Navamsa Rasi is transited by the
Moon, the delivery takes place. See in which Trimsamsa, Jupiter (lord of the kakshya) is placed.
The sign of this Trimsamsa lord will be the ascendant at the time of delivery. According as
Jupiter (lord of the kakshya) is in the Sun's or Moon’s Flora, the delivery will be during the day
or during the night.
These stanzas offer much food for reflection and much scope for research. Let our
medical men and so-called scientists make researches into this particular branch of knowledge
instead of airing their ignorant views on astrology.
Stanza 107. Take the stronger of the Drekkanas of the Sun and the Moon. When the
Moon transits this Drekkana Rasi, delivery takes place, provided the Sun or the Moon is in
the 1st Drekkana. If the Drekkana is the 2nd, delivery occurs when the Moon transits the
5th from the Drekkana Rasi. When the Drekkana is the 3rd then birth of the issue happens
when the Moon transits the 9th from the Drekkana Rasi; or take the Dwadasamsa of the
Moon. Count this Dwadasamsa Rasi number from Aries. When the Moon transits this sign
delivery takes place.
NOTES
Example:
Sun = 6 degrees Aries, i.e., Aries Drekkana Moon = 17 degrees Cancer, i.e., Scorpio
Drekkana.
Between the two, the Sun occupying his exaltation drekkana is the stronger.
When the Moon transits Aries, delivery of the child may be expected, the Sun being in
the first Drekkana.
Should the Sun be in Aries 13 degrees, the Drekkana would be Leo and still stronger than
the Moon in Scorpio Drekkana. In this case, delivery occurs when the Moon transits the 5th from
the Drekkana Rasi, i.e., the 5th from Leo which would be Sagittarius.
If the Sun occupies 23° Aries or the 3rd Drekkkana of Aries, then birth would occur when
the Moon transits Leo, the 9th from the Drekkana Rasi of the Sun, namely Sagittarius.
Alternatively, take the Dwadasamsa of the Moon. The Moon being in 17 degrees Cancer
it would be the 7th Dwadasamsa. The issue may be delivered when the Moon passes through the
7th sign from Aries, viz., Libra.
Stanza 108. Multiply the longitude of the Moon (devoid of sign) by 108 and find out
the resulting Rasi. When the Moon transits this or its trinal sign (whichever is

adhomukha), delivery will take place. The event will be certain if Gulika associates or
aspects this Rasi.
Find the constellation arrived at by adding the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon.
When the Moon transits this constellation, delivery takes place.
NOTES
Example: Moon 24° 12' Cancer.
Sun 8° 45' Scorpio. Method 1:
Taking the longitude of the Moon devoid of the sign, we have 24° 12' = 24.2 degrees.
24.2 x 108 = 2613.6 degrees. Expunging multiples of 360, we get 93.6 degrees or Cancer 3.6
degrees.
Scorpio and Pisces are trinal to it. Of the three. Cancer and Pisces are adhomukha signs.
The Moon's transit of Cancer or Pisces indicates the delivery of the baby, the stronger of the two
signs being more likely. Further, if Gulika joins one of these signs, that sign is confirmed.
Method 2:
= 332° 57' = Poorvabhadrapada.
When the Moon transits Poorvabhadrapada, delivery takes place.
There is a suggestion that the sum of the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon (in terms of
Rasis) should be deducted from 12 and the resulting constellation should be considered.
According to some, this step is necessary only when the Rasi arrived at by adding the longitudes
of the Sun and the Moon is a nocturnal one.
Stanza 109. The sum of the longitudes of the ascendant and the Moon, devoid of the
signs, should be multiplied by 12 and the resulting Nakshatra found out. When the Moon
transits this Nakshatra or its trinal one, delivery occurs.
The event can also happen when the Moon transits the 5th from the Dwadasamsa Rasi of
the Moon, at the time of query; or its trines. Both the methods should be compared and the
appropriate one selected.
NOTES
Example:
Let the Ascendant be 312° 40' and the Moon, 123° 12’.
Expunging multiples of 360 = 75° 52' = Gemini 15° 52'.
Taking the resultant longitude devoid of the sign we get 15° 52’ or 15° 86 degrees.
15.86 x 12 - 190.32 which counted from the first point of Aries gives Swati (2).
The event occurs when the Moon transits Swati (2) or its trinal points, Satabhisha (2) and

Aridra (2). Alternatively:
The Dwadasamsa Rasi of the Moon is Virgo. Delivery may take place when Virgo or its
trines, Capricorn or Taurus, is transitted by the Moon.
Stanza 110. Birth may occur in the Dwadasamsa Rasi of Lagna or the Navamsa Rasi
of the lord of the Dwadasamsa Rasi. These happening to be trines (to the Lagna) or having
sambandha chatustaya varga are a further confirmation. The Navamsa Rasi of Gulika and
its trines can also be the "sign of delivery".
NOTES
According to some the Navamsa Rasi of Gulika as on the night of the prasna day is
important. The Lagna at the time of delivery could be any of the following signs:
(1) The Dwadasamsa Rasi of Lagna.
(2) The Navamsa Rasi of the lord of the Dwadasamsa Rasi of Lagna.
Lor instance if Lagna is in Virgo Dwadasamsa and if the lord of this, viz., Mercury is in
Capricorn Navamsa, then the delivery sign will be Virgo or Capricorn.
If Virgo or Capricorn is trine to the Lagna, then it is a further confirmation.
(3) The Navamsa Rasi of Gulika, that is, if say Gulika is in Aquarius Navamsa, then
Aquarius can be the ascendant at the time of delivery.
Of the many Rasis given — that which is connected with Gulika has the highest chance
of becoming the Lagna at the time of the birth of the child.
Stanza 111. Delivery may take place when the Dwadasamsa Rasi of the Sun or its
trines rises. Dwadasamsa Rasi and the Navamsa Rasi of the ascendant may also be
considered. The relative strength of these should be weighed and preference given to the
sign having the connection of Gulika.
Stanza 112. The Varga Chatushtaya is thus obtained. Navamsa — by multiplying a
planet's longitude by 9; Nava Navamsa by multiplying a planet's longitude by 81; Navamsa
Dwadasamsa — The Navamsa longitude devoid of sign is multiplied by 12 and the signs
omitted earlier are added; and Dwadasamsa — multiplying the longitude of a planet
devoid of signs by 12 and adding to the result, the original Rasis earlier omitted.
NOTES
This stanza enables us to calculate 4 important divisional charts, viz., (1) Navamsa, (2)
Nava Navamsa, (3) Navamsa Dwadasamsa and (4) Dwadasamsa. While Navamsa and
Dwadasamsa are common in all text books on astrology Nava Navamsa and Navamsa
Dwadasamsa are peculiar to this work. We shall apply the principles to an example, viz., the
Sun's position at the time of prasna, viz., Cancer 23° 12' or 113°.2.
(1) Navamsa: Multiply the longitude by 9.

113°.2 x 9 = 1018°.8. Expunging multiple of 360 we get 298°.8'. Dividing this by 30, the
result is 9s 28° 48'or Capricorn 28° 48'. This is the position of the Sun in Navamsa.
(2) Nava Navamsa: When a planet's longitude is multiplied by 81, this divisional chart is
obtained:
In the example:
Expunging multiples of 360, the remainder is 169°-2 which is 5s 19° 12'. The position of
the planet in Nava Navamsa chart is Virgo 19° 12'.
(3) Navamsa Dwadasamsa: The Navamsa longitude devoid of signs (i.e. 28° 48' or 28°.8)
is multiplied by 12.
The omitted signs, viz., 9 are added to this (11s 15°.6 + 9 = 20s 15°.6 = 8s 15°.6).
Therefore the Navamsa Dwadasamsa of the planet is 8s 15°.6 or Sagittarius 15° 36'.
(4) Dwadasamsa: The longitude of a planet (devoid of signs) is multiplied by 12.
To this is added the signs earlier omitted, viz., 3. Therefore the Dwadasamsa position of
The correctness of these findings can be verified by applying the usual methods of
calculating divisional charts. Here, each chart is made equivalent to a complete circle and hence
the longitude of even the sub-divisional chart is given.
Stanza 113. (a) When the Moon transits the Arudha Lagna or a trinal sign from it
which should happen to be Adhomukba', birth of the child takes place. This should be kept
as a secret.
NOTES
Kerala astrologers appear to take the Ascendant and its trines also as delivery signs.
Suppose the Arudha is Aries. The trines are Leo and Sagittarius, Sagittarius is Adhomukha.
When the Moon transits this sign the issue will be bom.
Stanza 114. If planets are unfavourably situated causing obstruction to birth of
issues one will have to resort to remedial measures.
Stanza 115. If the Sun or Saturn joined by the Moon occupies an anishta place in an
odd sign the Pitris must be propitiated. If the Sun occupies an even sign, holy shrines
should be visited and kshetra pinda offered. Likewise if Saturn occupies an evil house and
an even sign, 'food' must be offered to the people. The Sun in odd or even sign (in an evil
Bhava) requires the performance of Japa as a remedial measure.
Stanza 116. If the Moon is in Anishta Bhavas, Sraddhas should be performed at

Gaya. Or musicians should be engaged to sing and dance in the Divine presence. If the Sun
and the Moon are both afflicted by evil planets, the trouble is from pretas; and for their
liberation, kshetra pinda should be performed and devotional music sung.
Stanza 117. When Mars is in an Anishta Rasi which, is also odd, worship should be
offered to Lord Subrahmanya and holy Brahmins fed. When Mars is in an even sign Durga
should be worshipped. If Mercury is similarly situated Lord Vishnu should be worshipped
with panchamruta and payasa, Brahmins should be fed and soubhagya sukta chanted.
Stanza 118. If Jupiter is in an Anishta place in an odd sign kalyanadighrita duly
charged with mantras should be consumed. If Jupiter occupies an even anishta sign,
Sankaranarayana should be worshipped and a thousand Brahmins fed sumptuously.
Stanza 119. If Venus occupies an anishta sign and an odd sign, yakshapuja should be
performed with bread, payasa, perfumes songs and music. If Venus occupies an even
unfavourable house, puja should be offered to the gods and Brahmins fed to their
satisfaction.
Stanza 120. If Saturn is responsible for the absence of issue and he occupies an odd
sign in an unfavourable house, sarpa ball must be performed. If he occupies an even sign,
serpent dance should be got done by dancers. If Saturn is in an unfavourable position in
common signs, serpent images should be gifted.
NOTES
Stanzas 114 to 120 deal with remedial measures to neutralise afflictions arising from
certain plenetary configurations which obstruct the birth of issues.
Birth of children is said to be denied by a number of causes traced to the displeasure of
ancestors, etc.
The affliction arises by the situation of a planet in an anishta bhava or house. The nature
of remedy depends upon the odd or even nature of the sign the anishta bhava falls in. The stanzas
are simple and can be easily understood.
All these remedies are traced to certain curses — sapas. We do not wish to make any
observations as to whether or not such curses really work. Western science cannot arrogate to
itself all knowledge. Areas of knowledge still unknown to western science had been studied and
understood by the ancient seers. Those who do not wish to believe in th'ese remedies or the
afflictions given, are at liberty to reject them, but there are factors which seemingly impossible
may contain germs of truth.
Stanza 121. The santana tithi should be worked out from santana Sun and santhana
Moon. This tithi has to be made use of in determining the birth of an issue.
NOTES

The following stanzas give the methods of working santana Sun, santana Moon, etc.
Stanza 122. According to some Acharyas, five times the Moon's longitudes and five
times the Lagna longitude give the progeny Moon (santana chandra) and the progeny Sun
(santana Sun) respectively.
NOTES
This stanza suggests that the method of calculating the progeny Sun and the progeny
Moon given here is according to some Acharyas, which means there may be some other method
perhaps approved by the author of this work. The manuscript in my possession does not contain
this method. But I have gathered from Kerala pandits that the method accepted by the author is
the following:
"Ishta" or the time of Prasna reduced to vighatis is divided by 50. Convert this into signs,
degrees and minutes. Call this x. From this deduct 30° or one Rasi. The remainder multiplied by
5 gives the Santana Surya.
Add 8 signs and 15 degrees to x. Expunging multiples of 12 multiplythe resulting figure
by 5 and you get San tana Chandra. We shall call the method given in the stanza as A and that
explained in the Notes as B and work out an example.
Example: 'A': Sun Cancer 23° 12’ = (3s 23° 12') Moon = Taurus 21 ° 26' = (Is 27° 26')
= Libra 26° Progeny Moon Is 27° 26' x 5 = 9s 17° 10'
= Capricorn 17° 10' Example B Birth time: Ghatis 32 and vigbatis 45 after sunrise.
= 1965 vighatis
Multiplying the remainder by 30 (to convert it into degrees), we get 15 x 30 / 50 = 9°
Expunging multiples of 12 from 39, we get 3s 9° x Deducting one sign from x, the
remainder is (3s 9° — Is ) = 2s 9° or Gemini 9°.
Multiplying 2s 9° by 5 we get Santana Surya or Progeny Sun = 2s 9° x 5
= 10s 45° = lis 15° or Aquarius 15° Adding 8 signs and 15 degrees to x, we have 3s 9° +
= 1 Is 24°. Multiplying this by 5
11s 24° x 5 = 59s = 1 Is = Aquarius 30°. This is Santana Chandra or progeny Moon.
The other theory is, this method should be applied if Aroodha Lagna is strong. If the
Prasna Lagna is strong the method given in stanza 122 should be applied.
To be frank, I have not been able to test these methods myself, and hence I am unable to

give my opinion. One Astrologer Panicker a close associate of late Mr. K. K. Kurup whom I met
at Trichur in 1958, said that the method given in the stanza should be accepted in preference to
the cumbersome method explained in the notes.
Stanza 123. The progeny tithi is obtained by deducting the longitude of the progeny
Sun from the longitude of the progeny Moon. If this tithi falls in the bright half, the issue
will be born. If it is the dark half the issue will be born after performing remedial
measures. If the tithi is earlier than the 6th of dark half, birth of the issue will be delayed. If
after the tenth, the event will happen early.
Stanza 124. If the delay is due to tithi falling in bright half Lord Vishnu should be
propitiated. If the delay is due to tithi falling in the dark half Lord Siva should be
worshipped. If the tithi are the 7th, the 8th, the 9th and the 10th (dark half), then an issue
will be born to the 2nd wife after the 2nd marriage. Even after remarriage Brahmins
should be worshipped and fed on New Moon days and Sravana days.
Stanza 125. If the santana tithi (or progeny lunar day) happens to be the 11th to
14th, the native will have an adopted child. If it falls on a New Moon or Full Moon day,
there will be no issue, not even an adopted child. Childlessness will be due to the
dissatisfaction of the Pitris. Ceremonies should be performed on parva days to satisfy the
Pitris. The dissatisfaction of the Pitris will be the prime reason for childlessness.
Stanza 126. If santana tithi falls on the 6th lunar day, God Subrahmanya should be
worshipped; on the 4th, Ganapati should be invoked; on the 9th, Durga should be
worshipped; on the 12th, worship the Sun; on the 8th, worship Serpent god; on New Moon
days, worship Pitris.
NOTES
All these are the remedial measures to be adopted when the santana tithi falls in the dark
half.
Stanza 127. The santhana tithi falling on the 4th, the 9th or the 14th lunar day of
any paksha denies the birth of an issue because of abhichara. The remedy is reading the
Puranas. If the Santana tithi falls on the 4th lunar day, the remedies should be done by
high class people; if on the 9th, low class persons should perform the remedies. The cause
of childlessness is a serpent god if santana tithi falls in Vishtikarana. If it happens to be
bright half, the curse is recent; if it is dark half, the curse is very old.
Stanza 128. In the bright half, Vishtikarana falls on the 4th (chaturthi), 8th
(ashtami), 11th (ekadasi) and full Moon; in the dark half Vishtikarana falls on 3rd
(triteeya), 7th (saptami), 10th (dasami) and 14th (chaturdasi). If 3rd and 4th are afflicted
by Vishtikarana, the trouble is from good natured serpents; if the 7th and the 8th are

similarly afflicted, the trouble is from serpents of the 2nd class; if the 10th and 11th are
similarly afflicted, the trouble is from cruel serpents; and if the 14th and new Moon day
are afflicted, the trouble is from very bad serpents. The remedy is the performance of
Sarpa Bali, especially for good natured ones. The others require devotional songs, dances,
etc.
Stanza 129. So much about santana tithi. There are other uses to which this can be
put.
Stanza 130. Five times the Moon's longitude (at the time of question) minus five
times the longitude of the Sun gives santana tithi. If this refers to bright half, birth of an
issue is indicated. Till the 5th lunar day the question of having children is doubtful. From
the 6th to the 10th, the chances are moderate. From 10th onwards, the result is certain.
Stanza 131. If the santana tithi falls in the dark half, the effects will be as follows:
1st and 2nd — children will be born and no second marriage is necessary; 3rd — requires
two marriages.; 4th — three marriages; 5th — four marriages; 6th — five marriages. Even
then suitable remedies must be performed.
From the 7th to 10th, the native must perform the remedial measures. From the
11th to new Moon, the querent will have no issue whatever good actions he may do. But
perhaps he may have an issue at the end by the special force of his Karmas.
NOTES
Let the Moon be 8s 15° and the Sun 4s 25° at query time.
Santana tithi = 5 (Moon) - 5 (Sun) = 42S 15° — 25s 5° = 18s 10° or 6s 10° = 190° that is
the dark half.
Since this is the 1st thithi of the dark half, children will be born.
Stanza 132. If Santana tithi falls on the 7th of the dark half, the querent will have to
adopt a brother's son; if it is the 8th, one has to adopt a son from his own gotra or genus; if
it is the 9th, he will have to adopt two — one from other families and another from his own
family.
Stanza 133. According as the Santana tithi falls on the 10th or 11th day of the dark
half, his successor will be his sister's son or one adopted from a different family. If it is the
12th, his property will go to his other relatives.
Stanza 134. If it is the 13th day the querist's property will lapse to temples. If it is
the 14th, it will be appropriated by the rulers. If it is new Moon, people will grab his wealth
as there will be no claimants.
Stanza 135. By examining Santana tithi, good karmas can be recommended in order
that men may have issues. The remedies suggested by sages of yore have been given below:

Stanza 136. Even if Santana tithi falls in the bright half, Vishti and Rikta are not
good. If it is the 4th day, Ganapati homa is recommended. If it is the 9th, worship of Durga
is effective; and if it is the 14th, worship of Siva will be useful.
NOTES
Here the special effects of Visbti are not given. Hence the same may be recommended.
Stanza 137. If Santana tithi falls on a full Moon day, Purusha sukta should be
recited. If the Moon is afflicted, stories regarding the Moon, her origin, etc., should be
listened to.
Stanza 138. Santana Gopala should be worshipped if the Santana tithi falls on the
1st day of the dark half. If it falls on the 2nd day one must take in panchagavya and other
medicated ghees.
Stanza 139. If it is the 3rd, Goddess Durga should be worshipped; if it is the 4th
Ganapati homa should be performed; if 5th, the family deity should be worshipped; if it is
the 6th God Subrabmanya should be invoked; if it is the 7th, SankaraNarayana should be
invoked; if it is the 8th, the serpent god should be worshipped; and if it is the 10th, one
thousand Brahmins should be fed.
Stanza 140. If Santana tithi falls on the 10th day of the dark half gana homa should
be performed; on the 11th, oblations should be offered in holy places; on the 12th,
Brahmins should be fed on the day ruled by the constellation Sravana. On the 13th jaya
ball should be offered.
Stanza 141. If it is the 14th day, Brahmins should be fed on Mondays and Pitri Bali
performed and Pitri Pinda offered in holy places.
Stanza 142. If it is new Moon, perform ashtaka sraddha, parvana sraddha and tila
homam. The same remedies hold good for the 1st day of the dark half.
Stanza 143. We shall again formulate certain methods in regard to issues applicable
to both horoscopy and horary based on the position of Jupiter.
Stanzas 144 and 145. Five times the sum of the longitudes of the ascendant and
Yamakantaka gives the position of progeny Jupiter (Santana Guru). If this is blemished by
the nine afflictions (nava doshas) the person cannot get any issue without recourse to
relieving measures. Under the following conditions the person should remarry if he wishes
to have progeny: (a) if the tithi sphuta — this is obtained by deducting the Sun's longitude
from the longitude of Santana Guru is afflicted; (b) if the Navamsa of Santana Guru
happens to fall in Taurus or Libra; or in the sign occupied by Santana Sukra; (c) if it is
aspected by Santana Sukra; (d) if it falls in the constellation of Venus.
The number of marriages is denoted by the number of planets in the 7th house from

Santana Sukra. According as the sign or the Navamsa occupied by Santana Sukra is strong
the native gets an issue from the 1st or the 2nd wife.
NOTES
Santana Sukra (or progeny Venus) is obtained by multiplying the longitude of Venus (at
birth or at question time) by 5. Example:
Let the Sun be in Cancer 23°; Ascendant — Aquarius 14°; Yamakantaka — Gemini 15°;
Jupiter — Scorpio 14°; and Venus — Leo 4°. Determination of Santana Guru:
Yamakantaka + Ascendant = 2s 15° + 10s 14° - 12s 29°
Santana Guru (S.G.) = 12s 29° x 5 - 64s 25° = Leo 25°.
If the S.G. is afflicted by any of the 9 blemishes (nava doshas), remedial measures should
be adopted to get issues. Determination of Tithi Sphuta:
Tithi Sphuta - Santana Guru — Sun = 4s 25° — 3s 23°
Tithi Sphuta - Is 2° or Taurus 2°
The tithi (lunar day) corresponding to this is 32 / 12 = 2 8/12 = the 3rd or tritheeya. If this
is afflicted, the native is advised remarry to get an issue.
Determination of Santana Sukra: Example: Santana Sukra - Venus x 5
- 4s 4° x 5 = 20s 20° Santhana Sukra 8s 20° or Sagittarius 20°.
(a) The Navamsa of Santana Guru is Scorpio (the 8th Navamsa in Leo) and not that of
Taurus or Libra. Hence there is no dosha.
(b) Santana Guru (Leo 25°) does not fall in the Rasi of Santana Sukra (Sagittarius 20°).
Therefore there is no dosha.
(c) Santana Guru is in Pubba ruled by Venus. Hence the dosha exists.
Balancing the doshas or blemishes one has to predict whether or not the native would get
a child from the (1st) wife.
IV (a) The number of marriages is known by the number of planets in the 7th from
Santana Sukra (Sagittarius 20°). In the example in question, there is no planet in the 7th from
Santhana Sukra.
(b) The Rasi of Santana Sukra is Sagittarius; the Navamsa is that of Libra. The Rasi is
stronger. Therefore we can say that the native will have an issue from the 1st wife.
Here it must be noted that these astrological principles were evolved at a time when there
were no legal restrictions on the number of marriages a male could have. But today a Hindu
cannot marry a second time when the 1 st wife is alive or is not divorced, while certain sections
of non-Hindus are free to have any number of wives.
Therefore the correct application of these two stanzas depends upon the existing social

conditions and the legal factors placed in the way of the majority population of this country.
Stanza 146. If Santana Sukra happens to fall in a eunuch Navamsa or eunuch
planets aspect this Navamsa, the native will have to marry a third time to get a child.
NOTES
Eunuch Navamsas are Gemini, Virgo, Capricorn and Aquarius. Eunuch planets are
Mercury and Saturn.
Stanza 147. The sum of Santana Guru and Yamakantaka multiplied by 9 gives
Santana yoga sphuta. From this can be ascertained the number of children.
Stanza 148. The expired portion of Santana yoga sphuta indicates the number of
children. If it is 5 degrees, the native will have one issue; if it is 10 degrees, two; if it is 15
degrees, 3 and so on. When three vargas of Santana yoga sphuta is controlled by Jupiter,
one will have more than six sons.
NOTES
Our author brings in another method to predict the number of issues one will have. In the
light of the fact that today the birth of children can be prevented by all sorts of birth control
methods, one should adapt these principles to the present day social environment. Of course, as
in some western countries, a day may come when birth rate may go down to such an extent that
we may revert back to the conditions existing before these family planning methods were
introduced. Determination of Santhana Yoga Sphuta:
Santhana Guru + Yamakantaka
Santhana Yoga Sphuta = 7s 10° x 9
At the rate of 5° per issue, the number of children will be 6.
Shadvarga lords for Virgo 30° are as follows:
Rasi
Hora
Drekkana
Navamsa
Dwadasamsa
Trimsamsa
Mercury
Sun
Venus
Mercury
Sun
Mars
Jupiter vargas do not figure at all. Therefore the requisite of Jupiter controlling the three
vargas in the Santana yoga sphuta does not apply here.
If the vargas of Jupiter exceed three, then there will be more than 6 sons.
Stanza 149. Take the Drekkana lord of Santana yoga sphuta. When he is debilitated
or in an unfriendly sign, loss of children should be predicted in the following manner: If the
expired portion of the longitude of this lord in the Rasi is 5 degrees, the eldest son will die;

if it is 10 degrees, the 2nd son will die; in this way, calculate till the end of the sign.
If the Navamsa of Yoga Sphuta is Taurus, Leo, Virgo to Scorpio, the native will not
have any children.
NOTES
The stanza is simple to understand. Just as the lord of the Drekkana is taken, the Santana
yoga sphuta may also be taken.
Stanza 150. If in the Santhana yoga sphuta, three vargas are held by Mercury and
Saturn there will be birth of twins. If these planets are weak, the twins will die.
Stanza 151. The sum of the longitudes of Mercury, Saturn and the lord of the 5th
multiplied by 5, gives Datta Sphuta. If this occupies a solar sign and a lunar Navamsa and
is associated with or aspected by malefics, a child will be adopted. If the above sphuta
stands in a lunar Rasi and a solar Navamsa, then no child will be adopted.
Stanza 152. If the Datta Sphuta is afflicted by nava doshas, the person will have no
sons, not even adopted ones.
Stanza 153. When Jupiter transits the Santana Jeeva Sphuta sign and its trines, the
child will be born. But this will happen only when Gulika occupies the first half of the
zodiac. When Gulika occupies the 2nd half, the issue will be born when Jupiter traverses
the Navamsa Rasi of Santhana Jeeva and its trines.
Find out the Navamsa of the sum of the Gulika Sphuta and Yamakantaka.
According as this Navamsa is odd or even the issue is a male or female.
Stanza 154. The Navamsa Rasi of the Yoga Sphuta is important in determining the
sex of the child. According as it is odd or even, the issue will be a male or a female.
Stanza 155. Add up the Santana Guru Sphuta, Yamakantaka and Santana Gulika.
Multiply the total by 81. Find out the Nakshatra of the resulting figure. The birth of the
child takes place when this Nakshatra or its trines is transited by the Moon.
NOTES Santana Gulika is obtained by multiplying Gulika by 5.
Stanza 156. In this chapter, the question of 'issues' is explained in many ways. When
it is found that one will have no issue or the issue will die, suitable remedial measures as got
from Santana Tithi should be adopted. Suitable advice should be given if the adoption of a
son or birth of a son by a second marriage is indicated.
Stanza 157. If the birth of a son is shown, the time of birth should be fixed by noting
the transit positions of Jupiter, Saturn, the Sun or the Moon. If the query concerns a
pregnant woman the sex of the issue also should be definitely predicted.
Stanza 158. I have described above "Santhana Prasna" in great detail basing it on
the writings of ancient sages so that the question may be clearly approached in as many

ways as possible.
Thus ends the Chapter XVIII

CHAPTER XIX
Issues According to Birth Horoscope
Stanza 1. Now we shall describe how the details regarding progeny — their numoer,
their time of birth, etc., and if there are no issues why it is so, etc., can be read from
horoscopy.
NOTES
This chapter deals mainly with methods to forecast details about children on horoscopy.
The previous chapter has given methods based on Prasna.
Stanza 2. If the Moon occupies an anupachaya sign in the wife's horoscope and is
aspected by any one planet, she will bring forth a child. If the Moon occupies an upachaya
sign and is aspected by strong benefic planets, she will have children, provided remedial
measures are performed. In the husband's horoscope, the Moon in a upachaya sign
associated with good planets indicates children. If the Moon is in an anupachaya sign with
an aspect of a planet, a child will be born only after the due performance of remedies. If,
however, in the wife's chart the Moon is in anupachaya and in the husband's chart the
Moon is devoid of benefic aspects, there will be no issue.
Stanza 3. There will be no issue if there is no strength for kshetra (in the female
horoscope) and beeja (in the male horoscope). Hence an examination of these is necessary.
Stanza 4. The strength to impregnate is contributed by the Sun, while Venus governs
semen. If these two occupy odd signs and odd Navamsas and are strong, the male has
"beeja strength" and he is capable of impregnating women. In a women's horoscope. Mars
governs the nature of blood and the Moon controls the capacity to bear children. If these
two occupy even signs and even Navamsas, the female has the kshetra strength to bring
forth issues.
NOTES
If Mars and the Moon are not strong, the woman will not bear children. If there are some
good qualities and weak qualities for these planets, children will be born only after the necessary
remedial measures.
Stanza 5. Divide the expired portion of the asterism occupied by Jupiter in ghatis
and vighatis by 5 and note down the resulting signs, etc.
Similarly treat the expired portion of the asterism occupied by the Sun and Venus. All
these three added together give Beeja Sphuta. Likewise deal with the expired portion of the
asterisms occupied by Mars and the Moon. To these add the result got from the asterism
occupied by Jupiter, Kshetra Sphuta is obtained.

NOTES
The average time taken by the Moon to pass through an asterisin (13° 20' or 200') is
about 60 ghatikas, which means the time required is about 4.5 ghatis per degree of longitude.
This velocity is to be used according to the author in calculation of Beeja Sphuta and Kshetra
Sphuta.
Suppose Jupiter is in 12° 2' of Scorpio, which means he has covered 8° 42' in the
constellation of Anuradha. The equivalent in ghatis for this is 8°.7 x 4.5 = 39.15 ghatis.
Therefore the expired portion of the asterism in which Jupiter is placed is ghatis 39.15.
Dividing this by 5, we get (39.15/5) = 7.83 or 7s 24°.9
= Scorpio 24°.9 as the Beeja longitude of Jupiter.. Similarly calculate for other planets
and find out the Beeja and Kshetra Sphutas. It will be seen that in a male horoscope Jupiter, the
Sun and Venus are involved while in the female horoscope Jupiter, Mars and the Moon are
involved.
Stanza 6. If Beeja Sphuta occupies an odd sign and an odd Navamsa and is aspected
by or associated with benefics, it is considered as strong. If otherwise, it is weak.
Stanza 7. If Kshetra Sphuta occupies an even sign and an even Navamsa and is
aspected by or associated with benefics, it is strong. If otherwise, it is weak.
Stanza 8. If the vargas occupied by these two are owned by benefic planets, they are
good; if owned by malefics, they are bad. If Rahu aspects or associates with Kshetra
Sphuta, childlessness or loss of children will be due to the fury of the serpent god. The
aspect or association of Gulika brings about trouble from Pretas. Saturn indicates sins
committed in past life. Mars shows trouble from enemies or deities like Bhairava or
Chamundi.
Stanza 9. Beeja Sphuta should be calculated in the horoscope of a male. Kshetra
Sphuta should be worked out in a female's horoscope. In horary, both Beeja Sphuta and
Kshetra Sphuta should be worked out. In fixing time, all these four Sphutas should be
made use of.
Stanza 10. We have given one method of calculating Beeja and Kshetra Sphutas.
There are other methods also given here, just for the sake of confirmation got by agreement
of different views.
Stanza 11. In the male's horoscope, Beeja Sphuta is the sum of the longitudes of the
Sun, Venus and Jupiter. In the female's horoscope, the Kshetra Sphuta is the sum of the
longitudes of the Moon, Mars and Jupiter. If Beeja and Kshetra occupy odd signs and
Navamsas and even signs and Navamsas respectively, they are said to be strong. If malefics
or neutral planets join or aspect the same, the strength of these is reduced. Again, malefic

planets in the 5th from Beeja and in the 9th from Kshetra render them weak. Neutral
planets weaken the Beeja and Kshetra, while benefic planets strengthen them.
NOTES
Here in this verse, the word "Parasu" means, 9th house from Kshetra. The worked "te"
(*) refers to malefic planets. "Athra" means the aspect or association of Beeja and Kshetra
Sphutas. Mercury is neutral and not to be included amongst benefic planets.
Stanza 12. Note the expired portion in Ghatis of the asterisms occupied by Beeja
and Kshetra. Divide the Ghatis and vighatis by 5. The longitudes so obtained are two
sphutas called Beeja Sphuta and Kshetra Sphuta. This is according to some (Pakshantara).
NOTES
In this connection reference may be made to notes under stanza 5.
Stanza 13. Determine the Pakshantara Sphutas and judge their strength by
applying the same rules as before. Panchaka is to be worked. If this Sphuta occupies the
1st, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th, 10th houses, children will be born during the first part of his life. If it
occupies the 2nd, 8th or 11th, he will have children during the middle part of his life. If it
occupies 3rd, 6th and 12th, children will be born during the last part.
Stanza 14. If these are partially strong but aspected by benefics, the native will have
children after performing the necessary Prayaschittas (remedial measures).
Stanza 15. The weakness of Beeja and Kshetra is due to two reasons, viz., (1)
internal and natural and (2) external. Internal weakness is due to the dislocation of the
three humours vatha, pitha and sleshma. The remedy for this is medical treatment and the
performance of other remedial measures. As these are due to sins committed in previous
births, these remedies, viz., japa and daana besides medical treatment if done properly, will
remove the evil and children will be born. This is the opinion of ancient Seers.
Stanza 16. If the trouble is external, it is due to the hidden attack of rakshasas,
yakshas and paisachas or the invisible influence of the curses of Brahmins or Devas.
Having ascertained the source of the trouble, the requisite 'karmas' or rituals should be
performed.
Stanza 17. The question of issues can also be considered by an examination of
Santana Graha Sphuta.
NOTES
How they are to be worked out is given below.
Stanza 18. Multiplying the longitudes of planets by 5 we get Santana Graha
Sphutas. Total the sphutas of Santana Sun, Santana Moon and Santhana Jupiter and the
result is Santana Trisphuta. If this Thrisphuta falls in the 3rd or 5th or 7th asterism from

the birth star of the native, or the 88th or the 108th quarter from the radical Moon or the
6th or the 8th or the 12th house from the ascendant, there will be no issue. Examine the
horoscopes of the husband and the wife. If this yoga is found, then there will be no issues.
If, however, this yoga obtains in one of the horoscopes, the birth of an issue is possible by
suitable remedial measures.
Stanza 19. If Trisphuta falls in the 3rd, 5th or 7th asterism from the birth star or
88th or 108th quarter from the radical Moon and if this asterism happens to be a male one,
the male issue will die. If it is a female star, the female issue will die. If Santhana Mars and
Santhana Saturn fall in th e same Trisphuta, no issue will be born.
NOTES
The 88th or 108th quarter from the radical Moon give similar results.
Stanzas 20 and 21. According as the Santhana Sun or the Santhana Moon or both
occupy a kendra from the Thrisphuta, an issue will be born to the 1st wife, or the 2nd wife
if he remarries, or to the first wife after 2nd marriage. Jupiter or Venus in a similar
situation denotes respectively that the native will marry a third and a fourth wife to both of
whom issues will be born. The absence of issue will be due to the curse of Pitrus or serpents
according as Saturn or Rahu occupies the 5th, 7th or 9th from Trisphuta. Remedial
measures should be prescribed on the basis of the asterism of the Trisphuta. If it falls
within the 8th asterism from Venus, Durga should be worshipped. If it falls within the four
from Rohini, Gana Homa should be prescribed. If within seven constellations from Pushya,
Sarpa Bali should be prescribed. And if the Trisphuta falls within 8 stars from Swati
feeding of Brahmins should be done on days ruled by the constellation of Sravana.
NOTES
These two stanzas are a bit confusing. However as I have understood them after
consultation with a learned Panikkar, the following are to be noted.
We have already learnt how to arrive at Santana Trisphuta (or Trisphuta as referred to in
these two stanzas). This is obtained by totalling five times the longitudes of the Sun, the Moon
and Jupiter. (1) If this Thrisphuta star is the 3rd, 5th or 7th from birth star; or if it happens to fall
in the 88th or 108th quarter from the radical Moon’s position, the issue will die. The sex of the
issue will be according to the masculine or feminine nature of the Thrisphuta star.
The birth of children is again rendered possible by marrying upto 4 wives which in the
present social set-up is impossible. Hence in the application of the other combinations one must
use one's skill and interpretative ability.
Stanza 22. The following combinations indicate extinction of family: (1) Malefics
occupying the 4th; Venus in the 7th and the Moon in the 10th; (2) all malefics posited in the

1st, 5th, 8th and 12th houses; (3) all malefics occupying the 4th, Mercury and Venus in the
7th and Jupiter in the 5th.
Stanza 23. It is said in Sarvartha Chintamani that if an evil planet occupies the
ascendant, the Moon is in the 4th and the lord of the ascendant is in the 5th and the lord of
the 5th is weak, the family will be extinguished.
Stanza 24. If malefics are in the 12th, 5th and 8th from the ascendant; if Jupiter and
the Moon occupy the ascendant; if either Mars or Saturn is in the 7th; if all the malefics
occupy the 4th; the Moon is in the 5th; and malefics occupy the 1st, 4th and 12th houses,
the family extinction takes place.
NOTES
Four combinations are listed in this stanza. For family extinction one of these
combinations should be present.
Stanza 25. The family becomes extinct if the 5th house is aspected by malefics and is
devoid of benefic aspect; the total number of bindus in the 5th house does not exceed 25 in
Sarvashtakavarga; the 5th house happens to be an even sign; the lord of the asterism of
Jupiter occupies the 5th house.
NOTES
Four combinations are listed in this stanza for the extinction of one's family.
(1) Malefics aspect the 5th house, devoid of benefics;
(2) total number of bindus in the 5th house in the Sarvashtakavarga is not more than 25;
(3) the 5th house is an even sign; and
(4) the lord of the constellation in which Jupiter is placed is in the 5th house.
Stanza 26. In the last stanza, some combinations have been detailed. If only one
combination is present, the absence of issue is due to stomach complaint; if two, the trouble
is due toievil forces; if three, it is the result of these two causes. Hence remedial measures, if
done properly, can give issues. If all the yogas are found, the native will have no issue.
Stanza 27. Under the following three combinations, there will be no birth of issues:
(1) lord of the ascendant, lord of the 5th, Jupiter and lord of the 7th are all very weak; (2)
lords of the 5th from the ascendant, the Moon and Jupiter are all devoid of benefic aspects,
(3) the 5th house has no benefic aspects but is heavily afflicted.
Stanza 28. The 5th house is occupied by malefics; the lord of the 5th is debilitated
and unaspected by benefics; or Mars occupies the 7th; the Moon and Venus join together.
These combinations indicate absence of children.
Stanza 29. If the waning Moon occupies the 5th and malefics are posited in the 1st,
7th and 12th, the native will have neither wife nor children.

Stanza 30. If the lords of the ascendaat and the Moon-sign, Jupiter, the 5th house,
the 7th house are extremely weak; these and 'Yama-kantaka' occupy the 6th, 8th or 12th;
the 5th house is aspected by or associated with malefics; if the eunuch combinations are
present; if Santana Thithi falls after the 8th day of the dark half of the Moon; if in Jupiter
Ashtavarga the 5th house from Jupiter has a small number of bindus, the native will be
issueless. He will not even have an adopted son.
NOTES
Stanzas 27 to 30 outline combinations where birth of progeny is ruled out. These are:
1. If the Ascendant lord, 5th lord, Jupiter and 7th lord are all weak.
2. If the respective 5th lords from the Ascendant, the Moon and Jupiter receive no benefic
aspects.
3. The 5th house has no benefic aspects but is afflicted malefics.
4. The 5th house is tenanted by malefics.
5. The 5th lord is debilitated and is not aspected by any benefics.
6. Mars is in the 7th.
7. The Moon and Venus are together (this combination seems ambiguous).
8. The waning Moon occupies the 5th and malefics are in the 1st, 7th and 12th. This
combination not only rules out issues but also a wife.
9. The Ascendant lord, the Moon-sign lord, Jupiter, the 5th and 7th houses are extremely
weak.
10. The factors given in (9) plus Yamakantaka occupy the 6th, 8th or 12th.
11. The 5th house is aspected by or associated with malefics.
12. Eunuch combinations are present.
Readers are referred to the Notes under Chapter XVIII stanza 146.
13. Santana Tithi falls after the 8th day of the dark half of the fortnight.
14: The 5th house from Jupiter in Jupiter Ashtakavarga has a small number of bindus.
In combinations 9 to 14, even an adopted child is ruled out.
At least a few of these combinations are bound to appear in the charts of childless
couples.
Let us see which of the combinations listed above are found in this chart.
Combination (7) Lagna lord Mars though in the 11th is with Ketu hemmed in between
malefics; 5th lord Jupiter is in debility with no benefic aspects, karaka Jupiter also is weak
without benefic aspect. The 7th lord Venus also is in an inimical sign without any good aspect.
Combination (2) is partly present as Jupiter who is the 5th lord from both the Lagna and
the Moon and Venus (the 5th lord from Jupiter) receive no benefic aspects.

Example:
Rahu
RASI
Jupiter
Saturn
Lagna
Moon
Venus
Sun
Mercury
Ketu
Mars
The chart above is of a native who died childless.
Combination (3) also holds good as the 5th is occupied by Rahu without any benefic
aspects.
Combination (4) and (5) also apply here.
Combination (7) applies but its logic is not very clear.
A large number of these combinations appearing in the chart explain the absence of
progeny.
Stanza 31. If the lords of the ascendant and the Moon sign are strong; when they,
Jupiter, and the 5th and 7th houses and Yamakantaka are favourably disposed; when the
5th house is well situated; when the 5th house in Jupiter Ashtaka-varga has a good number
of bindus, when Santana Tithi falls in the bright half, birth of children is indicated.
Stanza 32. If the combinations given above are found to be mixed, children can be
had by suitable remedial measures.
Stanza 33. In. horoscopy also Santana Tithi can be looked into and the prospects for
children ascertained. Such is the view of the seers. Hence how it is to be done is explained.
Stanza 34. It is to be assumed that at sunrise each day the (imaginary) Sun and the
(imaginary) Moon are posited at the end of Aries and the middle of Sagittarius respectively.
The Sun is presumed to move backwards and the Moon forwards at the rate of 50 vighatis
in each sign.
Stanza 35. Multiply the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon calculated according to
the above method by 5 and the positions of Santana Sun and the Santana Moon are
obtained. Then the Santana Tithi is to be obtained by deducting the Santana Sun from the

Santhana Moon. If the tithi falls in the bright half, the birth of a child is favoured.
NOTES
Determination of Santana Sun and Santana Moon: Method:
35 gh 40 vgh = 2140 vighatis after sunrise.
(a) Divide the time of birth (in ghatis from sunrise) by 50.
(b) Quotient - x.
(c) Expunge multiples of 12 from x to get y.
(d) 13 signs - y = Sun.
(e) Sun x 5 = Santana Sun
(f) y + 8 signs 15 degrees = Moon
(g) Moon x 5 = Santana Moon
(h) Santana Moon — Santana Sun = Santana tithi Example: Time of birth or of query =
35-40 ghatis from sunrise.
35 gh 40 vgh = 2140 vighatis after sunrise, (a) 2140 / 50 = 42 40/50 (b) x = 42 signs 24°.
Expunging multiples of 12 from x, we get
(c) y = 6 signs 24° after expunging mujtiples of 12.
(d) 13 signs - 6 sign 24° = Sun, i.e., Sun = 6 signs 6 degrees.
(e) Santana Sun = Sun x 5 = 6 signs 6° x 5 = 30 signs 30 degrees
= 6 signs 30 degrees = Libra 30 degrees
(f) 6 signs 24° + 8 signs 15° = Moon, i.e., Moon = 15s 9°
3s 9° (g) Santana Moon = Moon x 5 = 3s 9° x 15
= 4s 15" = Leo 15°. (A) Santana tithi = Leo 15° - Libra 30° = 135°-210°
= 285° or Santana thithi will be the 24th tithi or 9th day of the dark half.
Stanza 36. If the Santana tithi falls in the dark half of the lunar month no issue will
be born but a son will be adopted. This principle is applicable both to birth and horary
charts.
Stanza 37. If the waning Moon is in the ascendant, Jupiter combust, occupies a sign
of Saturn and malefics are in trines, the father of the issue will die before it is born. The
child bom will live long and happy. If Mercury occupies the 5th along with a malefic and if
a malefic occupies the 11th, or the 5th, or 1st or the 4th, the father may live only to see the
birth of the child.
NOTES
Obviously the father will not live long.
Stanza 38. (a) Mars in the ascendant, the Moon in the 8th and the Sun in the
issueless signs; (b) Jupiter in the 8th, Mars in the 12th, Saturn in the ascendant and an

issueless sign happens to be the 5th house; (c) malefics in the 5th house from Jupiter, many
planets in the ascendant and the Moon in the 12th. The above three combinations indicate
birth of issues in old age.
NOTES
The issueless or alpatmaja signs are Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio.
Stanza 39. The waning Moon in the ascendant, malefics in the ascendant or the 4th
house, planets other than benefics in trines indicate the posthumous birth of the child.
Stanza 40. When a malefic occupies the 5th house which is not his own sign, and
which has no aspect of strong benefics, the child will die. When the planet occupying the
5th is also the owner of the 8th, children will die. If Mars is in the 5th, all the children will
die as they are born. If Jupiter aspects Mars then only the first born will die- If Pisces
happens to be the 5th and is occupied by Jupiter and aspected by Saturn then also children
will die.
NOTES
A malefic must occupy the 5th house, which should not be the malefic's own sign. It
should not receive the aspect of strong benefics. Under this combination children will die. If the
planet owning the 5th and 8th is in the 5th, there will be loss of children. The position of Mars in
the 5th favours the death of children as they are born. If Mars receives the aspect of Jupiter the
first issue will survive. Children will die if Pisces happens to be the 5th occupied by Jupiter and
aspected by Saturn.
Stanza 41. When the lord of the 5th is in a malefic Navamsa, debilitated and
combust and aspected by malefics or occupies dusthanas then loss of children should be
predicted.
NOTES The dusthanas are the 6th, 8th and 12th houses.
Stanza 42. If the lord of the Drekkana occupied by the lord of the Navamsa
occupied by the lord of the 12th associates or aspects the 5th house or its lord, then children
will die.
NOTES
The combination is somewhat round about (a) Take the lord of the 12th; (b) see which
Navamsa he occupies; (c) find out the Drekkana in which this Navamsa lord (as per b) is placed.
This Drekkana lord should not aspect or associate with the 5th or the 5th lord. For example
Aquarius is the ascendant and the 12th lord Saturn is in Taurus Navamsa. Say the lord of this
Navamsa, viz., Venus occupies the Drekkana of Aries. Then if the lord of this Drekkana sign,
viz., Mars should have anything to do with the 5th house or the 5th lord, then the children will
die.

Stanza 43. When the lord of the 5th is combust and occupies cruel Shashtiamsas
joined or aspected by malefics, then also death of children should be predicted.
Stanza 44. If the 5th from Santana Lagna, and Santhana Guru, happen to be owned
by Saturn and Mercury or they are associated with or aspected by Saturn, Mercury and
the Moon, then the native will have to adopt a child. If the lord of the 5th is also strong,
then the man will have an issue born to him after his adoption of a child. Santana Lagna is
obtained by multiplying the longitude of the birth ascendant by 5.
NOTES
According to some, the 5th house from the birth ascendant and the radical Jupiter should
also be considered.
Stanza 45. When the lord of the 5th occupies the Navamsa of Saturn and is
conjoined with Mercury and Saturn, the native will adopt a child. When the lord of the 5th
is in the Navamsa of Saturn and Jupiter and Venus are in their own signs, then the person
will have a child born to his. wife after the issue has been adopted. If the 5th house from
Jupiter in the Ashtakavarga of Jupiter has points contributed by planets occupying the sign
or Navamsa of Saturn, then also adoption should be predicted.
Stanza 46. A strong benefic in the 5th house, unless aspected by the lord of the 5th,
can only give an adopted issue.
Some Visesha Yogas of Putrasthana
Stanza 47. When Saturn is in the fifth which happens to be Cancer, birth of sons is
indicated. When the Sun, Mars and Venus are similarly placed, the son will be born to the
second wife. When the Moon and Jupiter occupy the 5th, only female children are born.
There is only a feeble chance if Mercury is in the 5th.
NOTES
The stanza takes into consideration the results of different planets occupying the 5th
house which should happen to be Cancer. If (a) Saturn is in the 5th, there is chance of getting an
issue; (6) the Sun, Mars and Venus — birth of children to 2nd wife; (c) the Moon and Jupiter —
only female issues; and (d) Mercury alone — little chance of getting a child. In regard to (d) and
(c) some opine that the female children will outnumber male issues. According to some pandits,
Cancer happening to be the 5th house applies only to Saturn and Mercury. For the other planets,
the 5th house can be any sign.
Stanza 48. If a malefic occupies the 5th which should be his own sign, the native will
get many children, but they may not survive. But benefics so disposed will give reverse
results. Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio happening to be the fifth house give very few
children. If the Moon occupies these, then again there will be no issue. If the Moon occupies

the fourth or fifth house which should be Virgo, female issues will be born.
NOTES
Even if the 5th house happens to be his own, a malefic there indicates death of children.
If benefics occupy the 5th happening to be their own signs it indicates a number of children.
Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio are said to be alpaputra rasis. When any of these happen to be the
5th, very few children are born. The Moon in the 5th in one of these signs denies children. If
Virgo is the 4th or 5th house and the Moon is situated there, birth of daughters is indicated.
Stanza 49. When the Moon occupies an odd sign and an odd Navamsa aspected by
the Sun, there will be issues. If the lord of the 7th occupies the 5th, both the wife and
children will get ruined. If the strong lord of the 7th is in the 5th and the lord of the 8th is
in the 7th, there will be issues. Similarly, if the lords of the 1st and the 5th interchange
places, there will be issue; but if the lord of the 1st is Mercury, there will be no issue.
Stanza 50. When the first house is in an even sign, having the vargas of the Moon
and Venus and has the aspect of these two planets, the children will be female ones.
Stanza 51. When the 5th house is an odd sign and the lord of the 5th is in an odd
Navamsa, then all the issues will be males.
Stanza 52. When the 5th house is an even sign and the lord of the 5th is in an even
Navamsa, then the issue is a female. When the 5th house is an even sign and the lord of the
5th is in a eunuch sign, the child will be a eunuch.
NOTES Eunuch signs are Gemini, Virgo, Capricorn and Aquarius.
Stanza 53. If an even planet occupies his own sign in the 5th, many issues will be
born. If there are two evil planets in the 5th, many children will be born.
Stanza 54. If the lord of the 2nd is in the 5th aspected by Jupiter and is strong, then
issues will be born.
Stanza 55. If the lords of the ascendant and the 5th occupy quadrants in association
with benefics and the lord of the 2nd is strong, birth of issues can be predicted.
Stanza 56. If the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 5th is a benefic or
is associated with or aspected by a benefic, children will be born.
Stanza 57. When the 5th house from the ascendant or the Moon is strong and is
associated with or aspected by benefics or lord of the 5th is without any affliction, there will
be early birth of children.
Stanza 58. When the lord of the 5th and Jupiter are strong, not associated with the
lords of the 6th, 8th or 12th, etc., free from combustion, and Duritamsa, birth of children
can be predicted.
NOTES

The 2nd and the 3rd padas of Samhara Nakshalras make up Duritamsa.
Stanza 59. When Mars occupies the 5th identical with Aries, Leo, Scorpio or Pisces
and is aspec-ted by Jupiter, birth of an issue can be predicted.
Stanza 60. When the lord of the 5th, Jupiter, the Sun and Mars occupy odd
Navamsas in odd signs, male children will be born. If the Moon, Venus and the lord of the
5th occupy even ones, the issues will be females.
Stanza 61. If the 5th house and its lord are strong, the children will be long-lived. If
the house is owned by a malefic, the sons will be sinful. If it is odd, children will be cruel. If
the lord of the 5th happening to be a benefic, and Jupiter occupy their houses of exaltation
and own benefic vargas, the children born will be cultured, long-lived and prosperous.
Stanza 62. The general state of children will depend upon the mental attitude of the
parents at the time of impregnation. If they are happy and free from anxieties, children will
also lead a happy life. If at the time of impregnation, breath rushes out of the nostrils of the
father, the child will have a long life. If there is no breath, the child will have short life only.
Stanza 63. If the lord of the 5th and Jupiter are conjoined with or aspected by
malefics, the children will either be deformed or sick.
Stanza 64. The lords of the 1st and the 5th mutually interchange houses; these two
lords associate with each other, and aspect one another; these three combinations indicate
the birth of children. In a femeale horoscope, 'delivery' has to be ascertained from the 5th,
and the children from the 9th. If the 4th house in a female's horoscope is associated by a
benefic, there will be no delivery.
Stanza 65. If the longitudes of Jupiter and the 5th house fall in Jupiter's varga and
the 5th is aspected by Jupiter, then one will have children from his own wife. The 5th house
can be counted both from the ascendant and the Moon.
Stanza 66. If the lords of the ascendant and the 5th house are mutual friends, father
and son will be well disposed towards each other. If they are enemies, father and son will be
mutually ill-disposed. And if these lords are neutral, the relationship will be indifferent.
Stanza 67. If the lords of the ascendant and the 5th aspect each other or interchange
their houses, then the son will serve his father dutifully.
Stanza 68. If the lord of the 5th occupies or aspects Lagna, or the lord of the
ascendant occupies or aspects the 5th house, then also the son will be obedient to his father.
Stanza 69. If the lord of the 5th, Mars and Rahu aspect the 5th house from the
Moon or the ascendant, then the son will always be abusing his father.
Stanza 70. When the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 5th is in the
ascendant, the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the ascendant is in the 5th, and

the lord of the Navamsa occupied by Jupiter is in a kendra, Sages declare that the native
will have children.
From Anushtana Paddhati
Stanza 71. When the 5th house is either owned by benefics or associated with or
aspected by them, there will be issues. If otherwise, there will be no issues.
Stanza 72. When benefics occupy the 5th house from the ascendant or the Moon or
Jupiter, the father will be greatly benefited by the son.
Stanza 73. The product obtained by multiplying the longitude of the 5th house
(devoid of sign), in terms of minutes by the quantum of aspect (in terms of Shashtiamsas) is
to be divided by 200. The quotient indicates the number of children. The longitude of the
5th house (devoid of sign) reduced to minutes is multiplied by the aspect quantum of
malefics. The product is divided by 200. The quotient indicates the number of issues that
die.
NOTES
In giving an explanation of this stanza, I must submit that I have not been able to get any
satisfactory results in the application of this stanza to practical horoscopes. The dristhi
shashtyamsas are the collective aspect cast on a house by all the planets. The method of working
out this has been explained in detail with examples in my book Graha and Bhava Balas.
Convert the longitude of the 5th house (rejecting the sign) into minutes. Call this x. Take
the drishti shashtyamsa or quantum of aspect on the 5th house. Call this y. Multiply x by y and
call the product z. Divide z by 200. The quotient indicates the number of issues to be bom. The
quantum of benefic aspect denotes the number of surviving issues while the quantum of malefic
aspects denotes the number of issues that die. Some pandits are of the opinion that z should first
be divided by 60 and the quotient again divided by 200. I cannot vouchsafe for the working of
this theory.
Stanza 74. The completed number of Navamsas of the lord of the 5th gives the
number of children. Male issues are to be ascertained from the Navamsas of male planets
and female issues from female planets. If male planets occupy even signs, children will die;
female planets occupying odd signs indicate the same result. If the Navamsa lords are
strong, the issues will live long.
Stanza 75. If the Navamsa lords are strong by being exalted or occupying own or
friendly houses, the issues will live long. If these lords are debilitated or combust or occupy
inimical places, the progeny dies.
NOTES
The lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 5th and the lord of the Navamsa in

which the 5th falls are to be considered.
Stanza 76. The number of bindus found in the 5th house from Jupiter in his
Ashtakavarga chart indicates the number of children. Bindus contributed by planets
occupying unfriendly or debilitation signs or those that are in combustion should be
excluded. Bindus contributed by an exalted or retrograde planet should be trebled. For a
planet in vargottama or own house, the bindus should be doubled. Bindus contributed by
masculine planets give males, and feminine ones, females.
NOTES
A prasthara ashtakavarga (see my book Ashtakavarga System of Prediction) cast for
Jupiter shows the number of bindus contributed by each planet. When this is ascertained, one can
find out the bindus given by benefics, malefics, etc., and whether such planets are exalted or
debilitated, etc. This combination has been explained in detail with an illustration in my book on
Ashtakavarga.
Example: Chart 1
Ketu
Jupit.
Jupiter
Saturn
Moon
RASI
Rahu
NAVAMSA
Venus
Lagna
Sat.
Moon
Lagna
Ketu
Rahu
Mars
Sun
Mercury
Venus
Mars
Mercury
Sun
In Chart 1, the 5th from Jupiter is Libra. Libra has 6 bindus, the donors being Saturn,
Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon and Lagna. Of these, Saturn is in an inimical sign. Venus is in
debility. Therefore, deducting 2 bindus, the remainder is 4. The Sun is vargottama. Double the
contribution of the Sun (2). Mercury is vargottama. Double his contribution too (2). The total
now will be 8. Venus and the Moon are females. Though Mercury is a eunuch he can be
considered a male being in a masculine sign with male planet Sun. Hence the total number of
children will be 8 — 6 males and 2 females.
Stanza 77. The number of expired Navamsas in the 5th house minus those whose
lords are in inimical signs or debilitated; the number of expired Navamsas of the lord of the

5th minus those whose lords are debilitated or are in inimical houses; the number of
planets aspecting the 5th house: These give the number of issues.
NOTES
The translation of this stanza has been made without straining or stretching the original.
8 Navamsas have expired in the 5th house. Saturn is in an inimical sign and 7 Navamsas
have expired in his case. The Sun, the Moon and Jupiter are in debility and have crossed 2, 4 and
0 Navamsas respectively. That is7 + 2 + 4 + 0= 13.
The 5th lord Mercury has covered 6 Navamsas. From this we have to deduct 13.
No planets aspect the 5th.
The first two instances have to be ignored since the figure from which the deduction is to
be made is less than the figure to be subtracted. Applying this rule to the 5th house from
Example: Chart 2.
Rahu
Lagna
Lagna
RASI
Rahu
Venus
NAVAMSA
Mercury
Jupiter
Mars
Sat.
Jupit.
Ketu
Moon
Venus
Sun
Merc.
Ketu
Sun
Saturn
Moon
Balance of Saturn Dasa: 3 years, 3 months and 18 days. Chandra Lagna, the same result
ensues under the first and second conditions. However, Mars and Mercury aspect the 5th house,
i.e., 2 planets.
Taking the average of issues as per reckoning from Lagna and Chandra Lagna, we would
get 0 + 2 / 2 = 1. The native may expect 1 issue.
Stanza 78. Tne number of Rasmis secured by Jupiter and the lord of the 5th gives a
clue to the number of issues. The method of calculating Rasmis taught to me by my
preceptor is given below.
Stanza 79. The maximum number of rays allotted to the Sun, the Moon, Mars,
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn respectively are 10, 9, 5, 5, 7, 8 and 5. Deduct the
debilitation point of a house from its actual longitude. If the remainder exceeds 6s (or 180°),

deduct it from 12s (or 360°). Multiply this by the planets' Rasmi and divide the product by
6s (or 180°). If the planet is retrograde or combust, its contribution should be increased or
decreased.
NOTES
Rasmis are rays which each planet is supposed to get when in a state of deep exaltation.
The proportion of good or bad indications of a planet depends upon the number of Rasmis it gets
to its credit. The greater the number, the more beneficial the results.
The Sun, the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn get respectively 10, 9, 5, 5,
7, 8 and 5 rays in deep exaltation. In deep debilitation the number of Rasmis is zero. This is what
Kalyanavarma says in his immortal work Saravali. The same idea is expressed in the works of
Mani, Maya and Badarayana. The total number of Rasmis a planet can get is always 49. Whilst
some other writers grant that the total number is 49 they hold that each planet in deep exaltation
gets 7 Rasmis irrespective of its nature. But this view has not won the approval of Badarayana
and other great writers whose allotment of Rasmis is based on the inherent nature and
characteristics of the planets. The Sun is the brightest planet and consequently he gets 10 Rasmis
in deep exaltation. The Moon, Venus and Jupiter come next in their degrees of brilliancy and
therefore they get 8, 8 and 7 rays respectively.
A planet proceeding from debilitation to exaltation is said to be gaining in Rasmis. The
reverse holds good when the planet is moving towards debilitation from exaltation. If a planet is
in between these two points, the number of Rasmis may be obtained by proportion.
First the Rasmi-arc is obtained by subtracting the debilitation point from the planet's
longitude. If the remainder is greater than 180° then subtract it from 360°, and the planet's
Rasmi-arc is obtained. The rays ascribed to each planet being the value when it is at its deep
exaltation point, the full number of rays is taken when the Rasmi-arc is 180° and the number of
rays indicated by Rasmi-arcs (sphuta-rasmis) between 0° and 180° are found by proportion: —
180°: Rasmi-arc:: Planet's ascribed rays: sphuta-rasmi.
Suppose Mercury's longitude is 180° 33'. Applying the above rules we get Mercury's
Rasmi-arc thus:
180° 33' - 345° (debilitation point) = 195° 33' = 164° 27' = Rasmi-arc 164° 27' x 5 / 180°
= 4.56 Mercury's sphuta-rasmi.
In this way the sphuta-rasmis for other planets must be ascertained.
The sphuta-rasmis get increased or decreased according to the planet's situation in the
horoscope. If the planet occupies a friendly Dwadasamsa, this number must be doubled; if it is in
its own Navamsa, the number must be trebled; if in exaltation or own house, in addition to being
retrograde, the number requires to be trebled. If the planet occupies inimical or debilitated

Dwadasamsa, the sphuta-rasmis must be reduced by one-sixteenth; excepting Saturn and Venus,
if any other planet is in combustion, the sphuta-rasmis of such a planet become zero. If a planet
is about to leave retrogression, its sphuta-rasmis stand to be diminished by one-eighth. Add
together the rasmis of all the planets after the Haraoas (reductions) and Bharanas (additions) are
over.
If the total number falls short of 10, the native earns his livelihood by begging and similar
acts, becomes unfortunate and roams about aimlessly. If the total rays are between 10 and 15, the
results will be good character, righteously inclined and increase in religious lore. If between 15
and 20, famous, righteous and well-to-do; if between 20 and 25, fair appearance, brave, kingly
and respected; serving kings and notables if the number of rays is between 25 and 30; if 31, 32,
33 and 34, the results will be high position, great influence and immense wealth; 35 to 39
indicates kingly power, sovereignty over vast tracts of land and immense wealth; above 40
causes very high Raja Yogas and the native attains an exalted position similar to that of kings and
emperors.
Stanza 80. If the planet is retrograde or is exalted, the number of rays should be
trebled. If the planet is in his own or friendly Navamsa, the number is to be doubled; in
unfriendly or debilitation sign, reduce the rays by 1/16 part. If in combustion, all the rasmis
are eliminated but if Venus and Saturn, are in combustion only half has to be taken away.
Of Jupiter or the lord of the 5th, that lord which has more rasmis contributes the number
of children which the native will have.
Stanza 81. Of the methods to ascertain the number of children discussed above, that
which gives the greatest number may be taken if the lord of the 5th is strong. That which
gives the least number may be noted if the lord of the 5th is weak.
Time: Birth of Children
Stanza 82. If the lord of the 5th is placed near the 5th house or the lord of the
ascendant, a child will be born while the native is very young. According as the lord of the
5th occupies a kendra, a panapara or an apoklima, the birth of the child will be in young,
middle or old age respectively.
NOTES
Kendras are the 1st, the 4th, the 7th and the 10th houses. Panaparas are the 2nd, the 5th,
the 8th and the 11th houses, Apoklimas are the 3rd, the 6th, the 9th and the 12th houses.
Stanza 83. Birth of children can occur in the main and sub-period of the lord of the
ascendant, the lord of the 5th, Jupiter, the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the
5th; the lord of the Navamsa occupied by Jupiter; the lord of the 7th; the occupant of the
5th house; and the planet who aspects the 5th house.

Stanza 84. When Jupiter transits any one of the following signs, birth of an issue
may be predicted: the sign occupied by the lord of the 5th from the ascendant; the
Navamsa sign occupied by the lord of the 5th; the sign occupied by Gulika; the Navamsa
sign of Gulika; the trinal houses from the sign and Navamsa Rasi occupied by Gulika. Of
the signs mentioned above single out the one which has more bindus, in the Ashtakavarga
of Jupiter. The lord of the 5th from the Moon and Jupiter should also be considered.
NOTES
The period of birth of the child is ascertained by considering the transit of Jupiter in a
sign — one of the following, which in Jupiter's Ashtakavarga has the largest number of bindus.
The signs to be considered are:
(1) the sign occupied by the lord of the 5th from the ascendant,
(2) the Navamsa sign occupied by this lord,
(3) the sign occupied by the lord of the 5th from the Moon,
(4) the Navamsa sign occupied by this lord,
(5) the sign occupied by the lord of the 5th from Jupiter,
(6) the Navamsa sign occupied by this lord,
(7) the sign occupied by Gulika,
(8) the Navamsa sign of Gulika and
(9) the trinal houses from the Rasi and Navamsa Rasi occupied by Gulika.
According to some, the trinal houses of the above nine signs should be considered.
This stanza offers much scope for a research-minded astrologer to ascertain the year of
birth on the basis of Jupiterian transit.
Stanza 85. When Jupiter, the lord of the 5th, the lord of the ascendant and the lord,
of the 5th from the Moon-sign, transit the 5th house or the house occupied by the lord of
the 5th, or the trinal places of these two, the child will be born. When the lords of the 1st,
the 5th and the 7th transit the above-mentioned signs, then also birth of the issue can take
place.
Stanza 86. We have seen that the bindus in the 5th house from Jupiter, in his
Ashtakavarga chart, denote the number of children. Consider the stronger of the two signs
— the sign occupied by the planet who has contributed the bindu or its Navamsa Rasi. If
this lord occupies the first Drekkana, the child will be born when the Moon transits the
sign occupied by the lord of its Navamsa. If he occupies the 2nd Drekkana, the child will be
born in the 5th sign from the above; if he occupies the third Drekkana, the child will be
born when the Moon transits the 9th sign from the above. Multiply the expired ghatikas of
the planet in the Drekkana by 135 and divide the product by 1800. This gives the ghatikas

traversed in the Nakshatra. The result gives the constellation in which the child will be
born.
NOTES
If the planet occupies the first Drekkana, remove the Rasis in the second Drekkana,
remove the Rasis, and 10 degrees, and in the third Drekkana, remove the Rasis and 20 degrees.
The remainder should be converted into minutes, multiplied by 135 and divided by 1800. If the
remainder is divided by 5, the number of Nakshatra Padas expired will be got and in the next
Pada, the child will be born.
Stanza 87. When the Moon transits the sign or Navamsa of benefics that occupy or
aspect the 5th house; the lord of the 5th strong and well situated; and other planets that are
strong enough to give children, there will be birth of an issue. The 5th sign from the abovementioned signs and Navamsas also give children.
Stanza 88. We have described, in detail, the various Bhavas, their intrinsic merits or
demerits. They may be skilfully utilised in this connection also.
Stanza 89. Man has to redeem three debts in his life. Issue alone can redeem the
debt to Pitris. Obsequies alone cannot satisfy them. Hence the birth of a son is very
important and hence so much is said regarding it.
Thus ends the Chapter XIX

CHAPTER XX
Seventh House According to Birth Horoscope
Stanza 1. When there is perfect agreement between horoscopy (Jataka) and horary
(Prasna) in the matter of results, things can be predicted with greater accuracy. Hence I am
describing here how to read the life-career of one's wife from an examination of the
horoscope.
NOTES
Reading details about wife with the help of Prasna has been dealt with in Chapter XVII.
Stanza 2. Details regarding issues have been described in the last chapter.
Unmarried people can have no legitimate issue. They are not competent to perform any
karmas as ordained in the Sruti and Smritis. Married people have to do them. Hence
matrimony is absolutely essential for the sake of issue and for making one fit to do all the
ordained karmas. Ancient sages have elaborated these and from them I write drawing my
conclusions in my own way.
Stanza 3. All about the wife should be ascertained from the 7th house, the lord of the
7th, the planet aspecting the 7th, the planet occupying the 7th and Venus.
Stanza 4. The character of the wife depends on the nature of the lord of the 7th
house. The nature of the signs beginning from Aries having reference to the 7th house is
given below.
Stanza 5. In the horoscope of the husband, if the 7th bouse happens to be Aries, then
the wife will be fond of going to temples; if Taurus, liberal in giving food; Gemini — neat
and tidy and keeps all the household utensils clean; Cancer — fond of bathing; Leo
religious bent of mind; Virgo, inclined to store beautiful vessels and sweet perfumes; Libra,
clever in speech; Scorpio, clever in cooking; Sagittarius, fond of hearing puranic stories;
Capricorn, fond of soft beds and light dress (sparsana sukha); Aquarius, engaged in storing
grains and corn; and Pisces, collecting bronze vessels, sweet in words and skilled in fine
arts.
Stanza 6. When the 7th house is weak and afflicted by malefics, not aspected by or
associated with benefics; or lord of the 7th or the lord of the 1st; the lord of the 7th and
Venus occupy debilitated or inimical Navamsa or are in combustion or aspected by or
associated with malefics without being connected with benefics or the lord of the ascendant
or these occupy the 6th, the 8th or the 12th, the native will not marry. Even if he marries,
the wife will not live long.
Stanza 7. If Mars occupies the 7th house, the husband will live apart from his wife

or she will die. If Saturn aspects Mars in the 7th without any benefic connection, then the
wife will die. If the 7th house is Capricorn and Jupiter occupies it or if the 7th house is
Scorpio and Venus occupies it, the wife will die. If Taurus happens to, be the 7th and
Mercury is placed there, then his first wife will die.
Stanza 8. If Saturn is in the 7th identical with Pisces, if Jupiter is in the 7th identical
with Virgo; or if a strong malefic is in the 4th; or if the lord of the 8th or lord of the 5th
occupies the 7th; the wife will die. If the Sun and Venus occupy the 5th, the 7th or the 9th,
the wife will be defective of limbs.
Stanza 9. If Venus is hedged in between malefics without any benefic influence, the
native's life will be endangered by the wife or she may die. If malefics occupy the 4th and
8th from Venus without any benefic influence, some danger or accident will befall the wife.
If the Sun and Rahu are in the 7th, the native will waste all bis money on women.
Stanza 10. If Venus is in a moveable sign, hemmed in between malefics, and is
aspected by or is in association with Saturn, the wife will become an outcaste.
Stanza 11. If Venus occupies the Rasi or Navamsa of Mars or is associated with or
aspected by him, the native's wife will dote on a cruel person.
Stanza 12. If Venus is in the sign or Navamsa of Saturn, or is aspected by or conjoins
Saturn; or Venus is in his debilitated sign or Navamsa, the wife will be a low bred one.
Stanza 13. If in Venus Ashtakavarga, the 7th house from Venus has more bindus
contributed by malefics and Gulika occupies a trine from Venus, then the wife will die soon.
Stanza 14. If Venus is in the sign of Mars or the Sun, or is aspected by either of
them; or Venus occupies Agni Bhuta, then the wife's death will be due to fire.
NOTES
The calculation of the Bhutas has been given in Chapter XVI.
Stanza 15. Venus in combination with Mandi and the trinal or quadrangular house
is afflicted by Rahu brings about the death of the wife by snakebite.
NOTES
Here the trinal (trikona) or quadrangle (kendra) is to be considered from Venus.
Stanza 16. If Venus joins Saturn and a malefic is in the 8th house from Venus, the
wife will have an unnatural death. According as Venus occupies a quadrupedal sign, the
decanate of a bird, or a watery sign, death will be due to a quadruped or a bird or from
water. If Venus occupies watery signs along with the Moon, the wife will be drowned.
NOTES
Virgo, the first half of Sagittarius, Gemini, Libra and Aquarius are human or biped signs.
Pisces, Cancer and the latter half of Capricorn are watery signs.

The latter half of Sagittarius, the first part of Capricorn, Leo, Aries and Taurus are
quadrupedal signs. Scorpio is a keeta or insect Rasi.
Stanza 17. If Venus is in conjunction with the Sun, the wife will be afflicted by
bhutas (or hobgoblins) though born of a distinguished family; with the Moon, better bred
and cultured than the husband; with Mars, haunted by Rakshasas and will have a
paramour; with Jupiter, haunted by Vidyadharas though virtuous in all actions; and with
Mercury, educated, good natured and handsome.
Stanza 18. If Venus combines with Saturn, there will be trouble from Gandharvas,
will be fond of mean people and will possess a bad nature and deceptive habits; with Rahu
or Ketu, fond of low sort of people and defective of some limb; with Gulika, and the other
tertiary planets, dies suddenly of accidents; with Ardhaprahara, death will be due to
prolonged disease.
Stanza 19. If in the Ashtakavarga of Venus, the 7th house from Venus contains a
bindu contributed by the Sun, the wife will be as dear to him as life itself; bindu
contributed by the Moon, she will be agreeable to his mind; if by Mars, always engaged in
good deeds; if by Mercury, very faithful to the husband; if by Jupiter, endowed with good
children; if by Venus, well skilled in the arts of enjoyment; and if by Saturn, serve him
faithfully as a servant.
NOTES
In Venus Asbtakavarga, the bindus of Venus never fall in the 7th house from him. Hence
the only construction possible is that the bindus referred to must be "7th house from the
ascendant instead of Venus".
Stanza 20. If Jupiter or Venus occupies the 7th house, his wife will be of his own
caste. By examining the stronger of the two planets, viz., the lord of the sign occupied by
the lord of the 7th or Navamsa lord of the lord of the 7th all the details regarding the
physical features of the wife such as complexion, stature, etc., should be ascertained.
Stanza 21. Of Venus, the lord of the 7th and the planet occupying the 7th, the
stronger will give a clue to the colour, nature, caste, etc., of the wife.
Stanza 22. When a benefic occupies the 9th house from Venus and the lord of the 9th
is strong, the wife will be spiritual minded, lucky, and will have many issues.
Stanza 23. When the lord of the 7th is a benefic and is aspected by or is in
association with benefics, or strong planets occupy the 5th, 7th, 9th and 11th from the sign
occupied by the lord of the 7th, then a woman will be loved by her husband and children. If
otherwise, the wife will be barren and sickly.
NOTES

If the lord of the 7th is a malefic or aspected by malefics, or malefics or weak benefics
occupy the 5th, the 7th, the 9th, and the 11th from the sign occupied by the lord of the 7th, then
the wife will be sickly and barren.
Stanza 24. If the 7th house is occupied or aspected by its lord or benefics, and the
7th house is strongly disposed; or if the lord of the 7th and Venus are well disposed, the
native will have the fortune of getting a good wife.
Stanza 25. If the lord of the 7th is very strong, the native will marry a girl from a
rich family. If he is weak, he will marry from a poor family and the wife will not be goodlooking.
Stanza 26. If the lord of the 7th is associated with or aspected by or hemmed in
between benefics, the native will get a good wife and children.
Stanza 27. When the lord of the 7th or Venus occupies the sign of a benefic or is in
the Navamsa of a benefic and the lord of the 10th is strong, the native will marry a woman
with good qualities.
Stanza 28. If the 7th, the lord of the 7th or Venus is strong and is aspected by
Jupiter, one gets a devoted wife.
Stanza 29. If the lord of the 7th or the Sun is aspected by Venus or Mercury, and the
lord of the 7th has the association of Jupiter, the wife will be chaste and virtuous-minded.
Stanza 30. If the lord of the 7th occupies a quadrant, and is aspected by benefics or
is posited in a benefic sign and a benefic Navamsa, the wife will be a paragon of chastity.
Stanza 31. If the lord of the 7th or the Sun occupies a malefic sign and a malefic
Navamsa, or is aspected by or associated with malefics, the wife will be inclined to vice.
Stanza 32. When Rahu or Ketu occupies the 7th house; when it is aspected by
malefics; when the 7th house falls in a malefic Navamsa, the wife is sinful, inclined to
poison the husband, possesses an evil reputation and will be of a quarrelsome nature.
Stanza 33. If Venus is in the 7th house, the husband will be lustful and passionate. If
benefics are strong in the 7th house, he will be fond of his own wife. If Mars occupies the
7th, he will be fond of many women; if Saturn, he will be inclined to covet low-class women.
If the Sun occupies the 7th, he will be fond of others' wives.
Stanza 34. If the lords of the ascendant and the 7th house are friends, the wife's
family members will be friendly towards the native. If the lords of the 7th and ascendant
are foes, the wife and her family members will be inimical towards him.
Stanza 35. If the lord of the ascendant is very strong and the lord of the 7th is in a
benefic Navamsa aspected by or associated with benefics, occupies Vaisesbikamsa or is
exalted, the person will marry in a high-born family.

Stanza 36. When the lord of the ascendant is devoid of strength and the lord of the
7th occupies an inimical Rasi and a debilitated or inimical Navamsa, is combust, and is
conjoined by malefics, the native will marry a girl belonging to a family lower than his
own.
Stanza 37. When the ascendant is a common sign and when the Moon and the lord
of the 7th occupy common signs, or have their Navamsas in common signs, when two
planets occupy the 11th and eunuch planets occupy the 7th house, the native will remarry.
When the Sun and Mars are in the 7th house, or in their own Navamsas in the 7th house,
he will have only one wife though he may marry many women.
Stanza 38. The native will marry three women if the lords of the 7th (both from the
ascendant and the Moon) and Venus are strong and occupy favourable houses. If any two
of these are strong, he will marry two women, and if only one alone is strong, he will marry
only one. When the lord of the 7th or Venus is exalted or when more than two planets
occupy the 7th house he may marry three or even more women. The number of wives can
be calculated from the number of Navamsas completed by the lord of the 7th.
Stanza 39. When the 7th house is strong, when Venus and the lord of the 7th are
exalted, or occupy their own signs, or have vargottama or exalted Navamsa, the native will
marry a second woman.
NOTES
In stanzas 37, 38 and 39 combinations for more than one wife are given. In all civilized
countries, the order of the day is monogamy. This implies that when a chart indicates more than
one spouse, it can be under the following conditions: (a) death of spouse, (b) divorce, (c)
clandestine marriages, not approved by law or society.
Under (c) we may include certain groups such as the Moslems whose laws permit more
than one wife at the same time. Even amongst Moslems there are men who have married and
remained faithful to their spouses without taking advantage of their laws which permit more than
one wife. Charts of such natives indicate only one wife.
The Lagna and the Moon are in common signs. Rahu and Jupiter occupy the 11th. The
7th lord Jupiter is strong in the 11th; so also Venus who is exalted in the 10th. The native had
more than one wife. Where the word remarry is used it means, a second or third marriage after
the death or divorce of one or more spouses.
Example:

Rahu
Jupiter
Mars
Lagna
Moon
Mars
Saturn
Rahu
Chart 1
RASI
Sun
NAVAMSA
Jupiter
Venus
Moon
Ketu
Sat.
Ketu
Mercury
Lagna
Stanza 40. If the 7th and 2nd are afflicted by malefics, their lords are weak, the
native will remarry. This is according to Sarvartha Chintamani.
Stanza 41. If a malefic is posited in the 7th or 8th, Mars is in 12th house and the 7th
house is in no way benefited by the lord of the 7th, then also remarriage can take place.
Stanza 42. If the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 7th is combust or
debilitated or is in an inimical house, or is aspected by a malefic, or hemmed in between
two malefics, the native may marry more than one woman.
Stanza 43. When a number of malefics occupy the 2nd or the 7th, and lord of the
2nd or the 7th is aspected by malefics, one may marry three women.
Stanza 44. If a malefic planet occupies the ascendant, or the 2nd or the 7th, the lord
of the 7th happens to be in combustion, one will have three wives.
Stanza 45. If the lord of the 7th is in a quadrant or a trine, occupying exalted, own
or friendly sign, and is conjoined by the lord of the 10th, the native will have many wives.
Stanza 46. If the lords of the 11th and the 7th are in mutual aspect, are strong or
posited in trines, one will have many wives.
Stanza 47. If the following happen to be the Jan ma Rasi of the wife, there will be
mutual harmony and agreement between the husband and the wife: (1) the sign occupied
by the lord of the 7th; (2) the Navamsa occupied by the 7th lord; (3) the exaltation sign of
the lord of the 7th; (4) the debilitation sign of the lord of the 7th; (5) the sign occupied by
Venus; (6) the Navamsa occupied by Venus; (7) the 5th and 9th from the above; the sign
containing the bindu of the lord of the 7th from the house occupied by Venus in Venus,
Ashtakavarga chart.
Stanza 48. The married life of the couple will be happy if the male marries a girl

born in the sign occupied by the lord of the Chandra Kakshya in the Moon's Ashtakavarga,
or in the sign occupied by the lord of the ascendant.
NOTES
Example:
Let the Moon be in 16° Libra in the male horoscope.
Each kaksha being 3° 45', the Moon will be in the 5th kaksha ruled by Venus. (For details
of kaksha determination, refer to Notes under stanza 106, Chapter XVIII).
Let Venus occupy Gemini. Marriage with a girl born in Gemini ascendant will be happy.
Or, let the male's ascendant be Aries with Mars, its ruler, being placed in Virgo. A bride
with Virgo ascendant would bring happiness to the male.
Stanza 49. Find out the asterism of the sum of the longitudes of Venus and the lord
of the ascendant; likewise find out the asterism of the sum of the longitudes of the
ascendant and the 7th. Again find out the asterism of the sum of the longitudes of the
planet that aspects the 7th house and the lord of the 7th. The asterism of the wife will be
one amongst the above-mentioned three asterisms.
Stanza 50. If a man marries a woman from any of these Diks mentioned below, their
marital life will be happy: (1) The Dik governed by the lord of the 7th; (2) the Dik indicated
by the sign occupied by the lord of the 7th; (3) the Dik indicated by the Navamsa lord of
the 7th; (4) the Dik indicated by the sign occupied by Venus; (5) the Dik indicated by the
Navamsa Rasi of Venus; (6) the Dik indicated by the seventh Rasi from Venus; (7) the Dik
indicated by the lord who is in the 7th from the ascendant; (8) the Dik indicated by the lord
who aspects the 7th from the ascendant; (9) the Dik indicated by the lord who is in the 7th
from Chandra Lagna; (10) the Dik indicated by the lord who aspects the 7th from the
Moon; (11) the Dik indicated by the Rasi holding benefics and contains a greater number of
bindus in Venus Ashtakavarga chart; (12) the Dik indicated by the Rasi where the lord of
the 1st stands and has a large number of bindus in Ashtakavarga chart; and (13) the Dik
indicated by the sign where the lord of the 7th stands and holds a large number of bindus
in the above chart.
NOTES
Here are given a number of Rasis and planets. A question may crop up on how to select
one from these. Take the strongest of the planets and the sign yielding more indications. From
these, fix the Dik. A marriage from that direction will bring in happiness only.
Stanza 51. After reductions in the Ashtaka-varga of Venus, take that sign which
contains more bindus. If the marriage be conducted from the direction indicated by this
sign, it will bring felicity and happiness.

Stanza 52. The wife will be from a distant place if the sign occupied by the lord of
the 7th, the Navamsa Rasi of the lord of the 7th, the Rasi occupied by Venus, and the
Navamsa Rasi of Venus, are all movable. If they are fixed, the wife will be from a
neighbouring place. If they are common, she will belong to a place neither far nor near.
Stanza 53. We have given many indications fixing the asterism and the place the
wife hails from. One can have a happy married life if he takes as his wife a girl born in a
place and an asterism in which there is more than one coincidence of lakshanas or
indicative signs.
Stanza 54. Just as the details regarding the wife are ascertained by looking into the
7th house, the lord of the 7th and Venus, etc., in a man's horoscope, in the same manner
details of the husband can be ascertained in the female's horoscope by analysing the 7th
house, the lord of the 7th and Venus, etc.
Stanza 55. If an evil planet occupies the 8th house in the female horoscope, the
husband will die. But if a benefic occupies the 2nd house, she will die before the husband. If
Saturn aspected by an evil planet occupies the 7th house, she will die a virgin and nobody
will come forward to marry her. Though the presence of evil planets in the 7th and 8th
houses indicates widowhood, the strong presence of a benefic in the 9th house averts the
effect of widowhood. These peculiarities should be carefully looked into in the horoscope of
a woman.
Stanza 56. Certain peculiarities regarding the female horoscope have been detailed
by Varaha Mihira in the 22nd Chapter of Brihat Jataka. They should be carefully studied
and applied and the results predicted.
Stanza 57. In the horoscope of the male, the 7th house and Venus picture the life of
the wife. In the horoscope of the wife, the 8th house and Saturn reveal the characteristics of
the husband.
Stanza 58. When does the marriage take place — early age, middle age or old age?
In which Dasa does it come ? These are to be ascertained as follows:
Stanza 59. Marriage takes place in early life if a strong benefic lord of the 7th house
is in association with the lord of the ascendant; or a strong Venus combines with the lord of
the ascendant; or Venus and the lord of the 7th occupy quadrants. When the lord of the 71h
and Venus occupy Upachaya signs (3, 6, 10 and 11), prosperity will dawn after marriage.
When the lord of the 7th is far away from the 7th and the 1st houses, marriage will
generally take place after the bloom of youth.
Stanza 60. When the lord of the 7th stands near the lord of the ascendant or a
benefic is placed near the 1st or 7th house, marriage takes place very early in life.

Stanza 61. When benefics occupy the ascendant, the 2nd and the 7th and these
houses have benefic vargas or when these lords are in benefic vargas, marriage will take
place early in life.
Stanza 62. If the lord of the 7th is in parvatamsa, the lord of the 2nd is strong, and
the lord of the ascendant is in mridwamsa, marriage will take place even before the prime
of youth. This is the opinion of the venerable sages.
NOTES
The 46th Shashtyamsa is known as Mridwamsa.
Stanza 63. If Venus, the lord of the 7th and the lord of the 2nd are in Upachayas,
and the lord of the ascendant is aspected by benefics, good fortune will follow the couple
after marriage.
Stanza 64. When the lords of the 7th, the 2nd and the ascendant and Venus occupy
unfavourable houses, and are combust, debilitated or in inimical Navamsas, misfortunes
will follow after marriage.
Stanza 65. Marriage can take place in the major and sub-periods of the planets
occupying the 7th house, the planets aspecting the 7th house, the lord of the 7th, the lord of
the sign occupied by the lord of the 7th, the Navamsa lord of the lord of the 7th, Venus, the
Moon or the Navamsa lord of the ascendant. Some Acharyas opine that the period of Rahu
can also be included.
NOTES
While it is quite clear that marriage can be expected in the Dasa or Bhukti of planets
related to the 7th house which is the Kalatrasthana, or Venus, the karaka for marriage, or the
Navamsa (the sub-divisional chart for gauging all matters related to marriage) the logic behind
Rahu's power to grant marriage is not apparent. Nevertheless most classical authorities recognise
Rahu's marriage-causing abilities in his Dasa.
Stanza 66. When Venus or the lord of the ascendant or the lord of the Moon-sign or
the lord of the 7th transits the 7th house, the house occupied by the lord of the 7th, or the
trinal signs of these two, the marriage will take place. When Jupiter transits the sign
occupied by the lord of the 7th, the Navamsa sign of the lord of the 7th, or the 5th and 9th
from the above signs, marriage takes place.
Stanza 67. For a strict observance of Dharma, and the birth of issue marriage is
necessary. Details regarding wife and matrimony are sketched on the basis of horoscopy.
Thus ends the Chapter XX

CHAPTER XXI
Marriage Compatibility
Stanza 1. The existence of compatibility or otherwise between the couple to be
married is to be ascertained on the basis of their birth stars.
Stanzas 2 and 3. Before deciding a marriage, agreement in regard to the following
should be considered: Rasyadhipa, Nakshatra, Varna, Yoni, Gana, Rishi, Pakshi, Mriga,
Vedha, Bhuta, Rajju, Vayas, Ashtakavarga and Sakti.
Stanza 4. Regarding the first Rasi agreement, the author of Sarvasiddhi says: "The
male born in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th Rasis from that of the female should not enter
into wedlock. If both have the same Janma Rasi, marriage can be done provided both are
not of the same Nakshatra.
NOTES
The count is always from the Janma Rasi (radical Moon of the girl).
Stanza 5. When the woman is born in an odd Janma Rasi, then the man born in the
6th and 8th therefrom can be taken as an optional measure. If she is born in an even Janma
Rasi, the man born in the 6th should be rejected and the 8th can be accepted.
Stanza 6. Madhavacharya is of the opinion that the Janma Rasi of the man falling in
the 2nd from that of the woman will cause loss of money; in the 5th gives loss of children;
in the 6th causes diseases, danger and separation; in the 3rd, sorrow; and in the 4th,
quarrels and misunderstandings.
Stanza 7. Brihaspati is of the opinion that the man born in the 6th and 8th from the
Janma Rasi of the girl brings in losses and ruin, unless both the Rasis are governed by the
same planet or are friendly to each other.
Stanza 8. If the Janma Rasis of both the man and the woman have 'Vasya' and do
not have 'Vedha', then the 6th and the 8th dispositions can be accepted as good.
Stanza 9. When the bridegroom's Janma Rasi is the 5th or 2nd from that of the
bride, compatibility does not exist. Even if the lords of both are mutual foes, a person born
in the 7th can be accepted as very good.
Stanza 10. If the bridegroom's Moon is in the 6th or 8th from that of the bride, then
they will separate or quarrel or die. If he is born in the 2nd or 12th, they will suffer from
poverty. If he is born in the 5th, their children will die. If he is born in other Rasis, they will
enjoy prosperity, happiness and wealth. If the lords of both are mutual foes or if they have
vedha dosha, then the evils attendant on 2nd, 5tb, 6th, 8th and 12th will be felt in a greater
degree. If these lords happen to be one and the same planet and if they have Vasya, these

evils will not be felt.
Stanza 11. If it is found in the horoscopes of the husband and the wife, that the
ascendant, its Navamsa, the Moon and its Navamsa happen to be Virgo, Scorpio, Taurus or
Leo, then there will be no issue born to the couple.
Stanza 12. Capricorn and Pisces symbolise the yonees (sex organs) of birds; Cancer
and Scorpio symbolise reptile sex organs; Aries, Taurus, Leo and Capricorn denote
animals; and Gemini, Virgo, Libra, Aquarius and Sagittarius testify human.
Stanza 13. If the yonees of the man and the woman as indicated by the Rasis be the
same then it can be considered as good; if one is pasu-yonee (animal sex) and the other
nara-yonee (human sex), it is fair; in the same manner, if one is pasu and the other pakshi
(bird) or sarasripa, it is unfavourable; if one is human and the other reptile or bird, it is
bad and should not be accepted.
Stanza 14. In Muhurtha Sangraha, it is stated that a man born in the 6 signs from
the 7th from the Janma Rasi of the woman can be taken for wedlock. But a man born in
the 6th can be considered only as madhyama or ordinary. The male born in the 4th also can
be accepted if other items of agreement are present. The rest should be rejected.
NOTES
The author often quotes different authorities. The stanza in question gives the opinion of
the famous book Muhurtha Sangraha.
A bridegroom, having his radical Moon or Janma Rasi in the 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th or
12th from the radical Moon of the bride, can be considered for marriage. But if one's Janma Rasi
happens to be the 6th from that of the girl, then the agreement is madhyama or moderate or
ordinary. The bridegroom's Janma Rasi being the 4th from that of the bride is passable provided
other factors of agreement are present.
Stanza 15. If the birth constellations of the boy and the girl happen to be the same,
marriage is permissible provided it is not Jyeshta, Moola, Poorvashadha, Pushyami,
Aslesha, Makha, Hasta, Rohini, Dhanishta, Satabhisha, Aridra or Bharani.
Stanza 16. If both the couple have the same Janma Rasi, but not the same asterism,
it is good. Sons and grandsons will issue out of the wedlock. If both have the same asterism,
fear from poison has to be guarded against. If the couple's Janma Rasis are mutually 7th
from each other, the couple will be loving dearly. If the Rasis are dwirdwadasa and also
happen to be the end of Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces, the couple will experience poverty. Here
ends the first part of Rasyaanukulya.
NOTES
When the Janma Rasis of the couple are 2nd and 12th from each other, the alliance is to

be rejected if the Rasi of either the groom or the bride falls at the end of Cancer, Scorpio or
Pisces.
Stanza 17. If a male is born in a Rasi for which the Rasi of the woman is Vasya, then
it is favourable. Every Rasi has a Vasya Rasi and they are: Aries — Leo and Scorpio;
Taurus — Cancer and Libra; Gemini — Virgo, Cancer — Scorpio and Sagittarius; Leo —
Libra; Virgo Gemini and Pisces; Libra — Virgo and Capricorn; Scorpio — Cancer.
Sagittarius — Pisces; Capricorn — Aries and Aquarius; and Aquarius and Pisces —
Capricorn.
NOTES
If the Vasya Rasi of the Janma Rasi of the girl happens to be the sign of the bridegroom,
it is said that vasya kuta prevails.
Stanza 18. If the Vasya Rasi of the man's Janma Rasi happens to be the Janma Rasi
of the girl, then it is auspicious. The Janma Rasis of both should be mutually Vasya Rasis. A
pair born in Vasya Rasis, if yoked, will lead a loving life.
Stanza 19. If the lords of the Janma Rasis of both are friends, or are one and the
same, the match can be accepted. Planetary friendships are disposed thus: The Sun has
Jupiter as his friend; the Moon — Mercury and Jupiter; Mars — Mercury and Venus;
Mercury — the Moon, Mars, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn; Jupiter — the Sun, the Moon,
Mercury and Saturn; Venus — Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn; and Saturn —
Mercury, Jupiter and Venus.
Stanza 20. Lor any planet the lords of the 4th, 2nd, 5th, 8th, 9th and 12th from its
own Moola-trikona Rasi are friends. The rest are enemies.
NOTES
This stanza is from Vidya Madhaveeyam a famous work on Muhurta or electional
astrology. The reckoning of friendships, according to this stanza, is based on Satyacharya's
dictum referred to by Varaha Mihira in Brihat Jataka — (...) which means for any planet, the lord
of its exaltation, and the 2nd, 12th, 4th, 5th, 9th and 8th from its Moolatrikona signs are his
friends.
Take for instance the Moon. His Moolatrikona is Taurus. The 4th is Leo and the lord is
the Sun. He is a friend of the Moon. The 2nd and 5th are ruled by Mercury. He is the friend of
the Moon. The 12th from Taurus is ruled by Mars. He could be a friend. But Mars also rules the
7th which is not one of the houses mentioned in the stanza. Therefore, Mars is only a neutral.
The 8th from Taurus is ruled by Jupiter who is also the lord of the 11th, which is not included in
the list. Therefore Jupiter is also a neutral. Venus is no doubt the lord of the exaltation sign of the
Moon. But Venus also owns the 6th and hence he becomes a neutral to the Moon. According to

the same argument Saturn also becomes a neutral.
The following table based on this stanza is given for the information of the reader.
Planet
Friend
Neutral
Enemy
Sun
Moon, Mars and Jupiter
Mercury
Saturn, Venus
Moon
Sun and Mercury
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Venus
None
Mars
Jupiter, the Moon, the Sun
Venus, Saturn
Mercury
Mercury
Sun, Venus
Mars, Jupiter Saturn
Moon
Jupiter
Sun, Moon, Mars
Saturn
Mercury, Venus
Venus
Mercury, Saturn
Mars, Jupiter
Sun, Moon
Saturn
Mercury, Venus
Jupiter
Sun, Moon, Mars.
With this stanza Rasyadhipati consideration ends.
Stanza 21. Then comes the third consideration known as Dina Kuta. The birth
asterism is known as janmarsha; the 10th from it is karmarsha; and the 19th asterism from
it is adhanarksha. The 3rd, 6th, 7th asterisms from the janmarsha of the girl should be
avoided.
Stanza 22. The bridegroom born in the 3rd and 7th asterisms from the birth
asterism of the girl brings in trouble. One born in the 5th causes more trouble.
NOTES
According to this stanza a boy born in the 3rd or 7th asterism from that of the girl should
not be considered. But one born in the 5th is more inauspicious.
Stanza 23. The person born in the 88th Navamsa from the quarter of the birth star
of a girl brings in evil only. One born in the 108th Navamsa from the Navamsa of the girl's
star is equally bad.
NOTES
Here the Navamsa refers to the Navamsa position of the Moon and not that of the
ascendant.
Stanza 24. If the birth star of the boy happens to be the 4th, the 7th or the 10th from
that of the girl, it promotes their well-being. The farther the birth asterism of the boy is
from the girl's star, the better it will be for their happiness.
Stanza 25. If the girl is born in the 4th asterism from that of the boy, it is Mahendra;
if she is born in the 7th, it is known as Upendra. Mahendra gives wealth and grain and
Upendra gives children.
Stanza 26. When the number of asterisms counted from the asterism of the girl to
that of the boy exceeds 15, it is very good. This is called Streedeergha.
Stanza 27. The six stars beginning from Aswini to Aridra, Punarvasu to Uttara,
Hasta to Jyeshta and Moola to Satabhisha in regular order rule the Brahmin, the

Kshatriya, the Vaisya, the Sudra, anuloma and pratiloma castes. Poorvabhadra,
Uttarabhadra and Revati signify the Brahmin, the Kshatriya and Vaisya respectively.
NOTES
Aswini, Bharani, Krittika, Rohinit Mrigasira and Aridra represent respectively the
Brahmin, the Kshatriya, the Vaisya, the Sudra, the anuloma and the pratiloma castes. Likewise
consider from Punarvasu, Hasta and Moola. The last three stars signify the Brahmin, Kshatriya
and Vaisya.
Stanza 28. If both the boy and the girl belong to the same caste (varna), it is the best.
If the boy is of a higher caste, and the girl is of a lower caste, it is also admissible. If the girl
is of a higher caste and the man is of a lower grade, it is inadmissible. If one of them is
anuloma and the other belongs to one of the four castes, it is passable. If one of them is
pratiloma and the other is one of the four castes, it is to be rejected.
NOTES
The vamas of the man and the woman are to be determined from the Nakshatras as given
in the 27th stanza.
Stanza 29. Brihaspati is of the opinion that both should be of the same caste; the
man should be higher in caste, if the couple belong to two different castes; if the man is to
be lower in caste, it should be avoided. The first is the best, the second is ordinary and the
third is lowest.
Stanza 30. Sex compatibility (yonyanukulya) can be considered in two ways and
they are given below: If a girl is born in a female asterism and the boy in a male, the couple
will be happy. If both are female asterisms, there is loss of wealth. If both are male
asterisms, it is to be rejected. Aswini, Bharani, Pushyami, Aslesha, Makha, Uttara, Swati,
Visakha, Jyeshta, Moola, Poorva-shadha, Uttarabhadra, Sravana, Poorvabhadra are male
asterisms. The remaining 13 are feminine in sex.
Stanza 31. Another view: Aswini, Rohini, Punarvasu, Pushyami, Hasta, Anuradha,
Sravana, Poorvabhadra, Uttarabhadra are masculine constellations. Mrigasira, Moola and
Satabhisha are eunuchs; the remaining 15 are feminine in sex. A man born in a male
asterism marrying a woman born in the same star is inauspicious. A man born in a male
asterism and a woman born in a female asterism is good. A man born in a male asterism
and a woman born in a eunuch is good. A man born in a feminine star and a woman born
in a male one is nindya (fit to be censured). A man born in a feminine star and a woman
born in a feminine asterism is ordinary. A man born in a female star and a woman born in
a eunuch is not favoured. A man born in a eunuch star and a woman born in a masculine
star should be rejected. A man born in a eunuch star and a woman in a feminine star is

passable. And a man born in a eunuch and a woman in a eunuch is not favoured.
Gananukulya
Stanza 32. Revati, Aswini, Anuradha, Sravana, Swati, Punarvasu, Mrigasira, Hasta,
Pushyami belong to divine category. Bharani, Pubba, Poorva-shadha, Poorvabhadra,
Aridra, Uttara, Uttara-shadha, Uttarabhadra and Rohini belong to human category. And
the remaining are of a demoniacal nature.
If the boy and the girl belong to divine and demoniacal groups, quarrels and even
death may occur. If the divine group and human group are brought together, the yoni kuta
will be ordinary.
Stanza 33. If the boy and the girl have the same gana, it is highly propitious. If the
boy is of Deva Gana and the girl of Kara Gana, it is fairly good. A man of Asura Gana and
a woman of Nara Gana is ordinary. A man of Nara Gana and a woman of Deva Gana is
bad. A man of Nara Gana and a woman of Asura Gana should not be brought together.
NOTES
Light is thrown on the significances of Ganas — deva (divine), manusha (human) and
rakshasa (diabolical) in my book Muhurtha or Electional Astrology to which my esteemed reader
is referred. It looks as though the gunas represent different psychological temperaments. We can
roughly equate the deva with satwic nature, the manusha with thamasic nature and the rakshasa
with rajasic nature. In actual practice, it is found that unless there are strong antidotes, a rakshasa
gana girl is generally quarrelsome and capable of keeping the husband in perpetual tension,
despite all the other desirable qualities she may have. If both the boy and the girl are born in
rakshasa gana stars, the home will be a veritable battle-field, magnifying each trifle into an
enormous problem. Either the husband or the wife should possess an adjusting capacity if
relative peace is to prevail.
However, there are some exceptions which are dealt with in the next stanza.
Stanza 34. Work out the Nakshatras for the ascendants of the boy and the girl. If
these asterisms indicate agreement by gunas; or woik out also the Nakshatras of the lords
of the Chandra Navamsa of the couple; if there is agreement between the gunas of these
two Nakshatras; or if there is stree-deergha, the objection of a boy in a human asterism
marrying a girl born in a demoniac star can be ignored.
Gotranukulya (Agreement of Gotra)
Stanza 35. Aswini, Pubba, Swati, Abhijit signify Marichi Gotra; Bharani, Aslesha,
Visakha, Sravana signify Vasishta Gotra; Krittika, Makha, Anuradha, Dhanishta belong to
Angirasa Gotra; Rohini, Pubba, Jyeshta and Satabhisha belong to Athri Gotra; Mrigasira,
Uttara, Moola, Poorvabhadra belong to Pulaha Gotra; and Punarvasu, Chitta,

Uttarashadha and Revati signify Kretu Gotra. The Gotras of the couple should be
ascertained from their birth asterisms.
Stanza 36. If the boy and the girl belong to the same Gotra, it brings disaster. If the
Gotras are different, prosperity will come in. If the Gotras of Nakshatras worked out
according to the ascendant are the same, the result is ordinary.
NOTES
If there is no compatibility between the Gotras based on the birth asterisms of the boy
and the girl, then ascertain the asterisms on the basis of the ascendant points of the couple. If the
Gotras are the same here also, the compatibility in respect of this item is ordinary.
Vihanganakulyam
Stanza 37. Aswini to Mrigasira signify the bird Bharandhaka; Aridra to Pubba —
Pingala; Uttara to Anuradha — Kaka (crow); Jyeshta to Sravana — cock; and Dhanishta
to Revati — peacock. If the asterisms of the couple indicate the same bird, it is auspicious.
NOTES
If one is friendly to the other, it is passable. If one is the natural enemy of the other, it is
bad.
Stanza 38. The constellations have been assigned to the yonis of certain animals in
the order beginning with Aswini: horse, elephant, she-goat, serpent, dog, cat, sheep, cat,
mouse, rat, camel, he-buffalo (bull), lion, he-buffalo (bull), tiger, stag, deer, dog, monkey,
ox, monkey, she-buffalo, horse, woman, cow and elephant. If the asterisms of the boy and
the girl govern animals which agree in nature, the married couple will live amicably. If they
are mutual foes, the couple also will quarrel and separation will come in.
Stanza 39. If the asterisms of the couple come under influence of the following
animals, there will be family felicity and happiness. They are elephant, horse, cow, woman,
stag, goat, she-goat and cat. If tiger and serpent happen to be the animals of the couple,
death may ensue.
Stanza 40. The cat and the serpent are natural enemies; so are the rat and the dog;
so are the horse and she-buffalo. Lion has no natural enemy. Dog, mouse, cat, dog and
serpent are mutual enemies. Hence yoking persons ruled by these will be disastrous.
NOTES
Yoking the two (man and woman) ruled by animals having antagonistic yonis will spell
trouble to family life.
Stanza 41. According to Madhaveeya, tiger is the enemy of cow, dog, woman, hebuffalo, stag, goat and monkey. Dog is the enemy of cow, goat, she-goat, monkey and stag.
Cat and rat are mutual enemies. Elephant and stag are enemies. Horse and he-buffalo are

natural foes. Cat and serpent are traditionally averse. When we consider this compatibility,
we should see whether the asterisms indicate the same animal or animals friendly to one
another. If they happen to be inimical yonis, they are bad.
Stanza 42. According to Brihaspati, Chitta governs the yoni of the tiger. In
Muhurtha Ratna, it is said that Chitta governs lion. As this is controversial, it is left to the
discretion of the learned to settle one way or the other.
Vedha Dosha
Stanza 43. The asterisms can be classified into 5 divisions thus: Kantha — Rohini.
Aridra, Hasta, Swati, Sravana, Satabhisha; Kati — Bharani, Pushyami, Pubba, Anuradha,
Poorvashadha, Uttara-bhadra; Pada — Aswini, Aslesha, Makha, Jyeshta, Moola, Revati;
Siro — Mrigasira, Chitta, Dhanishta; and Kukshi — Krittika, Punarvasu, Uttara, Visakha,
Uttara, Poorvabhadra.
Stanza 44. If the asterisms of the couple do not fall in the same varga or division, it
is productive of good results. If the asterisms fall in the first varga (Kantha), the result is
widowhood; if in Kati, poverty results; if in Pada, distant travels; if in Siro — death will
ensue; and if Kukshi — loss of children. The Vedha blemish should also be looked into
when constructing new buildings.
Stanza 45. Each asterism has a vedha asterism as follows: Aswini — Jyeshta,
Bharani — Anuradha, Aridra — Sravana, Krittika — Visakha, Rohini — Swati, Aslesha
— Moola, Makha — Revati, Pushyami — Poorvashadha, Punarvasu — Uttarashadha,
Pubba — Uttarabhadra, Hasta — Satabhisha, Uttara — Poorvabhadra; Mrigasira, Chitta,
Dhanishta are mutually vedhas or mutually repelling. The asterisms of the couple should
not fall in the vedha group.
NOTES
Vedha stars are mutually repelling. Thus Aswini repels Jyeshta, Aridra repels Sravana and
so on. The bridegroom's and the bride's stars should not fall in the same repelling group.
Mrigasira, Chitta and Dhanishta are also vedha stars mutually.
Stanza 46. If there is Vedha affliction both the husband and the wife will go to rack
and ruin. Even if there are other items of agreement as Vasya, etc., Vedha will prevail. The
Vedha stars are connected with the 6th and 7th relatively.
Bh uthan ukulya
Stanza 47. The 27 constellations have been classified into 5 Bhutas or elements thus:
Prithvi (earthy): Aswini, Bharani, Krittika, Rohini, Mrigasira; Jala (watery): Aridra,
Punarvasu, Pushyami, Aslesha, Makha, Pubba; Teja (fiery): Uttara, Hasta, Chitta, Swati,
Visakha; Vayu (airy): Anuradha, Jyeshta, Moola, Poorvashadha, Uttara-shadha and

Sravana; and Akasa (ethereal): Dhanishta, Satabhisha, Poorvabhadra, Uttara-bhadra and
Revati.
If the asterisms of the couple are of one and the same Bhuta, it is good. If one is
aerial and the other is fiery, it is equally good. If one is earthy and the other belongs to any
other Bhuta, it is also good. If one has watery Bhuta, and the other has fiery Bhuta, it is
bad. If ethereal Bhuta combines with any other Bhuta, it is passable.
Stanza 48. Bhutas are classified into 5 as given above, but some writers say that
Gemini, Virgo, denote Prithvi; Taurus, Cancer and Libra — Jala; Aries, Leo and ScorpioAgni; Capricorn and Aquarius — Vayu; and Sagittarius and Pisces —Akasa.
Stanza. 49. In Sarvasiddhi, it is stated that the Bhutas should be classified as given
in verse 47. If the asterism of both happens to be one and the same Bhuta, it is auspicious.
If one is fiery and the other watery, it is bad. Other combinations are passable.
Rajju
Stanza 50. Classify the asterisms into three groups of nine each as given below:
1st group
Aswini
Aridra
Punarvasu
Uttara
Hasta
Jyeshta
Moola
Satabhisha
Poorvabhadra
2nd gronp
Bharani
Mrigasira
Pushyami
Pubba
Chitta
Anuradha
Poorvasbadha
Dhanishta
Uttarabhadra
3rd group
Krittika
Rohini
Aslesha
Makha
Swati
Visakha
Uttarashadha
Sravana
Revati.
If the asterisms of the couple happen to fall in the same group, the yoking of the
couple must not be done.
NOTES
If the asterisms of the couple happen to fall in the second group, it is called Madhyama
Rajju and the result will be death, quarrel, and less and hence this is supposed to be very
inauspicious.
If the asterisms fall in the 1st and the 3rd, it is called Rajju and it also cause calamities.
Vayanukulya (Age)
Stanza 51. If the bridegroom is three times older than the bride, it is considered as
good; if he is twice old, it is passable; if he is older only by a few years it results in sorrow.
If the bride is older, the family will become extinct.
Ashtavarganukulya

Stanza 52. If the Janma Rasi of the boy falls in a sign which, in the Moon's
Ashtakavarga of the girl's chart, has more bindus it is good. Similarly if the Janma Rasi of
the girl falls in a sign which, in the Moon's Ashtakavarga of the boy, has more bindus, it is
equally good.
Stanza 53. Find out the kaksha in which the Moon is found in the girl's horoscope. If
the Janma Rasi of the boy falls in the sign of the lord of this kaksha, the compatibility is
good. The same is the case in respect of the boy's horoscope.
NOTES
According to the Ashtakavarga scheme, each sign is divided into 8 parts or kakshas of 3°
45', the lords of which are respectively Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon
and the ascendant. Suppose in the bride's case the Moon is in Aquarius 11° 40'. This will be the
4th kaksha, the lord of which is the Sun. If the groom's Jan in a Rasi falls in the sign ruled by the
Sun, viz., Leo, it is good.
Chittanukulya
Stanza 54. If the couple love each other, they can enter into wedlock, even if there is
no agreement in other ways. This is very important in the matter of marriage.
Stanza 55. One who loves a girl sincerely, from his heart should marry her. Pure
love is greater than any other virtue.
NOTES
Stanzas 55 and 56 are suggestive and reflect the wisdom of the ancients in giving priority
to mutual love in preference to any other astrological factor. But the love for each other must
spring from their hearts and not from just casual desire. When such pure love is seen between a
boy and a girl, no astrological consideration should intervene to prevent such a marriage. But in
the modem times, except in very rare cases, it is not love that seems to weigh. It is lust which is
transient and disappears the moment initial infatuation ends. Hence we see today any number of
tragedies involving young men and women.
Other Considerations
Stanza 56. Count from the asterism of the girl to that of the boy. Multiply this
number by 5 and divide the product by 7. The remainder is vyaya or expenditure. If the
counting is again made from the birth-star of the bridegroom and the same process
repeated, the remainder indicates 'aya' or gain or income.
Stanza 57. If income is greater than expenditure, marriage brings in all-round
prosperity. If expense is greater, the couple will experience much poverty.
Stanza 58. Count from Aswini to the asterism of the boy as well as the girl and total
them up. Add to this sum 13. From the total figure subtract 32. Divide the difference by 5.

If the remainder is 1, the result is, aquisition of children; 2, death of one of the couple; 3,
prolonged illness; and 4, prosperity. If the total after adding 13 does not come to 32, then
the counting should be made from the birth asterism to Aswini.
Stanza 59. Count from the birth asterisms of the couple to Aswini. Add the two
figures and deduct the sum by 5. If the remainder is 1, prosperity is indicated; if 2, general
progress; if 3, calamities; if 4, acquisition of wealth and if 5, disasters.
NOTES
It is held by some that the principle given in this stanza only to the Chola country.
Stanza 60. If the birth stars of the male and female fall in the first varga — Aridra,
Hasta, Poorva-shadha, Uttarashadha — there will be great progress; if they fall in the
second varga — Krittika, Rohini, Mrrgasira, Makha, Pubba, Uttara, Anuradha, Jyeshta,
Moola, Dhanishta, Satabhisha, Poorva-bhadra — prosperity will follow; and if they fall in
the third varga — Aswini, Bharani, Punarvasu, Pusbyami, Aslesha, Chitta, Swati, Visakha,
Uttarashadha, Sravana, Revati — expenditure and debts will come in.
NOTES With this stanza ends Rinanukulya.
Stanza 61. The anukulyas (sources of agreement) described here are very effective in
results. The effects of some of them are described elsewhere and they are noted below.
Stanza 62. Dina agreement indicates that the couple will live long; mahendra brings
in children and grand-children; streedeergha gives the husband long life; yoni confers
unfailing prosperity; gana makes the couple mutually more and more attached; and vayas
(age) brings in union and greater amity.
Stanza 63. Of the various compatibilities described, 4 are based on Janma Rasi and
one each onthe lord of the Janma Rasi, sakti (love) and vayas (age); and 16 are based on
the asterisms. Thus we have 23 items or sources of agreement in all.
Stanza 64. Of the compatibilities suggested above, some are strong and others are
weak.
Stanza 65. Their relative importance will have to be noted. According to the work
Sarvartha-siddhi, 20 items of compatibilities are to be looked into. Of these, agreement in
respect of Janma Rasi, lord of Janma Rasi, Vasya, Mahendra and Yoni are the most
important. Hence these should be carefully studied.
Stanza 66. For matrimonial purposes the most important items of concordance to be
considered are Janma Rasi, lord of Janma Rasi, Vasya, Mahendra, Gana, Yoni, Dina and
Streedeergha.
Stanza 67. According to Muhurthabharana, Janma Rasi, lord of Janma Rasi,
Mahendra, Yoni and Vasya are the five most important sources of agreement that should be

considered.
Stanza 68. Madhava gives 15 items for consideration in all. Of these Mahendra,
Yoni, Janma Rasi, lord of Janma Rasi are the most important ones. Besides, Brahmins
should look into the Gotras they are born in. Others should consider the agreement in
respect of Varna besides the five already mentioned.
Stanza 69. Five items of agreement, viz., Vasya, Mahendra, Yoni, Janma Rasi and
lord of Janma Rasi have been found to be very effective by experience by many learned
writers on the subject. Hence, at least these five should be looked into before the settlement
of the marriage is made. Besides these, Brahmins should look into their Gotras, and other
castes (Varnas), these being special to them.
NOTES
The question of a concordance in the matter of matrimony has been elaborately
described, giving the opinions of other well-known authorities. In fact the author gives 23 items
for consideration. But in this verse he is practical enough to suggest that at least five items are
very important and they should be looked into before the settlement of marriage is made.
With due deference to the great author I must record my humble difference from him. All
these items are based either on the birth star or birth Rasi. In actual practice, however, I feel that
inherent compatibility should exist in the horoscopes of the male and female if the marriage is to
be successful. The author does not allot any unit for the various Kootas as has been done in
works on Muhurtha. I commend to my esteemed readers the chapter on Marriage given in my
book Muhurtha or Electional Astrology, wherein the subject has been discussed in great detail.
Thus ends the Chapter XXI

CHAPTER XXII
Effects of Transits
Stanza 1. Varaha Mihira has detailed the effects of planets in transit in his work
Brihat Samhita. I shall describe here briefly what is given by him in that famous treatise.
Stanza 2. When the Sun transits the Janma Rasi (the sign occupied by the Moon at
birth), fatigue, loss of good name and position, painful work and diseases afflict the native;
in the 2nd, loss of money, diseases in the eye, and deception from others happen; in the 3rd,
one will experience elevation to a new position, ruin to one's enemies, increase of wealth
and good health; in the 4th, he will meet with obstacles in the matter of enjoying the
company of his wife and will suffer from diseases in the stomach.
Stanza 3. In the 5th, affliction from enemies, and diseases; in the 6th, recovery from
illness, fall of enemies and pacification of all mental griefs; in the 7th, fatigue from
journeys, helplessness and diseases connected with the stomach; in the 8th repulsion for
women and from women and fear from the rulers and diseases.
Stanza 4. In the 9th, calamities of all sorts, feelings of privation and severe diseases,
and break to one's profession; in the 10th success in all undertakings and victory in all
quarters; in the 11th, promotion to an elevated position, general prosperity, recovery from
diseases and tendency to do good actions; and in the 12th, the native will not be able to reap
the fruits of any good actions.
Stanza 5. When the Moon transits his own radical position, he brings in wholesome
food to his satisfaction, increased bed comfort and gain of valuable things; in the 2nd, the
Moon causes troubles or obstacles to all good actions, loss of fame, and money; in the 3rd,
enjoyment with women, comfort from having good clothes and fresh acquisition of wealth;
in the 4th, fear from others; and in the 5th troubles of all sorts, obstruction to journeys.
Stanza 6. In the 6th gain of wealth, general happiness, peace with enemies and
pacification of all diseases; in the 7th, wholesome and satisfactory food, presents from
others, gain of money, comfortable sleep and enjoyment of women; in the 8th trouble from
lire; in the 9th diseases in the stomach and fear of imprisonment; in the 10th, benefits from
Government; in the 11th visits from relatives and increase of wealth; and in the 12th, loss
of money and obstacles to all work.
Stanza 7. When Mars transits the birth Moon, obstacles to all undertakings; in the
2nd, fear from rulers, troubles from thieves and fire, sorrows caused by enemies, ailings in
the body caused by mental and physical griefs; in the 3rd, gain of valuable metals, favour
of God Subrahmanya and easy destruction of enemies; in the 4th, association with bad

men, diseases in the stomach, high fever, unconscious flow of seminal fluid.
Stanza 8. In the 5th, Mars gives troubles from foes, sorrows due to children, and
dread from diseases; in the 6th, gain of valuable metals as copper and gold, fear from
quarrels and misunderstandings, fresh breaks with enemies; in the 7th, misunderstanding
with the wife, diseases in the stomach and eyes; in the 8th, blood pressure due to severe
blows in the body or break of limbs and consequent diseases, fear from dishonour, mental
depression.
Stanza 9. In the 9th, loss of money, diseases and defeat; in the 10th, profits in all
ways; in the 11th, elevation to the headship of a village and general happiness; and in the
12th, troubles of all sorts, waste of money, diseases due to heat, blood pressure and diseases
in the eye.
Stanza 10. When Mercury transits the radical Moon, it indicates quarrels and
misunderstandings with relations, loss of money caused by libel or unlawful words and
writings and journeys to distant places; in the 2nd, fresh acquisition of wealth and
influence and general prosperity; in the 3rd fear from enemies and anger of rulers; in the
4th, gain of money, prosperity to relatives and general progress of family; in the 5th,
quarrels with wife and children.
Stanzas 11 and 12. Mercury transiting the 6th indicates success in all things, general
luck and rapid promotion; in the 7th, quarrels: in the 8th, victory, happiness from children,
gain of clothes, increase of income, mental peace and increase of learning; in the 9th,
diseases of all kinds; in the 10th, destruction of enemies, gain of money and happiness from
women; in the 11th good speech, fresh gains, happiness and success in everything, better
and closer association with wife and children; and in the 12th, troubles from foes and
diseases.
Stanza 13. Jupiter transiting the birth Moon involves loss of money, depromotion,
quarrels and mental dejection; in the 2nd, gain of wealth, ruin to foes, happiness with
women; in the 3rd, some change in profession, obstacles to all actions; in the 4th, sorrows
caused by relatives, want of peace from all quarters; in the 5th, acquisition of vehicles as
horses or oxen, gain of ornaments and children, happiness from women, gain of clothes,
and dwelling houses; in the 6th, tendency to feel unhappy though having everything to
make one comfortable.
NOTES
Vehicles as horses or oxen imply by horse-camages or carts drawn by oxen.
Stanza 14. In the 7th, from radical Moon Jupiter brings in cleverness in speech,
sharpness of intelligence, accomplishment of all actions and gain of money, happiness in

sexual enjoyments; in the 8th, unbearable grief, diseases, loss of liberty, over-exertion and
fatigue; in the 9th, profits, happiness with wife and children, acquisition of authority and
accomplishments and success in all actions; in the 10th, loss of position or profession,
wealth and fruitlessness of all actions.
Stanza 15. Jupiter transiting in the 11th, indicates favours, success in all actions and
elevation to a distinghished station in life; and in the 12th, fatigue caused by long walks and
severe miseries in life.
Stanza 16. Venus transiting the natal Moon denotes getting wholesome food,
enjoyment with wife, gain of perfumed articles, fresh sleeping materials and valuable
clothes and happiness resulting from these.
Stanza 17. Venus in the 2nd gives wealth and grains, acquisition of ornaments and
flowers, favour of rulers and happiness for the family members; in the 3rd, respect and
regard for one's opinions, profits, honours from others, acquisition of clothes and
destruction of enemies; and in the 4th, happy reconciliation with relatives and great
prosperity.
Stanza 18. Venus transiting the 5th indicates gain of money, birth of children, help
from relatives, satisfaction for the elders; in the 6th, troubles from enemies and diseases; in
the 7th, trouble and danger from women; in the 8th, happiness resulting from women,
acquisition of household utensils and ornaments in the family; in the 9th gain of wealth,
fruition of liberal and charitable actions and happiness and enjoyment with women.
Stanza 19. Venus transiting the 10th causes rivalry and quarrels and dishonour; in
the 11th enjoyment of good food, gain of perfumed articles and favour from relatives; and
in the 12th, gain of wealth in many ways and acquisition of clothes and ornaments.
Stanza 20. Saturn transiting birth Moon causes fear from poison and fire, loss of
relatives and friends, exile to distant lands, quarrels with one's own relatives,
misunderstandings due to monetary transactions and journeys to distant places.
Stanza 21. Saturn in the 2nd, loss of wealth, happiness and health; decrease of
desires; in the 3rd, gain of elephants, buffaloes, good health and successful termination of
all actions.
Stanza 22. Saturn in the 4th brings in a cloud to the mind, separation from wife and
one's own wealth; quarrels with all; in the 5th, sorrows arising from death of children.
Stanza 23. In the 6th, pacification of enemies and diseases; in the 7th, intimacy with
female servants and distant journeys; in the 8th misunderstanding with one's own people
and extreme helplessness. Saturn in the 9th, enemity with all, imprisonment or bondage,
obstruction to one's charitable actions and heart trouble; in the 10th, loss of fame, wealth

and education, and success in one's actions (Karma Phala).
Stanza 24. Saturn in the 11th, intimacy with other women, huge profits, increase of
honour and authority; and in the 12th, succession of intermittent griefs and overwhelming
calamities in life.
Stanza 25. Planets in the course of their transit contribute both good and evil to the
native. But, they may be made to do good by propitiation, offerings, etc.
Stanza 26. The Sun and Mars give their transit effects when they are in the
beginning of the sign; Jupiter and Venus in the middle part; and the Moon and Saturn in
the last part. Mercury gives his effects throughout the sign.
NOTES
While considering the transits one has to note that unfavourable planets when aspected by
benefics are not evil fully. Similarly favourably situated planets when aspected by malefics do
not cause good fully. If the major planets, while in transit, conjoin or aspect the ruling Dasa or
Bhukti lord, the good effects of the directional lords are augmented or delayed and the bad
effects intensified or lessened depending upon the nature of the transiting planet. If, for example,
one is having the sub-period of a yogakaraka planet, Saturn in transit aspecting or associating the
sub-lord can delay the operation of the Rajayoga.
Stanza 27. If planets in transit are adverse, they should be propitiated by
worshipping them with flowers of various hues appropriate to the planets, by wearing
apparel of the colours of the planets thus: Sun and Mars — red; the Moon and Venus —
white; Saturn — dark; Jupiter — yellow; and Mercury — green; and by reciting the
mantras of the planets and performing Homa.
Stanza 28. We shall now indicate the nature of the jewels or precious stones,
governed by the various planets, things that are to be offered in charity, the nature of the
ceremonies to be performed and the things to be avoided, when planets in transit are in
unfavourable positions.
Stanza 29. The Sun governs — manikya, the Moon — mukta, Mars — vidruma.
Mercury — garuda, Jupiter — pushyaraga, Venus — vajra, Satmn — indra-neela, Rahu
— gomedhika and Ketu — vaidurya.
Stanza 30. When the Sun is in unfavourable transit position, gift a cow of kapila
colour; for the Moon, a conch; for Mars, a red bull; for Mercury, gold; for Jupiter, yellow
silk; for Venus silver and white horse; for Saturn, a black cow; for Rahu iron and sheep;
for Ketu, an elephant and sheep.
Stanza 31. Devas and Brahmanas shall be adorned. Elderly persons should be
obeyed. Vedas and Puranas should be listened to. Homas should be performed and

witnessed. The mind should be kept pure. Vedic chants should be listened to and gifts
offered, as ordained. If these are done, unfavourable planets, however afflicted they may
be, will do good.
Stanza 32. The planets in transit in unfavourable places will not do any harm if one
resorts to taking bath every day, resorting to ritualistic baths as ordained by Badarayana;
by having dips in holy waters and pouring on the body medicated waters of the appropriate
planet.
Stanza 33. Even a ruler should avoid the following when the planets are
unfavourable: Roaming during uncommon and late hours; engaging in hunting; declaring
war and undertaking any risky action; embarking on distant journeys; riding on elephants,
horses and other dangerous vehicles; and visiting another's house.
Stanza 34. For interpreting the effects of transits, three factors have to be
considered, viz., the transit situation, vedha and vepareeta vedha.
Stanza 35. Prepare the Ashtakavargas of all the planets and mark the favourable
positions from the Moon in each. They are called Gochara. When a planet occupies a
Gochara position, its effects can be nullified by another planet occupying a Vedha Rasi
from the above. Hence its good effects will be very greatly reduced. When a planet occupies
a Vedha position in respect of another planet in transit, the effects of the planet occupying a
Vedha will be reversely nullified by the planet in Gochara position. This is known as
Vipareeta Vedha. Hence the evil effects also will be greatly minimised.
Stanza 36. All planets transiting, the 11th from the natal Moon, do only good. The
Sun is favourable in 3, 6 and 10; Saturn is favourable in 3 and 6; Mars in 1, 3, 6, 7 and 10;
Venus in all places except 6, 7 and 10; Jupiter in 2, 5, 7 and 9; Mercury in 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10;
planets should not be afflicted by a planet occupying Vedha positions. This is the view of
Sreepathi.
Stanza 37. When the Sun transits 11, 3, 10, 6 (note the order) from the natal Moon
and when no vedha is caused by other planets except Saturn occupying 5, 9, 4, 12 (note the
order), the Sun does only good.
NOTES
When the Sun transits 11, 3, 10, and 6, the Vedha position of 11 is 5, of 3 is 9, of 10 is 4,
of 6 is 12. If a planet occupies its Vedha position, the planet in transit position Will be afflicted.
Stanza 38. When the Moon transits 7, 1, 6, 11, 10, 3 and when no planets except
Mercury occupy 2, 5,12, 8, 9, 4 (in this particular order) he does only good.
NOTES
Mercury does not cause vedha to the Moon. The vedha positions for 7 is 2, for 1 — 5, for

Stanza 39. When Mars transits 3, 11, 6 and no other planet occupies its Vedha
positions — 12, 5, 9, he does only good. Saturn is similar to Mars.
Stanza 40. When Mercury transits 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 11 and no planets except the Moon
occupy 5, 3, 9,1, 8 and 11, he gives only good. The Moon does not cause Vedha.
Stanza 41. When Jupiter transits 2, 11, 9, 5, 8 and no other planet transits 12, 8, 10,
4, 3 for Vedha affliction, he does only good.
Stanza 42. When Venus occupies in transit 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 12 and 11, and no other
planet occupies 8, 7,1,10, 9, 5,11, 6, 3 and cause Vedha, he does only good.
Stanza 43. If transiting planets are afflicted by Vedha, they do not give good effects.
Similarly a planet in an unfavourable and Vedha position counter-afflicting another planet
in Vedha Rasi contributes only good. In Vipareeta Vedha, we have Varna Vedha.
Stanza 44. Even if a planet transits a favourable sign, he does not do any good if he
occupies an inimical or debilitation sign or is associated with or aspected by an inimical
planet.
Stanza 45. The planets in Gochara positions are affected differently by Vedha and
Vipareeta Vedha. These are detailed in some other works and they are culled in for making
the facts clearer.
Stanza 46. When the Sun transits a Vedbya sign (3, 6, 10, 11) the Vedha signs are in
NOTES
If the Sun transits the 3rd from the natal Moon, the Vedha sign is 9. Similarly for 6 it is
12, for 10 it is 4 and for 11 it is 5. When the Sun is passing through the 3rd (Vedhya) from the
radical Moon, he is to give benefic results. If at the same time a planet transits the 9th (Vedha)
from the radical Moon, the Sun's favourable results are negated.
Stanza 47. For the Moon the Vedhya and the Vedha signs are 1 — 5, 3 — 9, 6 — 12,
NOTES
If the transit Moon is in the 3rd (Vedhya) from the natal Moon, it can give good results. If
simultaneously another planet is transiting the 9th (Vedha), the good effects are nullified.
Stanza 48. For Mars and Saturn, the Vedhya and Vedha Rasis are 3-12, 6-9 and 11Stanza 49. For Mercury Vedhya and Vedha signs are 2-5, 4-7, 6-9, 8-1, 10-8 and 11Stanza 50. For Venus the Vedhya and Vedha signs are 2-7, 3-1, 4-10, 5-9, 8-5, 9-4, 11-

Stanza 51. The Vedhya positions for Rahu and Ketu are 3, 6, and 11 as for Saturn
and the Vedha positions are 12, 9, 5. No planet having Vedha can give beneficial results.
Stanza 52. Saturn does not cause Vedha to the Sun nor does the Sun afflict Saturn.
Similarly the Moon and Mercury are not mutually afflictive.
Stanza 53. Even if planets occupy favourable Gochara positions, they do not
contribute good if they are afflicted by Vedha. Similarly, though the Vedha sign may be
unfavourable, a planet situated there being counter-afflicted by a planet occupying its
Vedha Rasi does no evil but offers only good.
Stanza 54. If an astrologer not knowing the principles of Vedha, Vipareeta Vedha
and strength of planets makes bold to predict the Gochara effects, his predictions will never
come true to acts.
Stanza 55. In this chapter, we have described the effects of planets in transit
counting from the Moon. This is given out by the great Sage Vasishta to his pupils, and it
should not be advised to any except good pupils. This is to be treasured as a great secret.
Thus ends the Chapter XXII

CHAPTER XXIII
Diseases: Causes and Remedies
Stanza 1. Diseases have been dealt with by me in Chapter XIII. I shall now describe
the primary causes of diseases and remedial measures as given in the work Karma Vipaka.
NOTES
According to ancient Hindu conceptions certain types of diseases such as tuberculosis,
cancer, etc,, are Karma Vyadhis being the consequences of certain prohibited acts which the
native must have done in his past life. The Western medical men try to find for every disease
causes within the body, and they are treated by medicines, surgery, etc., The majority of Hindus
however still believe in the ancient theory of our suffering, physical, mental, etc., in this life,
being the consequence of certain acts done in our previous life or lives. Karma Vipaka is an
ancient work listing the various diseases, how they arise and what remedial measures, which
mainly consist of japa, homa, dana, etc., should be adopted. Western medical science has not said
and cannot say the last word on ill-health and its healing. We have to consider what the sages say
with respect and faith.
Rajayakshma (Consumption)
Stanza 2. The reason for the terrible disease consumption is that in the previous
birth, the native might have caused violence to Brahmins, hated the preceptors and elders
or might have indulged in sexual enjoyment at the times of eclipses. The remedies are
chanting the Sahasra Nama, Rudra Sukta, Aindragni and Suktas accompanied by Havana;
and giving clothes as gifts.
Karsya (Emaciation)
Stanza 3. According to smritis stealing food is the main cause for karsya or
emaciation. As a remedial measure, an image of Siva should be gifted.
Kushta Roga (Leprosy)
Stanza 4. The primary cause of leprosy can be found in murdering Brahmins,
enjoying the wife of the preceptor, engaging in illicit sale of medicines or attempting to
poison a trusted person. The remedial measures are: chanting rudra sukta, ayusukta and
gifting the images of the Sun and the bull made of gold to venerable Brahmins and
performing kushmanda homa.
Swetakushta (White leprosy)
Stanza 5. Besides the causes specified in the previous stanza, misappropriation of
large quantities of cotton rolls, clothes and bronze vessels will also lead to one suffering
from white leprosy.

Remedial measures are also the same as given in stanza 4.
Visarpa (Serpis)
Stanza 6. Killing serpents or having them killed by others is the cause for one
suffering from Visarpa. The remedy is nagadana or gifting the image of a serpent as
specified in the smritis.
Pandu Roga (Leucoderma)
Stanza 7. Stealing the wealth of the Deities and Brahmins and eating forbidden
foods give rise to leucoderma. Performance of kushmanda homa and gifting of gold are the
palliatives.
Atisara (Dysentery)
Stanza 8. Destroying tanks and wells is the cause for Atisara. The remedy as per
sages is the recitation of Rudrasukta and Varunasukta.
Graham (Face Disease)
Stanza 9. Tearing away the lips, breaking the teeth and cutting away the tongues of
others; talking ill and disparaingly of elderly persons; uttering falsehood and becoming a
false witness are the causes for disease in the face. The remedies are Kushmanda homa,
Gayatri Japa and giving in charity a gold figure of the elephant, grains and medicines.
Arsa Roga (Piles)
Stanza 10. The causes of piles are misappropriating of the wealth of the learned and
the blind; stealing food, having sex relations on prohibited days and killing cows. The
remedy is the gifting of the figure of a cow made of gold.
Netra Roga (Eye Disease)
Stanza 11. Eye diseases are the consequence of ingratitude, casting wily glances at
other women and injuring others' eyes. The remedies are giving payasa prepared with milk
or dhal, gold, ghee and gifting the figure of Garuda and performance of Homas and
chanting Netra-raksha sukta or Netraraksha mantra with devotion.
Nakandhya (Partial Blindness)
Stanza 12. The disease of nakandhya is due to the injuring or blinding of cow's eyes.
The remedies are, giving in charity the image of Gopala.
Kama Roga (Ear Disease)
Stanza 13. Back-biting, tearing away others' ears and obstructing others' actions are
said to be the causes of Karnaroga. Giving in charity land, gold, grains and woollen goods
and chanting Surya Mantra are the palliatives.
Jihwa Roga (Lingual Disease)
Stanza 14. The causes for lingual disease are scolding preceptors and elderly

persons, uttering falsehood, causing grief to others, tearing away others' tongues. Gifting
grains, medicines, performing kushmanda homa and chanting Rahu mantra or other
Suktas are the remedies.
Vat ha Roga (Rheumatism)
Stanza 15. Criticising pious and respectable people, hating parents and preceptors
and stealing food are the causes for rheumatism. The remedial measures are giving in
charity the image of a deer made of copper along with clothes and wholesome food and
reciting or chanting Vayu Sukta and other Vayu Mantras.
Soola (Colic Trouble)
Stanza 16. Having relations with virgins, animals, widows and maid-servants;
consuming prohibited food, abandoning the performance of essential rituals, indulging in
back-biting, killing a person by poison or sharp weapon are the root causes for colic
troubles. The remedies are thila dana and padma dana and gifting away a trident made of
silver or gold.
Gulma (Spleen Disease)
Stanza 17. Deep-seated enmity towards and ill-treatment of the preceptor, envy and
misuse of another's food are the main causes for the disease Gulma. The remedies are
Homa with Aindragni-sukta, chanting of Rudrasukta and Vayusukta, chanting of Gayatri
Mantra and gifting of the image of Ganapati.
Prameha
Stanza 18. Sexual relations with animals, unmarried virgins, wives of preceptors
and widows, hatred of teachers, stealing of food from Brahmins and causing grief to others
are the causes of Prameha. Besides these, illicit relations with mother, mother-in-law and
brother's wife cause madhu meha or diabetes.
Stanza 19. Homas and gifting of gold, cow, water and food and chanting of varuna
mantra relieve one of diabetes.
Mahodara (Dropsy)
Stanza 20. The cause of this disease is sex relations with the wife of the preceptor
and causing of abortions. The remedies are chanting Rudra sukta and Varunasukta and
giving in charity the image of a crocodile and water.
Mootra Krucha (Urinary Disease)
Stanza 21. Physical intimacy with unmarried virgins, animals and widows and illtreating Brahmins are the main causes for urinary diseases. The remedies are gifting
gingelly seeds and lotus flowers. Performing 'Homas' with insufficient fire leads to
Agnimandya. The palliative is the chanting of Agnimantra.

Bhagandara (Fistula)
Stanza 22. Disregarding the advice of elders and preceptors and sex-relations with
the wife of the preceptor cause Bhagandara- The remedies are giving jewels, silver, gold
and image of an elephant made of gold and chanting Gayatri mantra, Aditya-sukta and
Rudrasukta.
Vidhradhi
Stanza 23. Stealing fruits is the cause of Vidhradhi roga. The remedies are
performing amradana asper the injunctions of Smritis.
Kantha Roga (Throat Disease)
Stanza 24. Stealing public prosperty results in one suffering from throat disease.
Grahasanti and gifting ratnas are the remedies.
Siro Roga (Headache)
Stanza 25. The cause of disease of the head is hatred towards Brahmins. The
remedies are repentence and gifting of the sacred thread.
Asrugadhara
Stanza 26. This disease is caused by destroying Aswatha and other sacred trees and
injuring cows. The remedy consists of gifting a red cow.
Apasmara (Epilepsy)
Stanza 27. The cause of Apasmara is the killing of preceptors and masters. Japa,
Dana and other measures recommended in Smritis of the sages are the remedies.
Mookathwa and Unmada (Dumbness and Insanity)
Stanza 28. Ridiculing elderly persons, always engrossed in pleasures and casting
eyes on others' wives and breaking of promises lead to dumbness, lunacy etc. The remedies
suggested are gifting of an elephant image.
Fevers
Stanza 29. Fevers arising from cold and heat and recurring fevers are caused by
intimidating others with the help of a dog. Remedies are the performance of Abhisheka for
Vishnu and Siva and chanting of Panchadurgamantra and Rudrasukta.
NOTES
For fevers arising from cold and heat Abhisheka of Siva and Vishnu are said to be more
appropriate. For intermittent fevers remedies other than the two mentioned here are
recommended.
Daha (Thirst)
Stanza 30. Daha or extreme thirst arises because of sins such as intimacy with the
preceptor's wife. The remedy is giving water to the thirsty.

Vrana Roga (Ulcers)
Stanza 31. Stealing vegetables, obstructing others' speeches, maltreating others and
immoral relationship with undesirable women and destroying trees lead to ulcers. The
remedy is gifting Ratna or pearls or precious ring.
Ulcers in the hands and the legs
Stanza 32. Ulcers in the hands and legs are respectively due to causing abortion and
having immoral relationship with the preceptor's wife. Giving Ratna as a gift to Brahmins
is the remedy.
Childlessness
Stanza 33. The causes for one getting no issues are: killing children, eating eggs,
hating preceptors and others' children, killing animals, causing dissensions between mother
and child, killing young pet animals and not performing the annual sraddha ceremony. The
remedy is gifting a cow's image made of gold.
Aruchi and Chardhi
Stanza 34. Giving in charity anything without due regard and devotion will lead to a
disease known as "Aruchi". Betraying a person who trusts the native will lead to a disease
known as Chardhi. Let learned men suggest suitable remedies for these two.
Mookatwa (Dumbness)
Stanza 35. Plagiarism leads to the disease of muteness. The remedy is gifting the
image of Goddess Saraswati.
Kamila (Blindness)
Stanza 36. The cause of the disease 'Kamila' (blindness) is taking food without
washing one's feet and cleaning the hands. Gifting the image of Garuda is the remedy.
Anthra Vriddhi (Intestinal Trouble)
Stanza 37. Obstructing the performance of Yagna results in this disease. Gifting the
image of Vishnu is the appropriate remedy.
Stanza 38. For the disease Gulma iron vessels should be gifted; for leprosy, silver
coins and images; for Vatha roga (rheumatism) cow's milk; for eye diseases, gold coins
immersed in cow's ghee; for pains in the body — beds, pillows and cots; for diseases in the
stomach — fertile plots of ground.
Stanza 39. For Arsas (piles) and Bhagandhara (fistula), gold and diamonds should
be gifted and Rudrasukta chanted. For all diseases, besides the special ones recommended
in their proper places, Sahasranama, Satarudreeya and Rudrasukta should be chanted.
Stanza 40. Kings and rich people should establish free hospitals. Ordinary people
should at least give food and medicines to the sick. Then their sicknesses will disappear.

Stanza 41. The 'gift of health' is the most important of all the gifts. If anybody wants
to be free from diseases and be healthy he should help the sick with food and medicines.
Thus ends the Chapter XXIII

CHAPTER XXIV
Questions bearing on Deities, Rulers etc.
Stanza 1. In this chapter I shall describe Deva Prasna (deities), Raja Prasna (rulers),
Yuddha Prasna (war) and Mrigaya Prasna (hunting), four in all.
Stanza 2. The installation of the holy idol should be done thus: The priest is to seat
himself in a prescribed holy place and perform atma pooja after due meditation. Then he
should worship his preceptor and Ganapati and give as gifts to Brahmins gold, clothes and
cows. The holy idol should be installed at the most auspicious time.
NOTES
Generally, the installation of the idol is done by Than-trikas. Self-purification and
worship of the divinity within himself and then the worship of his Guru and god Ganapati by the
priest should precede the formal installation at the moment earlier fixed on astrological
considerations.
Stanza 3. After the installation of the idol the performance of Abhishekha and
Utsava should be conducted. This Utsava is to be repeated every year either on the
installation day or on any other auspicious day properly fixed. A careful celebration of the
Utsava brings in prosperity.
Stanza 4. God exists in the holy idol as an invisible force to bless His devotees. This
'invisible force' or Chaitanya is the perpetual source of prosperity to His Bhaktas or
devotees. If it is discovered that for some reason or other, this Chaitanya is found to be
decreasing, suitable remedial measures should be adopted to restore things to their normal
condition.
Stanzas 5, 6, 7. The following are said to impair 'the Divine Presence' in the bimba
or the installed idol. (1) Births and deaths happening within the four walls of the temple;
(2) passing of the calls of nature inside angana and mantapa; (3) the entry of prohibited
people; (4) the entry of animals like owls, eagles, crows, dogs, asses, camels, pigs, apes,
'dundubha' and 'purassara'; (5) the appearance of snake-holes, ant-hills and beehives; (6)
any signs of grief or joy and 'perspiration and sweat' in the bimba; (7) the idol gets heated
or it jerks to and fro or it falls down, or its different parts get broken or go out of order; (8)
pujas and other ceremonies are stopped for no reason; (9) worship with prohibited mantras
or forbidden flowers is being done; or (10) rubbing the idol with pepper. Of these, some are
very strong anti-forces and some are yery weak.
Stanza 8. 'Prasada' is the Body of God. 'Bimba' is the seat of Sukshma Delia'.
'Prasada' is 'Adhara'. Bimba is 'Adheya'. Harm to one affects the other. If any disorder is

found in any one of these, both should be purified. If any disorder is found outside these
(but within the four walls of the temple), purificatory ceremonies should be performed. If
there is no serious dosha it is enough if the place is sprinkled with the holy water that
remains after Kalasabhisheka.
Stanza 9. If there is any serious disorder for the Bimba or Prasada or other
subsidiary parts, it should be repaired at once. Otherwise, the efficacy of the 'Presence' will
be very much affected and calamities will befall. If the disorders are set right, then Divine
favour will shower on all.
Stanza 10. First the idol should be installed at an auspicious hour. Then the
customary worship should be performed regularly. The annual festivals should be
conducted in a regular way. If there is any disorder or dislocation to the Bimba and any
part of the temple, it should be repaired at once. Then the Deity will bestow prosperity by
His divine presence.
Stanza 11. Deva Prasna must be resorted to, to ascertain the cause of uncleanliness,
the sudden stoppage, or performance of the rituals or utsava in a topsy turvy manner,
performance of any acts which may-have destroyed the sanctity of the Deity and the
decline in the income of the temple, taking into consideration the relevant houses in the
horary chart.
Stanza 12. If the ascendant is occupied or aspected by the Sun or the Sun occupies a
kendra, or Leo is the ascendant, then the God is Siva. If Cancer is the ascendant or the
Moon associates with or aspects the ascendant or a kendra, then it is Durga. If Mars is
disposed in the above manner then the God is Skanda. If it is Scorpio and Mars is
connected with it, then it is Bhadra Kali. If Saturn is similarly disposed, then the God is
Sastha. If Mercury is disposed as above, it is Vishnu. If Jupiter is having the same
disposition, all gods are present there.
NOTES
In case of doubt as to whether any prohibitory act has affected ihe sanctity of the temple,
or the cause of uncleanliness cannot be known, or if any doubts arise regarding whether
abhicharakarma has been done to destroy the Divine presence, or if there is any appreciable
decrease in the income of the temple or any unknown causes or invisible indications revealing
that there is something wrong somewhere, Deva Prasana should be resorted to.
If the ascendant at the time of the query is Leo, or the Sun aspects or occupies the
ascendant or is in a kendra from the ascendant, then the sanctum sanctorum housing God Siva
has been polluted. If the ascendant is Taurus or the Moon occupies or aspects the ascendant or
the Moon is in a kendra from the ascendant, the deity affected is Durga. If Mars is similarly

situated, it is Skandha; if the ascendant is Scorpio and Mars is disposed as above it is Bhadrakali;
the Deity is Sasta if Saturn is the planet involved. It is Vishnu if ths planet is Mercury. If it is
Jupiter then it means all deities.
Venus has been omitted. But Tai ms and Libra can be considered as also the situation of
Venus. The deity here is Annapurna or Lakshmi. Here the verses dealing with deities as given in
Chapter XV can also be considered.
Stanza 13. In the Deva Prasna chart the 12 houses from the ascendant indicate
respectively, the 'Divine presence', wealth, temple servants conveyances, Bimba, enemies,
ornaments, offerings and oblations (naivedya), temple authorities, festivals, income and
expenditure.
Stanza 14. According to another authority the twelve houses in a deva prasna chart
signify respectively, the Bimba, the wealth of the temple, naivedya or offerings, the land,
sannidhya or divine presence, uncleanliness or pollution, the public, temple servants,
worshippers, Dcvalakas, merit, the Thanthrika or Acharya.
NOTES
There is a slight difference in the assignment of significations to the twelve houses,
between the 13th and 14th stanzas.
The Bimba is the deity or God. Sannidhya or chaitanya is the divine presence. Devalakas
are persons employed in the temple for making garlands, sounding drums and music and blowing
conches and horns. The tenth house signifies sucharitam or merit and the 12th house governs
Thantrikas or priests who instal the Deity or conduct worship.
Stanza 15. According to another view the ascendant indicates the nature of Bimba;
the 8th rules servants and articles used for worship and 'Divine Presence'; the 9th signifies
merit; the 4th denotes the various parts of the temple; the 2nd signifies the wealth of the
temple and income; the 6th suggests thieves and people engaged in destroying the temple.
Bhavas yield good results if they are aspected by or associated with benefics and evil results
if they are connected with malefic planets.
Stanza 16. According to yet another view, the ascendant indicates the temple and the
81h house governs Bimba. The various Bhavas are to be considered according to the nature
of the planets that occupy them or the nature of the planets who are friendly or inimical to
them.
Stanza 17. Here are given different views regarding the Bhavas in a Deva Prasna.
Reconciling all these conflicting views, a general study is given below:
Stanza 18. From the ascendant is to be ascertained sannidhya, temple building and
the Bimba. From the 2nd house should be ascertained wealth, income, temple treasure and

guardians.
Stanza 19. The 3rd house indicates naivedya and temple servants. The 4th house
rules all the buildings connected with the temple, vehicles (vahanas) and every bit of land
connected with the temple. The 5th house signifies 'Divine Presence' and the Bimba.
Stanzas 20 to 23. The 6th house indicates pollution of the temple, enemies and
thieves. The people and ornaments should be looked into from the 7th house. The 8th house
signifies Divine Presence, naivedya and servants and good and evil matters. The 9th house
indicates the nature of the authorities and the conditions of the merit (Punya); the 10th
house rules over daily ceremonies, festivals and 'Devalakas'. The 11th has governance over
merit and prosperity and income, while the 12th denotes expenditure and waste and nature
of the priests.
Stanza 24. The ascendant and other houses occupied by benefics promote the
sanctity of the Bimba and other significations. Malefics harm or destroy the significations.
NOTES
The exceptions in the case of the 6th, 8th and 12th houses should be noted.
Stanza 25. If Mars occupies Bimba Bhavas (1 and 5), then the idol has a bend or a
cut. If Saturn occupies the house, the idol is very old. If Rahu or Gulika is in Bimba Bhava
dirty animals, such as Dundubha, have touched it. If Ketu occupies Bimba, enemies have
bathed it with some prohibitive powder. If the Sun occupies it, the Bimba has been smeared
with pepper ointment and the efficacy of the Divine Presence has been reduced. Any evil
planet in the 12th house denotes disfigurement of the image.
Stanza 26. Saturn occupying the 4th house denotes that the entire temple complex is
worn out. Mars or the Sun in the 4tb suggests that a part of the building has been affected
by fire. Gulika disposed in the same house indicates the entry of persons in pollution. Two
malefics in the 12th reveal that outcastes and fallen people have entered the temple.
NOTES
According to some papadwaya means not two malefics, but Rahu and Ketu.
Stanza 27. Malefics in the 3rd or 8th denote that the naivedya offered is unclean. If
the planet is Saturn, what is offered is inadequate. If it is Mars regular offerings are not
made. If it is Rahu or Ketu or Gulika, some dead animal matter has been mixed up with
the naivedya.
Stanza 28, If a malefic planet occupies the 9th house, it is to be interpreted that
some misfortune has befallen the temple authorities. The particular person involved should
be ascertained from the asterism occupied by the malefic or its trinal star. In the same way,
the condition of the priests, servants, Devalakas, etc., should be ascertained.

NOTES
From the 12th house, the priests' future can be read: from the 10th, Devalakas; and from
the 3rd the temple servants.
Stanza 29. When a malefic planet is in the 7th house, some of the ornaments of the
Deity have been lost. If he occupies the 10th house, the worship or the Utsava (procession)
is not being properly conducted.
Stanza 30. Ashtabandha is to be considered from the Bimba Bhava. If this is
moveable, Ashtabandha is not strong; if it is a fixed sign, the Ashtabandha can be said to be
very strong. The strength of Ashtabandha has to be read from the 4th house also. This is
the view of some learned writers on the subject.
Stanza 31. According as the Bimba sign is moveable or adhomuka, the idol is shaky
or has fallen down.
Stanza 32. Benefic planets posited in or aspected by the ascendant, and Jupiter
occupying favourable houses indicate that the Deity is in a favourable mood to bless people.
Stanza 33. If malefics occupy the ascendant and other unfavourable houses, it is to
be inferred that the Deity is angry. The reason for the wrath depends on the nature of the
houses occupied or aspected by malefics.
Stanza 34. What is stated earlier for answering questions bearing on general
matters may be conveniently utilised in Deva Prasna also.
Stanza 35. Death of persons connected with the temple and future good, etc., can be
read from Sutra and Trisphuta. If there are indications for death, it is to be predicted that
animals like cows will die falling in wells or tanks.
NOTES
Marana Sutra is calculated by the combination of Bhavas. The nature of death depends on
those Bhavas. If death indications happen to be in the 4th and it is aspected by an evil planet
governing quadrupeds and the Bhava happens to be a watery sign, then we can say that a
quadruped will die falling in water. If it is Cancer, it will be in one year: if it is Scorpio, it will be
in one month; and if it is Pisces, it will be in a day.
Stanza 36. What is given in earlier chapters can also be intelligently utilised here. In
Deva Prasna, if indications are present for loss of money or signs of uncleanliness,
appropriate remedial measures should be prescribed.
Stanza 37. To ward off all evil and to bring about general prosperity, Bhagavat-seva,
Ganapati Homa, Bhagyasukta Japa and Abhisheka with milk and its products should be
conducted in the temples regularly.
Thus ends Deva Prasna and here begins Raja Prasna.

Stanza 38. On questions bearing on royalty, the 12 houses beginning from the
ascendant signify respectively the bodily features of the king, treasury, army and the chief
of the army, vehicles, mantra, i.e., advice and advisers, enemies, the ways of procedure to
be adopted in war, age, mental attitude or policy, administrative work, gains and losses.
NOTES
The Ascendant represents the ruler, his health and well-being. If the question relates to
the State, all details pertaining to the chief minister can be gauged from the Lagna. If it is the
Union or the Country that is the subject of the question, the well-being or otherwise of the prime
minister is assessed from the rising sign. The 2nd house rules the economic policies of the
government. The 3rd house shows the defence forces and also the neighbouring states or
countries as the case may be and relations with them. Malefics here indicate border squirmishes
and tensions between neighbouring states or neighbouring countries. The 4th house ruling
vehicles covers all domestic issues. The 5th house is very important since it gives clue to those
who surround the ruler as advisers and counsellors. The 6th house governing enemies or the
opposition is simple enough. The 7th shows warfare and matters of war and defence strategy.
The 8th house which shows age can also be taken to anticipate the time and duration of periods
of trouble, riots and violence in the state and problems in the administration. It also gives an
inkling of the span or longevity of the ruling government. The 9th house influences the policies
of the government. Mars, Saturn and Rahu afflicted in the 9th are a synonym for corruption. The
administrative machinery is covered by the 10th house. The 11th and 12th houses rule revenue
and expenditure respectively. Afflictions to the 11th show either a deficit in the State's funds or
heavy taxing programmes.
Here is information of much importance on political astrology. The ascendant represents
the personality of the ruler — the king, president, etc., the 9th indicates the policy of the ruler or
the government and the 10th administrative work.
Political forecasts in respect of a country can be made on the basis of the time of
commencement of the new year. Predictions for a desired month can be worked out on the basis
of a chart cast for the time at which the new Moon or Amavasya ends. The details furnished in
this and the following stanzas can be adopted while dealing with mundane forecasts, subject to
the modern political, social and economic factors.
Stanza 39. Malefics are harmful in houses other than the 3rd and 11th. Mars and
the Sun are favourable in the 10th house. Beneflcs generally strengthen the houses they
occupy. A benefic in the 6th removes the opposition of the enemies. The Moon in the 12th or
8th does not promote the house. Venus occupying the 7th is not favoured.
Stanza 40. Subjects partake of the good and the bad effects of the rulers. This is the

view of the learned works of the sages.
NOTES
As the king so the subjects, says a proverb. When the ruler is corrupt, unprincipled,
characterless and immoral, the people will also reflect these characteristics in their lives. The
corruption and want of character amongst the mlers in our own country are only being reflected
by the people.
Stanza 41. The good and the bad effects of a ruler are based on eight factors
signified by the houses 1 to 8. They are the ruler, his children, treasury, vehicles and
followers, the palace, wives, advisers and preceptors and subjects.
Stanza 42. When the strong Sun and the Moon occupy quadrants, or when Arudha
and the ascendant, or Arudha or the ascendant, happen to be Cancer or Leo, then the king
or the ruler will exercise his authority fully. If these are weak, he will not be able to enjoy
royal prosperity. If, however. Raja Yogas are present in the horary chart, he will be able to
exercise his royal powers.
Stanza 43. Mercury governs the heir-apparent; Mars denotes commander-in-chief;
Jupiter and Venus govern ministers. If these planets are exalted and occupy favourable
places and are aspected by benefics, these will have a prosperous career, and the king will
be able to derive benefits from them. Otherwise they will be a source of danger to the ruler,
who will not favour them.
Stanza 44. When Arudha Lagna is Urdhwa-mukha, its lord is about to enter its
exalted sign, and strong planets are in appropriate houses, then the ruler will soon assume
administrative powers.
Stanza 45. When the ascendant has a number of benefic vargas and benefics occupy
the ascendant, then the ruler will attain his ambition and secure a a new country or a new
distinguished position soon,
Stanza 46. When benefics occupy the 7th and the 10th, a high position in life is
secured. If they occupy the 1st, the 2nd and the 5th, respect and money will be conferred.
Malefics occupying the 11th or 12th (in a Raja Prasna) do not give good results. The Moon
in the ascendant is not favourable but in the 10th he is good.
NOTES
This stanza is from Shat Panchasikha or Chappana.
Stanza 47. If the ascendant is aspected by Mercury, the querist will overcome his
enemies and will gain money and lands.
Stanza 48. In an earlier chapter, "Lakshanas" signifying 'gain of elephants', etc.,
have been given. They may be utilised in this context befitting rulers.

NOTES
The chapter referred to is the 16th.
Stanza 49. Strong planets disposed in favourable houses and in particular a strong
planet posited in the 11th infallibly confer gain of objects in accordance with the
indications of the planet.
Stanza 50. When the lords of the 2nd and the 11th happen to be watery planets or
occupy watery signs and Navamsas favourably and the ascendant is a watery sign, the ruler
will get 'ships' as gain. When Capricorn is the ascendant, and the lords of the 2nd and the
11th occupy aquatic signs and Navamsas in unfavourable positions, associated with or
aspected by malefics or in combustion, then the ruler will lose many ships in the bargain.
Stanza 51. If soldiers on march put in a question, "who amongst us are going to die
and who will have success", the answer is to be given thus:
Stanza 52. Soldiers in whose Rasis Saturn, Rahu, Ketu and Gulika are placed at the
time of query and soldiers whose ascendant (or Janma Rasi) lords are in combustion will
also experience defeat. Those who stand in the directions of Sirshodaya or Urdhwamukha
signs or such ones who occupy elevated spots and places, and those who are feeling with
their hands, their heads or right hand will be victorious.
Stanza 53. Soldiers who are stationed in the south or south-east or those who are
facing these directions, or those who are touching their knee-cups or those who have their
weapons raised high, will die in the battle-field.
NOTES
When whole armies march against a ruler, it is quite likely some will die in war, others
survive but in an ignoble manner while still others may come out in glory. In such circumstances,
each soldier may want to know his fate.
As a general rule, we can predict defeat in the case of those in whose cases, at the time of
the query, Saturn, Rahu, Ketu or Gulika join the sign occupied by the Moon. The same fate
awaits also those whose lord of the ascendant at the query time is combust. This is from the
horary chart. Where it is not possible to cast a chart, the stanza also envisages the use of
lakshanas in judging the query of a soldier. Those who face the directions of the Sirshodaya
signs, that is, Gemini (S.E.), Leo (South), Virgo (S.W.), Libra (West), Scorpio (West) and
Aquarius (North) will be successful. Men who occupy elevated spots such as a heap of rubble,
stones, steps, mud mounds can also be sure of a favourable outcome. Those who touch their head
or their right hand can be sure of success in their respective duties.
More clues to discover defeat or success follow in the next stanza.
Stanza 54. When other signs of victory for the soldiers posted in the various

directions are found, the enemies will be killed and their weapons captured.
Stanza 55. The soldier who stands in a depressed ground or who feels with his hands
the left side of his body will be defeated. If other signs (of defeat) are found, he will be
wounded, or his weapons will be confiscated by the enemy or he will die.
Stanza 56. Victory falls on those who feel with their hands, their chest, head or right
hand or their weapons. The soldier, who cuts or breaks another thing at the time, will also
score success.
Stanza 57. On hearing that there is to be a war, a king or his representative may
enquire whether the enemy would invade or not. Then the answer is to be given as follows:
Stanza 58. If the Moon occupies a fixed sign, and the ascendant happens to be a
moveable sign and a moveable Navamsa, then the enemy will soon come to fight in
strength. If the Moon is in a moveable sign and the ascendant is in a fixed sign and a fixed
Navamsa, the enemy will not invade.
Stanza 59. If the ascendant is a fixed sign or the Moon is in a common sign and
Mercury, Jupiter or Venus occupies the 6th, then the enemy who has invaded will be
defeated.
Stanza 60. When the Moon occupies a fixed sign and the ascendant happens to be a
moveable sign and Navamsa, the enemy will invade in strength. When the Moon is in a
moveable sign and the ascendant falls in a fixed sign, the enemy though well prepared will
not march for fighting.
Stanza 61. If the ascendant is a fixed sign and the Moon is in a common sign, though
the enemy may have come near, will return without fighting.
Stanza 62. When the Moon is in a moveable sign and the ascendant in a common
sign, the enemy will come half the way but retire without fighting. When the Moon is in a
common sign and the ascendant in a moveable sign, the enemy will march from two
directions; and if the ascendant is aspected by malefics, the enemy will be defeated.
Stanza 63. If malefics occupy the 5th or 6th, the enemy will retreat though he has
proceeded half the distance. If malefics occupy the 4th house, the enemy will be defeated in
the fight.
Stanza 64. If malefics occupy the 1st, the 2nd, the 3rd, the 5th, the 6th and the 12th,
enemies will come to fight, but when the malefics are in the 4th, they will not come to fight.
Stanza 65. When the Sun and the Moon are in the 4th, enemies will not come to
fight. When Mercury, Jupiter and Venus are in the 4th, they will mount an attack
immediately.
Stanza 66. If Aries, Taurus, Leo or Sagittarius happens to be the ascendant or the

4th house and if any planet occupies them, the enemy will go back without fighting.
Stanza 67. If a fixed sign ascends and Jupiter or Saturn occupies it, then the enemy
will not come to fight. If the ascendant is a moveable sign and the Sun or Jupiter occupies
it, then the enemy will invade.
Stanza 68. If Jupiter or Venus occupies the 2nd or 3rd, the enemy will appear all of a
sudden with his army. In regard to a question bearing on a missing person, he will come
back safe.
NOTES
The combinations given in stanza 68, viz., Jupiter or Venus occupying the 2nd or the 3rd
from the ascendant, can also be applied to queries bearing on missing persons. If at the time of
the query the above combination is present, then the missing person will return.
Stanzas 57 to 68 give combinations to find out if an inimical ruler will march his army
against the king (querent) or not. These same combinations may be suitably adapted to presentday warfare. The nature of the signs and planets involved can also be successfully employed to
anticipate the nature of attack — aerial, naval or the army moving in.
The following planetary combinations may be noted as indicative of an invasion: All
these combinations are for the time of query.
(a) The Moon is in a fixed sign, the Ascendant is in a moveable sign and a moveable
Navamsa — the enemy comes in great strength.
(b) The Moon is in a common sign and the Ascendant is in a moveable sign — the enemy
mounts a two-pronged attack marching in from two different directions.
(c) Malefics in the 1st, the 2nd, the 3rd, the 5th, the 6th and the 12th — the enemy comes
to fight.
(d) Mercury, Jupiter and Venus are in the 4th — a sudden and immediate attack.
(e) The Ascendant is a moveable sign and the Sun or Jupiter occupies it — the enemy
will invade.
(f) Jupiter or Venus occupies the 2nd or 3rd — the enemy makes a sudden appearance or
ambushes. The nature of the rising sign is not specified.
2. Under the following circumstances, the enemy will not invade or even if the march has
begun, will abandon it:
(a) The Moon is in a moveable sign and the Ascendant is in a fixed sign and a fixed
Navamsa — an invasion by the enemy need not be feared.
(b) The Ascendant is a fixed sign and the Moon is in a common sign — the enemy will
begin his march but give it up half-way.
(c) The Moon is in a moveable sign and the Ascendant is in a common sign — the enemy

will start marching but retire without fighting.
(d) Malefics are in the 5th or the 6th — the enemy will retreat though he has marched a
long way.
(e) Malefics occupy the 4th, the enemy will not march at all.
(f) The luminaries are in the 4th — the enemy will not come to fight.
(g) Aries, Taurus, Leo or Sagittarius is the Ascendant or the 4th house and a planet
occupies it — the enemy returns without fighting.
(h) The Ascendant is a fixed sign and Jupiter or Saturn occupies it — the enemy will go
back without fighting.
3. When the enemy marches on against the querent, the outcome is decided in the
following manner:
(a) The Ascendant is a fixed sign or the Moon is in a common sign and the 6th house is
occupied by Mercury, Jupiter or Venus — the invading army will be defeated.
(b) The Ascendant in a moveable sign is aspected by malefics and the Moon is in a
common sign — the enemy will be defeated no matter what strategy it employs.
(c) Malefics occupy the 4th house — the enemy will be defeated.
These rules, though framed in ancient days as applicable to the methods of warfare
prevailing then, can still be applied in modern times with slight adaptations.
Stanza 69. Count from the asterism of the ascending degree to the asterism held by
the Moon. From the day of the query the enemy will come in as many days subject to the
condition that there are indications for the enemy's attack, and when there are no planets
intervening between the ascendant and the Moon.
Stanza 70. The time of arrival or return of the enemy is ascertained by multiplying
the period assigned to the planet indicating the event by the the number of the Navamsa it
has gained.
NOTES
According to Varahamihira, each planet is assigned a time scale, viz., the Sun ayanam (6
months); the Moon — two ghatikas or 48 minutes; Mars — a day; Mercury — a rithu (season or
two months); Jupiter — a masa (month); Venus a paksha (fortnight): and Saturn — a varsha
(year).
Suppose the planet indicating the invasion is Venus and he is in the 2nd, Cancer, having
covered 7 Navamsas. The time scale for Venus is 1 month. This multiplied by 7, viz., 7 months
indicate the probable time of invasion by the enemy.
Stanza 71. Ascertain first the house occupied by the planet that indicates the good or
bad events. Multiply this by the period governed by the lord of Lagna. This counted from

Prasna day gives the period of the fructification of the event.
NOTES
Suppose the malefics indicating invasion occupy the 4th house and the lord of the
ascendant is the Sun, whose period is 6 months. Then multiplying 4, the number of the afflicted
house by 6, we get 24 months, which means, the enemy will attack in 24 months from the day of
the query.
Stanza 72. The product obtained by multiplying the period governed by the lord of
the ascendant by the completed number of Navamsas in the ascendant will be the time
required for the success or defeat of the enemy.
NOTES
According to some pandits the time-scale of the lord of the Navamsa Lagna should be
multiplied by the number of Navamsa gained by the lord of Lagna.
Stanza 73. If the planet that indicates success or otherwise of the event occupies a
fixed sign, then its period should be multiplied by 3; and if it occupies a common sign, the
period should be multiplied by two.
NOTES
In a moveable sign, the period assigned holds good.
Stanza 74. If, at the time of query, the questioner or another person is seen standing
along with him or one of them has his hands joined together or has his hands clasped with
another, then the war will end in arbitration; or if a planet occupying its own or friendly
sign aspects the ascendant, a peace pact will be signed by the parties.
Stanza 75. When Mercury occupies the 3rd, the 6th, the 9th or the 12th and the
ascendant is aspected by benefics, it can be boldly predicted that a treaty will be signed by
the parties and there will be no war.
NOTES
According to another interpretation, Soumya means benefic planets and not Mercury.
Stanza 76. When a strong malefic occupies the 7th house, and he happens to be the
victorious one in Graha Yuddha (planetary fight), then peace will be concluded without
war, thereby gaining a lot of wealth. If, however, a malefic is in the ascendant, even if there
is to be peace, it will be temporary.
Stanza 77. If the 1st, the 11th and the 12th happen to be Nara Rasis (human signs)
and benefics occupy the same, there will be unexpected peace. Malefics in common signs
indicate no peace.
Stanza 78. Benefics occupying the 9th, the 1st, the 4th, the 7th and the 10th aspected
by benefics, denote that peace will be concluded. Malefics aspected by malefics occupying

quadrants denote that war will go on.
Stanza 79. If malefics are in Lagna, Mercury is in the 3rd and the Sun occupies the
4th, there will be war, the citizens will suffer destruction and the enemy will succeed and
the defending ruler will be defeated.
Stanza 80. When malefics are situated in quadrants in the vargas of Mars and
aspected by malefics, then there will be war.
Stanza 81. If Rahu, Ketu, Gulika or Kala occupy or aspect the ascendant, there will
be many deaths in the war. Similarly when Mars and the Sun are strongly connected with
the ascendant, the carnage will be heavy.
Stanza 82. After understanding what is meant by Sthayi and Yayi, one has to predict
victory or defeat.
Stanza 83. 'Yayi' is the invading or attacking party represented by houses 2 to 9.
'Sthayi' is the defending party signified by houses 3 to 8. The invader or defendant will be
victorious according as Yayi or Sthayi has more benefics.
Stanza 84. In the country of Kola, a kind of warfare known as 'Anga Yuddha' was
prevalent in ancient times. The party who enters the arena of fight first is Yayi and the
party that enters next is 'Poura'.
Stanza 85. 'Pouras' are the inhabitants residing within the fort, or town or city. The
invading batch is known as 'Yayi'.
Stanza 86. When Cancer, Scorpio, Aquarius or Pisces happens to be the 4th house,
the enemy will be defeated. If a quadrupedal sign happens to be the fourth house, then
enemies will retreat being defeated.
Stanza 87. When the Moon, Mars and Saturn occupy the 11th, Venus, the Sun and
Mercury are respectively in the 1st, 3rd and 4th and Jupiter is in the 5th, the enemy will be
routed and the king can return to the capital triumphant.
Stanza 88. When benefics occupy the 1st, the 7th and the 10th, the ruler will be
successful. Mercury, Jupiter and Venus in the 9th also indicate victory, Mars and Saturn
give defeat.
Stanza 89. When the ascendant and the 10th happening to be Nara Rasis (human
signs) are occupied by malefics the invading enemy will be defeated. When the 1st and the
10th are Nara Rasis occupied by benefics the invader will be victorious.
Stanza 90. When a malefic occupies the 1st, the 10th, the 11th or the 12th, the
invader will take possession of the capital. A benefic in any of these houses gives defeat to
the invader.
Stanza 91. Victory or defeat is to be read from the Sun and the Moon and the signs

they occupy. This is explained in Rana Deepika.
Stanza 92. Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius and Pisces are the Sun's or diurnal
signs. The remaining are the lunar or nocturnal signs.
Stanza 93. When the Sun and the Moon occupy diurnal signs, the ruler will be
defeated. When they occupy nocturnal signs, the invader will be defeated.
Stanza 94. When the Sun occupies a nocturnal sign, the invader will defeat the
besieged and when the Moon occupies a diurnal sign, the invader will be repulsed.
Stanza 95. When the Sun and the Moon are respectively in their own, i.e., diurnal
and nocturnal signs, though the fighting parties be young and well equipped, will not desire
to fight.
Stanza 96. When strong malefic planets occupy unfavourable places, the asterisms
involved must be noted. The parts of the body signified by the constellations, as reckoned
from the birth asterism, get injured or wounded.
NOTES
The 27 constellations govern the different parts of the body of the soldier thus:
Janma Nakshatra or birth asterism — face; the 2nd — left eye; the 3rd, 4th and 5th —
head; 6th — right eye; 7th — right ear; 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th — right hand; 12th, 13th and 14th
— right leg; 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th and 19th — chest and heart; 20th — neck; 21st, 22nd, 23rd
and 24th — left hand; and 25th, 26th and 27th — left leg.
Stanza 97. A ruler should begin to collect materials for war on a day ruled by
Dhanishta. He should collect money and make his first appearance amidst his enemies on
the day ruled by Poorva-bhadra. He should declare war at the time when Mars and the
Moon occupy their own vargas in the same Navamsa in the ascendant. Then he will secure
victory.
Stanza 98. On a Tuesday, when Mars is in the ascendant or at the time of
Vishaghatika, the ruler taking an arrow or some water and assuming it to be fiery should
shoot it in the direction of the enemy. If the arrow is sent in Vishti Kala from that quarter
(Dik) governed by that Vishti, the enemy can be easily defeated.
Stanza 99. Indications or signs, pointing when wars and other calamities devour a
country, are clearly explained in the Samhita by Varaha Mihira. They are noted below.
Stanza 100. When temples, forts, festoons, flagstaff are affected by fire, the enemy
will invade the country within six months.
Stanza 101. When it smokes without fire, when dust and darkness pervade the
atmosphere, terrible experiences are in store for the country. Asterisms invisible in a
cloudless sky at night and visible in broad day light indicate that some danger is at hand.

Stanza 102. Though there is no wind, branches of trees tear away from them; trees
fall off uprooted; fearful sounds are heard from the tops of trees. These indicate imminent
war, deposition of kings and epidemics everywhere.
NOTES
These are to be looked into, when there is fear of invasion, or when the future of a king is
being considered in a Prasna.
Stanza 103. Trees and creepers bloom in certain periods. When they blossom in
other periods, fall of kingdoms or destruction in the country can be predicted. If they
bloom prematurely death of children and if any fluid oozes out of trees, destruction to all
things can be predicted.
Stanza 104. If any fluid resembling liquor issues out of trees, vehicles will be
destroyed. If any watery substance resembling blood issues out, there will be war; if any
liquid resembling honey comes out, there will be epidemics; if anything like oil issues out
there will be poverty and if anything as thin as water issues out, there will be great fear
affecting the people.
Stanza 105. If the tree of worship (generally preserved in a palace) blossoms in
untimely periods and yields fruits in the unusual seasons, it forebodes the ruler's death. In
the same manner, if smoke or fire issues out of that tree, it forebodes the death of the ruler.
Stanza 106. Dead trees put forth fresh leaves, trees die without any legitimate cause,
fallen trees rise up of their own accord and put forth leaves; these indicate some divine
danger is at hand.
Stanza 107. When trees seem to shiver and sounds emanate from them, it signifies
that some calamities affecting the people in general are nearby. When all such abnormal
phenomena take place, results come within ten months.
Stanza 108. Weapons seem to burn, or to make unusual sounds or to shiver and
shake; they come out of the sheath of their own accord, cuts and breaks take place. All
these show that a fearful war is impending.
Stanza 109. Birds that generally inhabit towns and villages begin to migrate to
forests, and forest birds frequent inhabitable spots in large numbers; animals that are seen
during daytime are seen during night and, nocturnal ones frequent broad day light. These
also indicate danger.
Stanza 110. When a palace, or sacred trees kept near the harem or doorway of a
fort, are being afflicted by birds coming in large numbers, or by honey-hives or by natural
and wild growth of mallika and lotus creepers or by the frequent appearance of serpents,
there will be ruin in the country.

Stanza 111. When any house becomes the repository of bones and remains of the
dead body brought in by dogs, the owner of the house will die.
Stanza 112. If lire and smoke are perceived in a forest where there is no fire, both in
the morning and evening, long and deep cracks are discovered in the lower strata of the
ground, or if the whole ground seems to shiver and shake, then some danger is at hand.
Stanza 113. When children carrying weapons, sticks and stones roam about crying,
"cut, beat, carry off, divide", some unexpected danger is at hand.
Stanza 114. The house marked or disfigured by cinder or some coloured mud will go
to ruins; when the picture of the owner is drawn or the figure of pretas engraved in any
decent family house, it will soon be destroyed.
Stanza 115. The house not kept clean by frequent sweeping but allowed to be
covered by cob-webs; the house where the sacred lights are not lit; and the house where low
class women quarrel, will go to dogs.
Stanza 116. The kingdom of a ruler who tolerates atheists and counter-religionists,
and who disregards good usages and customs and who is always jealous, angry and
impatient and who is interested only in fighting, will go to rack and ruin.
Stanza 117. Signs or indications should be peculiar and abnormal. They should not
form part of the customs of the place, or of the times or of the community.
NOTES
The various omens listed in these stanzas should relate to abnormal phenomena and not
to existing situations.
Stanza 118. When an army marches to the battle-field, the presence of flesh-eating
birds in the rear indicates the defeat of the army in the battlefield. Flight of birds (a bevy of
them) in the front of the army is auspicious.
Stanza 119. The good and bad results should be predicted by the astrologer after a
careful study of the various shades of differences in the omens.
Stanza 120. As it is very difficult to estimate the strength of planets and signs, omens
help very much the elucidation of their real strength.
Stanza 121. Whenever the above-mentioned unfavourable omens are perceived, the
prescribed remedial measures should be performed and the threatened evil effects will not
happen.
Stanza 122. To secure victory, the ruler should start war on an auspicious day, tithi,
rasi and nakshatra.
NOTES
The day and time should be fixed on the basis of mles given in works on Muhurtha. The

auspicious time is said to ward off the evils indicated by the omens and planetary positions.
Stanza 123. The lord of the Varna of the ruler should be strong at the time when
righting begins. The lord of his birth-ascendant should also be very strong. The rising sign
must be urdhwamukha and sirshodaya and moveable. The proscribed asterisms should be
avoided.
NOTES
To start the lighting on auspicious time should be fixed with the following dispositions:
(a) The planet ruling the caste of the ruler should be strong;
(b) The lord of the birth ascendant of the ruler should be strong;
(c) The Muhurtha Lagna, i.e., ascendant to start the war, should be urdhwamukha,
sirshodaya and a moveable sign.
The sirshodaya signs are: Gemini, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio and Aquarius.
Bharani, Krittika, Aridra, Aslesha, Makha, Pubba, Visakha, Jyeshta, Moola,
Poorvashadha, Poorvabhadra are the prohibited stars. The 4th (chaturthi), the 6th (shashthi), the
8th (ashtami), the 9th (navami), the 12th (dwadasi) and the 14th (chaturdasi) should be avoided
as also Sunday, Tuesday and Saturday and Aries, Leo, Scorpio, Capricorn and Aquarius.
Stanza 124. When the sign in which the omen appears is beneficial, when planets in
transit are favourably disposed, the king should march the army, avoiding prohibited
asterisms, the constellation of Chitta and the chidra lunar days.
NOTES
The chidra tithi or prohibited lunar days are the 4th (chaturthi), the 6th (shashthi), the 8th
(ashtami), the 9th (navami) and the 14th (chaturdasi).
Stanza 125. Prishtodaya signs are not good for journeys. So also fixed signs. Gemini
is inauspicious and causes the downfall of the ruler.
Stanza 126. Urdhwamukha signs when occupied by benefics are good for journey.
So also fixed signs. But Aquarius is ordinary and causes harm. Gemini even if conjoined by
benefic planets should be avoided. This is the view of sage Garga.
Stanza 127. Journey started in a sirshodaya sign leads to the achievement of the
object in view. A prishtodaya sign defeats one's object. Armies will have to retreat after
defeat. Easy attainment of the aim can be had by starting towards the various directions
governed by the various signs. The counter-Diks bring in only defeat.
NOTES
Aries and its trines indicate East: Taurus and its trines indicate West; Gemini and its
trines rule South and Cancer and its trines denote North.
Stanza 128. Journey during day should be conducted in diurnal signs, and during

night in nocturnal signs; if vice versa the result will be unfavourable. If the journey is
begun when the Sun and the Moon are in tie ascendant which should be a moveable sigp,
the object will be realised.
NOTES
If the Sun, the Moon and the ascendant are together in a fixed sign, return to own place
can be done. Common signs are suitable for starting the journey and also for returning.
Stanza 129. The 2nd, 3rd, 6th and 10th signs from the birth-ascendant and radical
Moon of the native are auspicious for the journey.
NOTES
According to some the ascendant at the time of the journey could also be the sign of the
native's ascendant at birth or his radical Moon-sign.
Stanza 130. When the ruler starts at a time when the 8th house from the rising sign
or the Janma Rasi of the enemy is occupied by a malefic planet, the enemy will be
destroyed.
Stanza 131. When the Moon occupies the 4th (from the ascendant at the time of the
journey), or when the lord of the 6th occupies the ascendant, the native will experience
grief. When the lord of the Dik (direction) towards which the ruler starts happens to be
weak and is posited in the 6th, the 8th or the 12th, then grief, ill-repute and death will come
to pass.
Stanza 132. The following should be avoided: (a) The 6th and 8th signs from the
birth ascendant or radical Moon of the person; (b) the signs occupied by the lords of the
6th and the 8th from the birth ascendant and the birth Moon; (c) when the lords of the
birth ascendant and the birth Moon become weak (in the election chart), or these signs are
afflicted by malefics; and (d) the lord of Dik (direction), the ascendant and the benefics at
the time are weak: When the journey is undertaken in the above-mentioned periods losses
alone will happen.
Stanza 133. When the Moon occupies the 4th from the ascendant (at the time of the
war), there will be some initial successes but the end will be fatal. When the lord of the
direction towards which the ruler travels, occupies the 6th or the 8th from the ascendant
(in the election chart), the result will be grievous.
Stanza 134. The 6th, the 8th and the 12th houses from the Janma Lagna of a person
should be avoided for everything. Shaving, marriage and journeys can be conducted in the
6th from the Janma Rasi.
NOTES
The ascendant at the time of undertaking any activity should not fall in the 6th, the 8th or

the 12th from one's Janma Lagna or Janma Rasi. But in regard to travel, marriage, shaving, the
Muhurta ascendant can fall in the 6th from one's Janma Rasi.
Stanza 135. There is an imaginary log or stick known as Parigha. Its lay is as
follows: Krittika to Aslesha — east and south-east, Makha to Visakba — south and south¬
west, Anuradha to Sravana (including Abhijit) west and north-west and Dhanishta to
Revati — north and north-east.
Stanza 136. The lay of the Parigha for 14 days from Dhanishta to Aslesha is north¬
east (vayavya). Hence on those days it is inauspicious to travel south or west. The lay of the
Parigha for 14 days from Makha to Sravana is south-west (nairiti). Hence, on those days it
is inauspicious to travel north to east. Women and cows are excepted.
Stanza 137. The constellations Jyeshta, Poorva-bhadra, Rohini, Uttara, Pushyami,
Hasta, Sravana and Aswini respectively denote diksoola in the east, south-east, south,
south-west, west, north-west, north and north-east. Travel in the various directions should
not be undertaken in the constellation denoting the diksoola.
NOTES
For instance Jyeshta shows sula towards the east. No journey should be undertaken
towards the east on a day ruled by Jyeshta. Similarly with regard to the other asterisms, travel
towards directions in constellations declared as indicating sula should be avoided.
Stanza 138. According to Brihaspati, asterisms Rohini, Mrigasira, Pushyami, Hasta,
Anuradha, Sravana, Dhanishta, Revati are auspicious for all quarters. Varaha Mihira
considers Aswini, Pushyami, Hasta and Anuradha to be good for all places.
Stanza 139. Travel should be avoided towards directions on days ruled by asterisms
declared to be Parigha thus: Uttarashadha and Sravana — east; Aswini and Uttarabhadra
— south; Rohini and Pushyami — west and Uttara and Hasta — north.
Stanza 140. The 25th and 27th asterisms from one's birth star should be avoided for
journeys. According to some, these stars are inauspicious for all good actions.
Stanza 141. The constellation Moola is good for all journeys. Chitta is unfavourable
for all journeys. According to some, the 1st lunar day is auspicious while others say it is not
favourable for journeys.
Stanza 142. The groups of lunar days — Nanda, Bhadra, Jaya and Purna — are
auspicious for travel towards east, south, west and north respectively. Adhomukha signs
are not favourable.
NOTES
Nanda tithis are the 1st (pratipada), the 6th (shashti) and 11th (ekadasi); the Bhadra tithis
are the 2nd (dwiteeya), the 7th (saptamf) and the 12th (dwadasf); Jaya tithis are the 3rd

(triteeya); 8th (ashtami) and 13th (trayodasi); and pooma tithis are the 5th (panchami), 10th
(dasami) and 15th (Paornima). At the time of a journey the ascendant should not fall in an
adhomnkha sign.
Stanza 143. To travel east on a Tuesday is good; towards south — Monday and
Saturday; towards west — Wednesday and Thursday; and towards north — Sunday and
Friday. No journey should be undertaken towards the east on a Sunday; south —
Thursday; west — Friday; and north — Monday.
Stanza 144. According to Brihaspati the following week-days are inauspicious for
travelling towards different directions: Thursday and Friday — east; Tuesday — south;
Saturday and Monday — west; and Thursday and Wednesday — north.
Stanza 145. The following are auspicious for travel: east — Tuesday; south —
Monday and Saturday; west — Wednesday and Thursday; and north — Wednesday and
Friday.
Stanza 146. Starting on a Sunday brings in calamities in the way; Monday — want
of enthusiasm and some obstruction for meals; Tuesday — fear from burns and pitta
(bilious troubles); Wednesday — reconciliation with friends; Thursday — success and
profits; Friday — gain of clothes, wealth and women; Saturday — diseases and
imprisonments and even death.
Stanza 147. The effects of journeys undertaken during the Kala-hora of different
planets are similar to the effects of week days mentioned above with this difference, viz.,
journey in the Moon's Kala-hora brings help from women and gain of jewels.
Stanzas 148 and 149. It is auspicious to undertake a journey to that quarter, the lord
of which, is in a quadrant or occupies the right quarter calculated in the order of
Nakshatras. It is also auspicious when the lord of the weekday occupies the Upachaya Rasi
or the right quarter in the order of Nakshatras.
It is auspicious, even though rejected on other grounds, to begin a journey when the
lord of the weekday occupies 3, 6, 10 and 11 from Yatra Lagna. Though accepted on other
grounds, it is not auspicious to start when the lord of the weekday occupies other than an
upachaya place.
Stanza 150. If, at the time of starting, the Moon joins with malefics, sickness will be
the result. If he is associated with benefics, the native will quarrel with the person with
whom he travels. Hence the Moon should not be conjoined by any planet good or bad.
Stanza 151. When you undertake a journey keeping the dik or direction expressed
by the asterism in which Venus stands to your left, you will not return and you will meet
with death. This Sukra Dosha is ineffective when you go out of the country caused by

famines, floods etc., or when your journey limits itself to neighbouring parts or when Venus
is exalted or occupies own house.
Stanza 152. No journey should be undertaken towards a Dik where Gulika, Saturn
or vishti stands. The opposite side brings in success.
Stanza 153. A journey by water should be undertaken in mridu, kshipra and chara
constellations. The ascendant must be a watery sign; and Capricorn sign or Navamsa
should be excluded.
NOTES
Aswini, Pushyami, Hasta are kshjpra constellations; Punarvasu, Swati, Sravana,
Dhanishta, Satabhisha are chara constellations; and Mrigasira, Chitta, Anuradha and Revati are
mridu constellations.
Stanza 154. In fixing the time for a journey (Yatra Lagna) the following dispositions
should be avoided: (i) The Moon in the bright half in the 1st, 6tb, 8th; (ii) the Moon in the
dark half in the 7th or 10th; (iii) Venus in the 6th, 7th or 10th; (iv) Jupiter in the 3rd, 8th or
10th houses; (v) malefics in all houses other than 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th; Rahu and Saturn
in the 10th; and (vi) all planets in the 12th.
Stanza 155, 156 & 157. The Sun in the 1st bouse at the time of starting (yatra
Lagna) brings in grief, heat, diseases and obstacles; in the 2nd, destruction of health,
wealth, fame and the army; in the 3rd, gain of money, food, pearls and lands; in the 4th,
quarrel with relations and dislike for everything, discomfort in sleep and travels; in the 5th,
danger to children and gain of wealth from the wayside; in the 6th destruction of enemies
and accomplishment of desired object; in the 7th loss of money and quarrels with wife; in
the 8th, death, or deadly danger; in the 9th, charity decreases and money is gained; in the
10th, success without one's exertion or personal knowledge; in the 11th, gain of jewels; in
the 12th, loss of money in all ways.
Stanza 158. The Moon in the 1st, quarrels and grief; in the 2nd, gain of clothes,
women and jewels, favour from sons and relations; in the 3rd, gain of women, jewels and
wealth; in the 4th, gain of money (if the Moon is bright) and death of relations (if dark).
NOTES
When the full Moon occupies Lagna, peace and pacification, of all griefs crop in.
Stanzas 159 and 160. The Moon in the 5th indicates gain of money and loss of
children; in the 6th, quarrels with relations and grief; 7th gain of wealth, lands and
women: if he is weak, loss of money; 8th, death or grief; 9th, the person will not return
immediately, his mission will meet with success; when Moon is in the 10th, loss of money;
strong Moon in the 1st, increase of wealth; in the 11th gain of money, happiness and

prosperity; and in the 12th, fear, loss of wealth, grief and diseases.
Stanzas 161, 162 and 163. Mars in the 1st indi-cases fear from fire and poison,
trouble from weapons and diseases due to blood corruption; in the 2nd, danger to the army
but the attainment of all objects; in the 3rd, gain of women, jewels, wealth and clothes; in
the 4th, fear from enemies and death of relatives; in the 5th, danger to children; in the 6th,
destruction of enemies unexpectedly; in the 7th, loss of money, grief from enemies and
diseases; in the 8th, danger to relatives, loss of money, grief from diseases and fear of death;
in the 9th obstruction to charity; 10th, good according to some and bad according to other;
in the 11th, gain of money and prosperity; and in the 12th, great loss of money.
Stanzas 164 & 165. Mercury in the ascendant indicates fame, happines, success and
accomplishment of aim; in the 2nd, gain of money sometimes carefully and sometimes
carelessly; in the 3rd, accomplishment of one's desired objects; 4th, comfort in sleep, in
food and prosperity; in the 5th, happiness from sons; in the 6th, death of enemies and
accidents to oneself; in the 7th, company of good women and acquistion of clothes and
money; in the 8th, happiness according to some and misery according to some others; in
the 9th, increase of charitable deeds; in the 10th, attainment of all objects: in the 11th,
increase of education and wealth without exertion; and charitable deeds; in the 12th, much
expenditure.
Stanzas 166,167 & 168. Jupiter in the 1st indicates fame; in the 2nd, gain of money;
in the 3rd, fatigue due to travels; in the 4th, respect accruing from charitable actions; in the
5th, attainment of impossible aims; in the 6th, control of enemies or according to some
being won over by the enemy; in the 7th, fame, wealth and women; in the 8th, death or
according to some, the person will live long; in the 9th, birth of a son and increase of
charitable deeds; in the 10th, gain of money and success in all actions; in the 11th,
attainment of desired objects: and in the 12th, all sorts of grief.
NOTES
There appears to be some contradictions in the description of the results of planets
occupying different places from Yatra Lagna. For example, in stanza 154, Jupiter's situation in
the 10th is not favoured where as according to stanza 168, Jupiter in the 10th indicates gain of
money etc. The author does not not appear to have indicated how such contradictions could be
resolved. Under such circumstances an astrologer should go by his own power of analysis and
interpretation.
Stanzas 169 and 170. Venus in the 1st indicates favour of dancing girls, success in all
actions, gain of clothes and garlands and comfortable food; in the 2nd, gain of money; in
the 3rd, never gets tired; in the 4th, closer association with relations; in the 5th, gain of

wealth, station in life and fame; in the 6th, trouble from enemies, grief, want of comfort in
sleep or travels or long stay in a place; some are of the opinion that Venus in the 6th brings
in happiness and defeat of the enemy; in the 7th, gain of women and wealth in the
beginning and in the end loss of everything; in the 8th, success in one's aims; in the 9th,
accomplishment of one's objects without delay; in 4he 10th, gain of much wealth; in the
11th, success and monetary gains; and in the 12th, grief and want of rest according to
some; some are of the opinion that it is good.
Stanza 171, 172 and 173. Saturn in the 1st in the travel ascendant signifies
imprisonment and death; in the 2nd, loss of money; in the 3rd destruction of the enemy; in
the 4th, others will bring about the destruction of the relatives; in the 5th, failure in
everything; in the 6th, enemies will be vanquished; in the 7th, diseases in the eyes and want
of enthusiasm; in the 8th, death from poison, fire and weapons; in the 9th, no happiness or
feelings of charity; in the 10th, break in one's profession and grief; in the 11th, gain of
money and success over the enemy; and in the 12th, all kinds of calamities.
Stanza 174. Malefic planets in the 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th confer beneficial results.
But Saturn in the 10th is bad. Benefics in all houses are productive of good but Venus in the
7th does not give favourable results.
Stanza 175. A planet unfavourable by position etc., at the time of birth, though a
benefic, does not do good when he occupies Yatra Lagna. A planet favourable by position
and strong though a malefic, does not do harm when he occupies Yatra Lagna.
NOTES
This is a suggestive stanza which can also be applied to the Gochara or transit results of
planets. A natural benefic may occupy unfavourable positions etc., in the birth chart. Such a
planet placed in the ascendant at the time of starting a journey (Yatra Lagna) does not confer any
beneficial results. Likewise a malefic planet which occupies a favourable position in the birth
chart can do no harm if he is placed in the ascendant.
Stanza 176. A planet weak according to horoscope and unfavourable in Gochara
movement and inimical to the prevailing Dasa lord, though a benefic does not do any good
to the native if he occupies Yatra Lagna.
Stanza 177. A planet strong at the time of birth and favourable at the moment and
friendly to the lord of the Dasa prevailing at the time, though a malefic, does give only
favourable results to the native, if he occupies Yatra Lagna.
Stanza 178. If the lord of the sign occupied by the Moon at the time of birth of the
enemy is in combustion or debilitated or in Yatra Lagna or 6th house from the same,
journey undertaken will end in good.

NOTES
Here the idea is that if the lord of the Janma Rasi in the birth chart of the enemy is
combust or in debility in the Yatra chart, or occupies the ascendant or the 6th in the Yatra chart of
the person who wishes to declare war, then the person concerned will be successful. All the
above 4 stanzas can be applied in individual cases when dealing with one's enemy or the
opponent. Suppose X (plaintiff) wants to fde a suit against say Y (defendant), then X must elect
an auspicious time so that in the election chart the lord of the Janma Rasi of the defendant is
debilitated or occupies the Lagna or the 6th at the time of filing the suit by the plaintiff. This is
supposed to ensure success in the court affair. Similarly this principle can be used while filing
election applications. In actual practice we have found that stanza 178 can be applied
successfully.
Stanza 179. Certain yogas formed by the planets at the time of a journey as
explained in Madhaveeya and other works can be applied to all-rulers and the common
people.
Stanza 180. Though 'Yogas' affect all alike, it is more effective in the case of rulers.
This is the view of Acharya Madhava.
Stanza 181. Kings should carefully examine the yogas when fixing auspicious times
for journeys, while Brahmins, Vaisyas andSudras should examine the lunar day and
asterism. Thieves should consider the omens. All others should carefully fix a Muhurtha
when they undertake any journey.
NOTES
The author is clear in suggesting that the rulers should carefully consider the yogas i.e.,
the various special combinations given in the above stanzas. It implies that so far as others are
concerned consideration of the lunar day (tithi) and constellation (nakshatra) is adequate. Of
course thieves and robbers are askad to take note of "omens". The reference to thieves by the
author appears to imply that in his days there might have been 'decent' thieves who believed in
"robbing Paul and paying Peter." Our grandfather used to say that he was himself aware, in his
younger days, of the existence of certain thieves, who were men of character and principles in all
respects but believed in thieving so that what they stole could be distributed to the poor and the
needy.
Stanza 182. The exact direction which the vehicles carrying the weapons of war etc.,
should take when the army begins its march to secure victory over the enemy should be
carefully noted. This has been explained in Madhaveeya.
Stanza 183. A king when commencing the journeys ought to place his right foot
firmly on the ground. After walking 32 feet of ground, he should get into his vehicle. He

should mount on an elephant's back, use his chariot, ride on horse-back or make use of
palanquins according as the direction is towards the east, south, west or north respectively.
Stanza 184. When he once starts he can halt only after travelling 1000 dhanus or 500
dhanus or in case of unavoidable necessity he can halt after going 100 dhanus.
Stanza 185. After his starting the journey, a king should not stop in a place for more
than 10 days continuously. Ordinary people cannot stop for more than five days. If they
exceed the time limit, they should again fix a new Muhurtha for starting.
Omens
Stanza 186. Sneezing at the commencement of any undertaking is not good. If a cow
does this at the time, death will happen. If this is done by aged persons, young children and
sick men, the evil effect need not be considered.
Stanza 187. Sneezing is considered good when taking medicine, when getting into a
vehicle, when sitting, when lying down for rest, when taking food when commencing
education, and when sowing seeds.
Stanza 188. When burning cinders, elephant, horse,bhadra deepa, dancing girls,
kusa gross, fresh mud, rice, sugarcane, chamara, eatables and weapons happen to be omens
at the time of a journey, they bring in good.
Stanza 189. Bheri, mridanga, mritu madhala, sanka, veena, the sound of vedic
chants, appealing and agreeable music, a young woman with her baby, a cow with its calf, a
washerman with his washed clothes, are also auspicious omens.
Stanza 190. One should not proceed on his journey if he happens to hear others
quarrelling or crying.
Stanza 191. Suppose a question is asked, "What will be my fate in today's fighting;
death, victory or injury?", the answer should be given thus:
Stanza 192. Persons born in the constellations which happen to be the 2nd, 27th or
11th to 19th from that held by the Sun (at the time of journey) will meet with death. Those
born in the 3rd, 4th, 20th and 21st will get a sort of success. And those born in the
remaining ones will secure complete victory.
NOTES
This arrangement is called the Surya Chakra. Suppose the Sun is in the asterism of
Aslesha at the time of starting the journey, the 2nd, the 27th, the 11th, the 12th, the 13th, the
14th, the 15th, the 16th, the 17th, the 18th and the 19th happen to be Makha, Pushyami, Moola,
Poorvashada, Uttarashada, Revati, Aswini, Bharani, Krittika, Rohini and Mrigasira. If the person
who contemplates to start the journey is born in any of these stars, the result is death.

The 3rd, 4th, 20th and 21st from the constellation occupied by the Sun are Pubba, Uttara,
Aswini and Bharani. If the person concerned is bom in any of these stars, the result is some sort
of a success.
The remaining stars are the 5th, 6th, the 7th, the 8th, the 9th, the 10th, the 22nd, the 23rd
the 24th, the 25th and the 28th are Hasta, Chitta, Swati, Visakha, Anuradha, Rohini, Mrigasira,
Aridra and Punarvasu. If the person is born in any of these, he will secure complete success.
Stanza 193. Persons born in the asterisms which happen to be the 2nd and 27th
from that held by the Sun will experience a sensation of fear. Victory will be secured, when
the birth constellations happen to be the 3rd to 10th. Death will happen when the birth
asterisms are occupied by the Sun and the 14th and 15th from it. Sickness will result when
the birth star is the 26th, 2nd, 13th, 15th and 16th. This is called Surya Kalagni Chakra.
NOTES
Suppose the star held by the Sun is Rohini. The 2nd and 27th from this will be Mrigasira
and Rrittika respectively. Those born in these two stars will experience fear.
The 3rd to 10th stars from Rohini are Aridra, Poonarvasu, Pushyami, Aslesha, Makha,
Pubba, Uttara, Hasta. Birth in these stars denote victory.
Asterism occupied by the Sun and the 14th and 15th from it are Hasta, Uttarabhadra and
Revati. Those born in these will meet with death.
The 27th, 2nd, 13th, 15th and 16th from the star held by the Sun are Rrittika Mrigasira,
Visakha, Anuradha and Jyeshta. Birth in these indicate sickness.
Stanza 194. Those born in the asterism occupied by the Sun, the 2nd, the 9th, 10th,
11th, 18th, 19th and 20th from it will die; persons born in the 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th
and 17th from that occupied by the Sun will be defeated; persons born in the 3rd, 4th, 5th,
6th, 7th, 8th, 21st to 26th, from that occupied by the Sun will score victory. This is Surya
Soola Chakra.
Stanza 195. Suppose the question is asked: "From which side should I fight to get a
victory or defeat ?" Then the answer should be given by carefully studying "Bhumi Virya"
as given below.
Stanza 196. The 12 lunar months beginning from Chaitra have 24 pakshas or halflunar months. Three pakshas are to be allotted to the eight directions beginning from the
east. Thus in the two pakshas of Chaitra and one of Vaisakha, the east is strong. Thus is to
be found out the bhumibala or the vitality of the earth. If the fighting started keeping the
strong dik either to the back or to the right, victory can be scored.
NOTES
The twelve lunar months are Chaitra, Vaisakha, Jyeshta, Ashadha, Sravana, Bhadrapada,

Asweeja, Kartika, Margasira, Pushya, Magha and Phalguna. The diks or directions are to be
assigned thus:
East is strong — Chaitra 2 pakshas and in Vaisakha 1 paksha.
South-east is strong — Vaisakha 1 paksha and in Jyeshta 2 pakshas.
Thus, if fightings begin in Jyeshta Masa, the army should be so placed as to have S.E in
its back or to its right to ensure victory.
Stanza 197. We have given something regarding Yuddha Prasna. More details can
be had from other works and the results of war predicted.
Mrigaya Prasna
Stanza 198. If the 8th house happens to be owned by Mars or occupied by him, or if
Mars is posited in a kendra, a pig with its young ones will be shot dead. If the Sun occupies
a kendra, a tiger will be shot dead. If Venus occupies the 1st, 8th or 11th and Mercury is in
a quadrant, no animal can be shot dead. If Venus occupies the 1st, 8th or 11th and Mars is
in a quadrant, a pig will be shot but it will escape.
Stanza 199. If the ascendant is a moveable sign occupied by Mars, Gulika is posited
in the 8th and Saturn stands in the 4th, a pig will be captured in the hunt.
Stanza 200. The Sun, Saturn, Mars and Rahu occupying the 4th, 7th, the ascendant
and the 10th indicates the death of many animals in the hunt.
Stanza 201. When malefics occupy moveable signs and benefics are in fixed signs
and Gulika is in the 3rd, many animals such as tigers, etc., will be ki lled.
Stanza 202. If malefics occupy kendras or quadrants, the 5th or the 9th, Mandi is
posited in the 3rd, and Capricorn happens to rise, animals will be captured in the hunt.
When the Moon and Mars are in the 8th, Gulika is in the 3rd, and Yamakantaka occupies
the 9th a pregnant animal will be killed. The nature and kind of the animals are to be
ascertained from the rising decanate.
Stanza 203. That which helps the easy killing or capture of animals in a hunt is the
elevation or depression of the ground. This can be known from the Rasi or planet. The
number of animals to be captured should be ascertained from the number of planets in
combustion, in debilitation, or in inimical places.
Stanza 204. In Sara Samgraha, animals have been classified under various heads as
bipeds, quadrupeds, etc., and planets also have been allotted relationships to animals. They
are given below: —
Stanza 205. The Sun governs lion and other superior animals; the Moon, hare and
other gentle animals; Mars, tiger, leopard and such cruel animals; Mercury, pig and hog;

Jupiter, elephant and horse; Venus, deer and stag; Saturn, donkey and camel and Rahu,
creeping animals as godha. The Sun and Saturn govern bipeds, the Moon and Mercury,
six-legged animals, Mars and Jupiter quadrupeds and Venus and Rahu, 8 legged animals.
Stanza 206. According to some authors, the Sun governs lion; the Moon, hare; Mars,
tiger; Mercury, pig; Jupiter, wild elephant; Venus, small animals; Saturn, animals that live
on thorns, etc., as camel; and Rahu, creeping and crawling ones such as snakes.
Stanza 207. Aries, Taurus, Leo, Sagittarius govern quadrupeds. We shall now
describe the animals as given in Krishneeya.
Stanzas 208 to 211. The Sun in Sagittarius indicates elephant; in Leo, lion; in
Taurus, deer and stag; when the Moon is in Sagittarius, it is horse; in Leo, lion; in Aries,
goats; in Taurus, oxen and cows. When Mars occupies Sagittarius, it is horse; Leo, tiger;
Aries, goats; and Taurus, oxen. When Mercury is in Sagittarius, Leo, Aries or Taurus, it
means hog and monkey. Jupiter in Sagittarius means horse; in Leo, camel; in Aries and
Taurus, camel and donkey. When Venus occupies Sagittarius it is horse; Leo and Aries,
elephant and donkey; and Taurus, wild ox. When Saturn occupies Sagittarius, it means
elephant; in Leo, baboon (monkey); in Aries, he-buffalo; in Taurus, she-buffalo.
Stanza 212. Planets that occupy quadrants and trines indicate animals that could be
seen while hunting, while that planet which is joined with Gulika indicates the animal to
have been shot dead.
Thus ends the Chapter XXIV

CHAPTER XXV
Rainfall
Stanza 1. At the time of the solar ingress into Gemini, when the Moon occupies a
watery Navarasa and Venus is in the 2nd or 12th from the Sun, there will be copious rains.
When the Sun, the Moon, Mars, Saturn and Rahu are in watery signs and Mercury and
Venus conjoin in a fixed sign, there will be very heavy rains.
Stanza 2. When the Sun, Mercury and Venus occupy the same sign and the same
Navamsa, there will be heavy rains. But if the sign and Navamsa happen to be watery, the
rains will be all the more heavy.
Stanza 3. When Mercury and Venus occupy the same sign and the same Navamsa
and in combustion, and Venus happens to be behind Mars, then also there will be plentiful
rains.
Stanza 4. If the Sun is in an earthy sign and the Moon, Mercury and Venus occupy
watery vargas, and at that time if a. rainbow is seen in the western sky, then also there will
be plentiful rains.
NOTES
If a planet occupies a watery sign in the Navamsa, Drekkana, etc., it means it is in watery
vargas.
Stanza 5. When the Moon occupies watery vargas and Mars and Saturn are in
earthy vargas and a rainbow is observed in the east, there will be heavy rainfall.
Stanza 6. In the rainy season the rainbow appearing in the east does not give rain.
In the other seasons, a rainbow in the east will bring in rains. A rainbow in the west during
the rainy season brings in a downpour.
Stanza 7. When the Sun is fully covered by clouds, a radiance caused by the
combinations of the Sun's rays is visible and this can be perceived through the clouds just
resembling the Sun himself. This is known as prathi surya or mock-sun.
Stanza 8. When the mock-sun appears towards the north of the Sun's disc, there will
be rain; towards the south, a tempest; and on both sides, a flood will come in. If it appears
towards the top of the Sun's disc, some danger to the king is seen; and below the disc means
some calamities to the people.
Stanzas 9,10 and 11. When it rains on a new Moon day and the pratipada day, there
will be no rains in the dark half. In both pakshas when it rains during the first 15 ghatikas
on Dwiteeya and the last 15 ghatikas on Pratipada, there will be copious rains during those
pakshas. When it rains only a little on those days, rains also will be scarce during those

pakshas. If it does not rain then, there will be no rain during that paksha.
NOTES
The science of weather-forecasting had been systematically studied by our ancient
astronomers and astrologers, though western scientists may say that meteorology is a new
science. A systematic study of the science was made by our ancient astronomers and astrologers.
Even today it is a matter of common occurrence that village astrologers are right in a
surprisingly high percentage of their weather predictions. Their rules are simple and dispense
away with costly apparatus. Observation coupled with experience enabled the great sages of
India to dive deep into the subject of meteorology and discover the laws governing weather,
rainfall, storms, etc., which are of utmost importance to mankind.
Meteorolegy was taken by the Hindus as a branch of astrology because the heavenly
bodies, the aspects, conjunctions, etc., are all common to both.
Every member of the solar system which, of course, includes the earth, can exert an
important influence by gravitation upon every other. This leads to the proposition that planetary
effects could possibly be produced upon the very mobile atmosphere of the earth. The ancient
theory that the Moon exercises regulatory control over weather variations has now become an
accepted fact of western science, thanks, to the researches of some Australian scientists. While
the Moon's varying distance from the Sun, i.e., lunur day or tithi is a potent factor in weather
changes, there is overwhelming evidence that the major planets have a powerful influence over
atmospheric eventualities.
Research has revealed that about twice as many tropical storms have whirled to hurricane
intensity on the three days centered at new Moon and full Moon. The rank and file of "scientists"
ignore such scientific astrological facts because "known laws of science" cannot explain the
theory of the astrological facts. Because the "known laws of scince" are sacrosanct to the "men
of science", they play down the whole question even though it may mean ignoring facts. It is said
that some meteorologists in U.S.A. have found what they call an incidence of correlation
between years rich in rainfall and Jupiter's movements. At least the West is leading the way in
this matter.
The present-day meteorologists in India have not come forward to test the methods
recorded in ancient works on astro-meteorology because of the strange and peculiar attitudes
developed in their thinking by nurturing an inferiority complex following years of foreign rule.
Life in large parts of the coastal Andhra Pradesh came to a standstill on the evening of
November 19, 1977. A cyclone of tremendous intensity had hit the coast killing over 20,000
people and destroying property, crops, livestock worth an estimated three billion rupees. It was
not, however, totally unexpected. Two days earlier a severe cyclone had hit the neighbouring

state of Tamil Nadu and most knew that the storm was heading towards them. But two days was
not just enough time to prepare to receive the impact of the century's most devastating cyclone.
The Meteorological Department had failed again and in spite of the statement of the Government
of Andhra Pradesh that "... the meteorological department had given storm warnings and
precautions had been taken" the people knew who were to be blamed. The statement was a cruel
joke and an insult to the suffering people of the State.
Very few newspapers had the courage to point out the inadequacies and unscientific
attitudes of the Meteorological Department of India. Some hoped that with the completion of
project Monex and the installation of some more scanners, all at the expense of the suffering
public, we should have been able to study weather patterns better. It is indeed a sad commentary
on the apathy of the general public that crores of rupees have been frittered away by the
Meteorological Department with no questions asked and no doubts raised. An example in point is
the almost blind installation of scanners on the Andhra Pradesh Coast. The department prides
itself on the fact that scanners can follow a cyclonic path upto 400 km. But with cyclonic speeds
being in excess of 100 km per hour this would give a four-hour warning — hardly enough time
to prepare to face a cyclone.
It seems that the failure of meteorologists is mainly due to a lack of sufficient 'scientific
open-mindedness' which prevents them from considering extra-terrestrial happenings as being
significant in the weather forecasting process. Temperature, pressure and rainfall are all
important meteorological factors. To understand the weather phenomenon fully it is necessary to
build up a comprehensive picture of the average climatic conditions over the earth as a whole
and study those factors and their primary causants. In the West some researchers are increasingly
inclined to view these primary causants as extra-terrestrial something that the sages of India had
propounded thousands of years ago in their astrological works. But unfortunately astrology is
taboo to our 'scientific minded' meteorologists.
Research conducted in the West shows that the average level of great lakes like Nyasa,
Victoria and Albert as well as the Caspian Sea and other large basins of water is much higher at
points of maximum solar activity than near minimum, Other studies indicate that periods of very
heavy rainfall coincide with sunspot maxima. Flooding of the Nile also follows the solar cycle,
being greatest at sunspot maxima. All considered it is reasonable to conclude that at such times
(viz., sunspot maxima) there is higher rainfall over the earth and there are greater number of
storms in the tropical regions. Moreover the general circulation of the atmosphere is more violent
so that the temperature over the globe is slightly lower than normal average. These effects are
most clearly defined in the Tropics and extend towards the Poles along the principal warm
occean currents. Meteorological changes are also related to geomagnetic storms which in turn

depend on events taking place in the Sun. It is worth noting that in 1957, a year of exceptional
solar conditions, the United States had an extremely large number of cyclones.
In any case there is enough evidence to establish that there is a correlation between solar
and terrestrial meteorological phenomena. On the earth, there are variations caused by normal
warming and cooling of various sections of the atmosphere due simply to the movements of
airmasses. Disturbances on the Sun affect different parts of the earth in different ways by
producing changes of temperature or pressure, on humidity, rainfall and even storms.
The solar wind is a stream of electrically charged particies which blows along the lines of
force of the Sun's magnetic field. This is funnelled into the polar regions by the earth's magnetic
field. Once they get into the earth's upper atmosphere small particles such as these act as 'seeds'
on which crystals of ice and snow can grow. If these ice crystals melt rainfall can be produced.
There may be other ways in which solar activity and the solar wind act to affect the weather.
Studies of variations in the solar wind as measured from pioneer spacecraft provide another clue.
The solar wind is more 'gusty' around the time of maximum solar activity. This is statistical proof
that when the Sun is more active, producing flares and spots, the solar wind contains more high
speed streams. And these high speed streams are very likely to affect the weather on the earth.
Another piece of direct evidence linking sunspots and the weather comes from records of
the occurrences of storms and lightning in the United Kingdom. Dr. M. F. Stringfellow of the
U.K. Electricity Council, Research Center has published graphs which indicate that the annual
lightning incidence (which is a measure of the number of lightning flashes occurring in a given
area each year) closely follows the mean sunspot index.
The cause of the sunspot cycle is still a mystery but it seems to roughly synchronise with
the period of Jupiter's orbit around the Sun. Just as the Sun and the Moon raise tides in the
oceans and the atmosphere of the earth and even in the solid earth itself, so does the gravity of
the planets raise tides on the surface of the Sun. And the height of the total tide depends on the
relative alignments of the planets.
The earth's magnetic field seems to be linked with the weather. Studies conducted by the
U.S. Weather Bureau show a steady increase in magnetic intensity in England, Sweden and
Egypt as well as a steady decrease in temperature. At the same time in Mexico, Canada and the
U.S.A. the magnetic intensity is decreasing and the climate is getting warmer. Sudden changes in
magnetic intensity are followed by abrupt changes in weather. And again solar activity has a lot
to do with the earth's magnetic intensity.
A study of some of the most devastating cyclones on the Andhra Pradesh coast shows a
very significant periodicity between sunspot maxima and the occurrence of a major cyclone.
The figures in table I indicate how closely major cyclones in Andhra Pradesh follow

snnspot maxima.
Table I
Year of Cyclone
Sunspot maxima
Zurich sunspot number
April 1752
May 1832
May 1839
Looking at planetary positions on cyclonic days we come across another interesting
correspondence. Any unprejudiced person would find that this correspondence when used in
conjunction with sunspot maxima and conventional weather forecasting techniques can be of
tremendous value in predicting future cyclones.
For example on the day of the 1927 cyclone there were loose conjunctions between
Jupiter and Uranus and between Saturn and Ketu. In 1936 we find a Jupiter-Rahu conjunction. In
1949 there was a Saturn-Ketu conjunction in Virgo, the ruling sign of India. 1969 saw a SaturnJupiter opposition and a Rahu-Uranus conjunction, the latter combination aspecting the 12th
from Virgo. The 1977 cyclone synchronised with a Jupiter-Rahu square and Saturn in the 12th
(loss, death, etc.) from India’s ruling sign.
It seems that cyclones on the Andhra Pradesh Coast are likely to occur close to periods of
sunspot maxima when the planets Jupiter, Saturn, Rahu (Ketu) and Uranus form even loose
aspects of kendra (square) and samagama (conjunction) between themselves. These indications
are strengthened whenever either Virgo or the 12th from it are afflicted.
When a suspected periodicity crops up in observations but cannot be proved, the obvious
thing is to find a physical reason why such a period should exist. All things point to the influence
of the Sun on the earth and the influence of relative planetary alignments on the Sun. The
Government as well as the Meteorological Departments owe a sacred duty to the public to
investigate all possible methods of forecasting cyclones and other natural weather phenomena.
Till now scientific progress in this field has been blocked by highly prejudiced attitude towards
Astrology — probably the only science which can give long-range weather forecasts with some
degree of accuracy. Continued prejudice can only mean suffering and death to millions of our

countrymen. The influence of planets on the weather is being seriously investigated by (among
others) such prestigious agencies like the National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder,
Colorado, U.S.A., the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and. Appleton
Laboratories in England. Many scientists at N.C.A.R. feel that even numerical modelling
(computer simulation) of weather can only help in developing a broad understanding of the
processes involved in changing both weather and climate but simply cannot cope with the
complexities required for accurate forecasting.
It will be seen that what follow in the following passages are important scientific truths in
the eyes of Hindu savants. That the weather indications of one single day should form the subject
of so much calculation with the Hindus in determining the future agricultural prospect of the land
while to the inexperienced eye of a "man of science" the day appears as indifferent or otherwise
as any other day of the year makes it clear that modern science in general and meteorology in
particular are still far behind in their investigations of the laws of nature.
Varahamihira begins with a theory of clouds and cloud formation, which to the student of
modem meteorology, may seem puzzling. To determine the amount of rain that one may expect
during the rainy season, one has merely to study the conditions of the atmosphere six months
earlier; in other words, the atmospheric conditions at any one time determine the amount of
rainfall six months hence. Long-range forecast was therefore a speciality with our ancient
meteorologists. In their poetic language, the clouds become "pregnant" at certain seasons of the
year and give "birth" to rain six months later. The symptoms of the "conception" of the clouds
should be observed during the days of the bright fortnight of the month of Margasira (NovemberDecember) beginning with that day when the Moon enters the asterism of Poorvashadha. We are
thus enabled to determine the very day of the occurrence of rain from a knowledge of the day on
which rain has been "conceived".
Not only that, but the very hour of the occurrence of rainfall could be determined; for
says Varahamihira, clouds "conceiving" during the day will be delivered at night, and clouds
conceiving at night will be "delivered" during the day; clouds "conceiving" in the twilight of the
morning will be delivered in the twilight of the evening, and vice versa. Again, if at the time of
conception, clouds have appeared in the east, then at the time of birth, they will appear in the
west; and so on with the other quarters. Similarly, if at the time of conception the wind has
blown from the east, then at the time of rain, it will blow from the opposite quarter.
What are the signs of a healthy "conception", which would in due course yield abundance
of rain? To know them the observer is asked to study all atmospheric phenomena, such as
rainbows, clouds, lightning and thunder, from the beginning of the month of Margasira, for about
four months. The general atmospheric conditions for a healthy conception of the clouds are

stated to be the following: —
(1) Gentle and agreeable winds from the north, north-east and east. (2) Clear sky. (3)
Soft, white, deep halo round the Moon or the Sun. (4) Dark coloured sky, 'dark as the crow's
egg’. (5) Sky overcast with huge, bright, dense clouds. (6) Needle-shaped clouds or sword¬
shaped clouds. (7) Blood-red clouds. (8) Rainbow in the morning or in the evening. (9) Low,
rambling roar of thunder. (10) Lightning. (11) The appearance of the mock-sun and (12) Planets
shining in full form and with soft light.
Apart from these general signs, certain phenomena observed in certain seasons of the
year indicate a healthy "pregnancy" of the rainclouds. In the month of Margasira (NovemberDecember) and Pausha (December-January) red sky in the morning and in the evening, clouds
surrounded by halos, and less than usual cold with excessive fall of snow are indications of a
healthy conception. In the month of Magha (January-February) the signs of a healthy conception
of clouds are high winds, frost and mist obscuring the Sun and the Moon, excessive cold, and
sunrise and sunset under clouds. In the months of Phalguna (February-March) strong, violent
winds; fine clouds marching from place to place; broken and imperfect halos round the Sun and
the Moon; and tawny colour of the Sun, all these are indicative of an abundant rainfall 195 days
after. Sky marked by winds, clouds and halos in the months of Chaitra (March-April) and
Vaisakha (April-May) indicate a healthy conception of clouds.
If during the months of conception (November-May) the "pregnant" clouds appear of the
colour of pearls or silver or tamala leaf, or blue lotus, or of collyrium, then the rain during the
season will be profuse. If the pregnant clouds should be exposed to the hot rays of the Sun, or
accompanied by gentle winds, then the rain that follows after 195 days will be excessive.
Certain phenomena, however, tend to nullify any chance of future rainfall. Shapes of
cities and towers in clouds; thunderbolts; dust-storms; meteoric falls; appearance of comets in
the sky and of spots in the solar disc; occurrence of eclipses — all these are indications that the
"pregnancy" of the clouds will "miscarry". Also, if there should be a fall of heavy rain at the time
of conception, or if the symptoms of a healthy pregnancy assigned to the several seasons of the
year should fail, then the clouds will yield little or no rain during the rainy season.
Three days in the month of Ashadha (June-July) have been specially selected by our
ancient meteorologists for observation of atmospheric conditions with a view to determine the
future prospect of rain. They are the days when in the lunar month of Ashadha the Moon passes
through the asterisms of Rohini, Swati and Uttarashadha. They have been respectively called the
Rohini Yoga, Swati Yoga and Ashadhi Yoga days. It devolved on every Hindu Astronomer to
study the atmospheric conditions on these three days. If he should notice the sky covered with
huge clouds, serpent-like in shape, white in certain parts and black in certain other parts, or he

should see the sky covered with red clouds or clouds of the colour of blue lotus, and marked by
lightning immediately before sunrise and after sunset he can be sure of heavy rains during the
rainy season. On the Swati Yoga day, if there should be a fall of rain throughout day and night,
there will be uninterrupted rain for several days in winter. Wind from the east or north-east on
the Ashadhi Yoga day indicates good rain, good crops; wind blowing from the south-east,
southwest indicates very little rainfall in the future. Continuous hot wind from the south-east or
high wind from the southwest at sunset, on the Ashadhi Yoga day, spells terrible famine.
When our ancient meteorologists could predict rain long in advance, it was no difficult
thing for them to forecast rain in the immediate future. During this rainy season, if the Sun at the
time of rising is exceptionally bright and red, or if the taste of water is insipid, or the colour of
the sky is that of the cow's eye; if at the time of sunrise or sunset there should be seen the
rainbow in the sky; if salt begins to sweat; if fish in tanks jump from water on the bank; if cats
frequently scratch the ground; if metal vessels emit a fishy smell; if ants with their eggs move
from one place to another, there will be immediate rainfall.
One is able to understand these signs, for at the time when rain is expected and a low
cloud is approaching, the odour of metal vessels and of drains becomes noticeable as the lower
pressure causes some of the air to escape, and one observes a change in the behavior of animals
and insects which react to a change in the atmospheric conditions. The red colour of the Sun, the
halo around the Sun and the Moon and presence of clouds, all indicate the hazy condition of the
atmoshere.
We had also rain-gauging in the past. Falling rain, says Varahamihira, should be collected
in a vessel whose capacity is an adhaka. An adhaka has been defined as the quntity of rainfall
which fills to the brim a vessel 20 inches in diameter and 8 inches deep. Four such adhakas
constitute a drona. Equipped with such a rain-gauge our ancient meteorologists were able to
measure the exact" amount of rain that fell during the rainy season; and by correlating the
amount of rain that fell with the factors that made possible the fall of rain, they were able to
predict the exact amount of rainfall that could be expected in the rainy season. If the
"conception" of clouds is due to all the five conditions of wind, rain, lightning, thunder and
clouds, says Varahamihira, then the quantity of subsequent rainfall will be one drona, and this
will fall over an area of 400 square miles. If the "conception" has been due to wind alone, the
resultant rainfall will be three adhakas; if due to thunder, twelve adhakas, other factors affecting
rainfall.
These quantities of rainfall are, however, modified by the amount of rain that falls on the
days when the Moon passes from the asterism of Poorvashadha to that of Moola in the lunar
month of Jyeshta (June-July). During this month if it rains on the day on which the Moon is in

the asterism or either Hasta or Poorvashadha or Mrigasira or Chitta or Revati or Dhanishta —
then on the corresponding days of the next lunar month, there will be 16 dronas of rainfall; if it
rains on days when the Moon is in either Sravana or Makha or Anuradha or Bharani or Moola
then on the corresponding days of the next month there would be 14 dronas of rainfall; if when
the Moon resides in either Satabhisha or Jyeshta or Swati, there would be 4 dronas of rainfall on
the corresponding days of the rainy season: if in Krittika 10 dronas; if in Poorvaphalguni 25
dronas; if in Visakha, Uttarashada, 20 dronas; if in Aslesha 13 dronas; if in Uttarabhadrapada or
Uttaraphalguni or Rohini, 25 dronas; if in Aswini, 13 dronas; if in Aridra, 18 dronas. In all the
above cases, the subsequent rainfall depends upon the asterisms being unaffected by comets,
meteors and the like from the month of Jyeshta to the rainy season. If the asterisms should suffer
by the meeting together in them of the Sun, Saturn and Ketu (Moon’s descending node) or by the
course of Mars through them or by planetary conjunctions, there will be neither rain nor
prosperity in the land; but if benefic planets should pass through the asterisms or if the asterisms
should remain unaffected in any of the ways described above, mankind would be happy.
The above notes are based on a study of Varahamihira's Brihat Samhita. It will be seen
how closely our forefathers studied the atmospheric conditions to determine beforehand, almost
exactly, the extent, quantity and quality of rainfall that might be expected during the rainy
season. Their theory of the "conception" of clouds looks fantastic to us who have been reared on
Western science, but having due respect for the wisdom of the ancient Hindu sages, it would be
well to test the truth of their statements.
The only hope of accurate weather forecasts would be a synthesis of different approaches.
It is time our meteorologists understand the limitations of conventional forecastings techniques,
remove the blinkers of prejudice and pseudo scientific arrogance off their eyes, and tap the
enormous potentialities that astrology has to offer. Otherwise future generations will hold them
guilty of prejudices of the worst kind — prejudices which could make the difference between life
and death for thousands of people.
The rules enumerated in ancient books, as could be seen from the above 10 stanzas are
simple and dispense with costly apparatus. On the basis of the methods given in ancient works,
we are enabled to make not only long range forecasts of rainfall but also of the occurence of
rains in half-lunar months (Paksha) and even of the day.
Our author appears to have relied mostly on Varahamihira and Madhaveeyam while
dealing with the principles of forecasting rainfall.
The solar ingress into Gemini (sankramand) is given much prominence. Certain juxta¬
positions of planets on that day are said to indicate whether or not during the year ahead, there
would be copious rainfall. Emphasis is laid on watery signs both in the Rasi and in the vargas.

For instance, if a planet occupies Cancer or Scorpio or Pisces in Rasi, Navamsa, Drekkana etc., it
is said to be in watery vargas or divisions.
Natural pheonomena such as the rainbow and the mock Sun are all given importance to
study the trend of rainfall. In the rainy season (Sravana and Bhadrapada) appearance of a
rainbow in the east forebodes no rain. In other seasons such a phenomena indicates rainfall.
Stanzas 9, 10 and 11 enable us to predict rainfall Paksha-wise i.e., every 15 days, based on the
full Moon and new Moon phenomena.
Stanza 12. When winds blow from the northeast in the evening twilight of the full
Moon day of the lunar month of Ashadha, there will be downpour and consequent
luxuriant vegetable life during the ensuing year. When it rains on the 4th day of the dark
half of the lunar months Ashadha and Poorvabhadra constellation of the same month,
there will be luxuriant vegetation during the year following.
Stanza 13. If the 5th day of the bright half of the lunar month of Ashadha falls on a
Sunday, there will be little rain; on a Monday, there will a downpour; Tuesday, rains will be
fierce; Wednesday, would bring in a storm; Thursday, general prosperity; Friday, ruin and
loss; and Saturday, misery everywhere.
Stanza 14. When the Sun is in Aquarius and the constellation of Rohini coincides
with the 6th lunar day, it will rain only a little; the 7th gives a little more; the 8th, moderate
rains; the 9th, copious rains; and the 10th, a deluge.
NOTES
The coincidence of certain lunar days and asterisms when the Sun occupies certain signs,
appear to have much significance in deciding the nature and extent of rainfall. When the Sun is
in Aquarius and the 10th lunar day (Dasami) and Rohini coincide, there will be very heavy
rainfall. These principles can be tested even by laymen and no special technical qualifications are
called for.
Stanza 15. When the Sun is in Poorvashadha, if on the 1st day, all the sky including
the Sun is found to be completely covered by dark clouds, there will be some rain (during
the month of Gemini) when the Sun transits Aridra. Similarly, if on the 2nd day, all the
heavens are studded with dark clouds, there will be rain here and there during the latter
part of Gemini and the first part of Cancer when the Sun transits the asterism of
Punarvasu. Similarly on the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th and so on till the 14th day, if the same
conditions prevail, there will be rains during the succeeding months when the Sun will be in
Pushyami, Aslesha, Makha, Pubba, till Moola in regular succession.
NOTES
If however the heavens are only partially covered, there will be rain during certain days

only within the period of 13 1/3 days. If the heavens are clear, than there will be no rains.
Stanza 16. From the Nakshatra occupied by Venus after the end of combustion,
rainfall can be predicted.
Stanzas 17, 18, 19 and 20. The four asterisms beginning from Bharani constitute the
first mandala or cycle; the 4 beginning from Aridra is the 2nd mandala; the 5 stars
beginning from Makha is the 3rd Mandala; the 3 stars beginning from Swati is the 4th
mandala; the 5 stars starting from Jyeshta is the 5th mandala and the 6 stars commencing
from Dhanishta and ending with Aswini mark the 6th mandala. When Venus rises after
combustion in the 4th and 6th mandates copious rains and abundant crops will prevail
during the year. If he rises in the 1st and 2nd mandalas rains will be below average. If he
rises in the 3rd and 5th there will be little rain and famine will afflict the people.
NOTES
Obviously our author seems to have taken these details from Varahamihira's Brihat
Samhita where the results for Venus emerging out of combustion from the stars in the different
mandalas have been dealt with elaborately.
Stanza 21. In the rainy season, when the Moon transits the 7th from Venus or the
5th, the 7th or the 9th from Saturn, aspected by benefics, there will be heavy rainfall.
Stanza 22. Rains can be expected when the combustion periods of the various
planets begin and end; when the Moon conjoins with other planets, when the Sun aspects
the six mandalas described above, on full Moon and new Moon days, when the Sun transits
Cancer and Capricorn, and when the Sun occupies the asterism of Aridra.
Stanza 23. When Mercury conjoins with Jupiter or Venus, or when Jupiter joins
with Venus there will be rain. When Mars and Saturn conjoin without any aspect or
association of benefics danger from fire, lightning and storms can be expected.
Stanza 24. When clouds surrounded by a radiance resembling that of the Moon,
white as nectar, with a blue-black spot in the centre, and pouring layers of water and
resembling a staircase pass from west to east or east to west, there will be a very heavy
downpour before long.
Stanza 25. If in the rainy season, the sunrise is observed to have a 'halo' in the east,
and the noon (midday) is marked by the intense heat of the Sun's rays, there will be rain
that day.
Stanza 26. Ants are observed to carry their eggs from one place to another
intermittently; snakes have their sexual union or climb on trees; cows hasten home to meet
their calves. These are all indicative of immediate rainfall.
Stanza 27. Cats scratch the ground with their claws; young children play on the

rainwater constructing mud-banks and dams. These indicate rainfall.
Stanza 28. Hills shine at a distance and seem to have a blue colouring; caves are
observed to have a covering of thick mist: and the disc of the Moon has a circular red line,
the colour being that of the eyes of the hen. These are signs of immediate rain.
Stanza 29. Chameleons climb up trees and stare stupidly at the sky. Cows toe seem
to stare upwards. These indicate immediate rain.
Stanza 30. Cocks crowing in the day looking up and flashes of lightning marked in
the northeast denote heavy rains.
Stanza 31. There will be rains immediately if the Moon is observed to have the
colour of honey or of the eyes of parrots or doves; or the disc of the Moon though enveloped
in clouds, seems to emanate a radiance round in shape (pratichandra).
NOTES
In the earlier chapters omens or nimithas or indicative signs have been dealt with bearing
on other aspects of horoscopy or prasna. In Stanzas 26 to 31, the author gives certain indicative
signs, which clearly suggest there would be immediate rains etc., in the rainy season.
Fourteen nimittas mentioned in the texts have been given below for the information of
the reader:
1. Carrying of eggs by ants from place to place2. Snakes climbing trees and having sexual intercourse.
3. Cows rushing home to meet their offspring.
4. Cats scratching the ground.
5. Young children building dams mud banks.
6. Hills at a distance appearing to have a blue colouring.
7. Thick mist covering caves.
8. The Moon's disc having a circular red line.
9. Chameleons climbing trees and staring at the sky.
10. Cows looking up at the sky.
11. Cocks crowing in the day.
12. Flashes of lightning appearing in the north-east.
13. The Moon's colour appearing to be that of honey or the eyes of parrots.
14. The appearance of mock-moon or pratichandra.
It is clear from the list of indicative signs given above how deep were the observations of
nature made by our ancient sages and how superficial has been our own understanding of not
only nature but also the nimittas embodied in ancient books. Sir Walter Scott's Quentin Durward
records that once when King Fouis and his entourage were returning to Paris, they found on the

way, that washermen with washed clothes on the backs of donkeys were rushing home. When
they were asked why they were rushing hastily they said that the donkeys had lifted their ears
upwards which meant there would be immediate rain. And in no time the heavens poured
torrential rains. Varahamihira, the celebrated mathematician, astrologer and astronomer, has dealt
with the subject of rainfall extensively in his Brihat Samhita and readers are advised to go
through this classic.
Stanza 32. Pearls of thunder crash in the night time; deep red flashes of lightening
are observed during day time, cold winds blow from the East.
Stanza 33. Young sprouting leaves raise their beads high, birds freely bathe in water
or in dust, serpents bask in the sunshine lying on grass.
Stanza 34. Clouds assume the colour of peacock, parrot, wild crow, or chataka bird
and seem to have the shape of waves, hills, tortoise, pigs and fishes.
Stanza 35. A rainbow at sunrise or at sunset, a thick line like that of an iron pebble
is seen, the mock Sun, flashes of lightening, a halo straight and rainbow coloured
Parivesha.
Stanza 36. A rising bundle of Sun's rays shoot-out justlike hills, clouds come closer
to the earth, with thunder and lightning.
Stanza 37. Water becomes tasteless, the sky gets the colour of the cow's eyes, a glow
in the 8 Diks, salt melts, the heavens get a glow just like that of crow's eggs, winds come to
a standstill, frogs croak and fishes spring up above water.
NOTES
Stanzas 32 to 37 give other indicative signs for immediate rainfall.
Stanza 38. When God Subramanya was asked to explain the various signs of
rainfall, the reply given by the God is given below.
Stanza 39. If the first of the lunar month Chaitra happens to be a Sunday, there will
be no rains in the first part of the year. During the 2nd part, the rains will be unevenly
distributed. If it is Monday, rains will begin late and continue in abundance. If it is
Tuesday, it will rain on hilly tracts.
Stanza 40. If it is Wedneday, there will be good rains. Thursday brings in a deluge
and consequent calamities. Friday brings in prosperity though rains are deficient; and
Saturday causes diseases, loss of crops and high morality.
Stanza 41. Rainfall to be predicted on the basis of different week days falling on the
1st day of Chaitra has been explained. The effects of the asterism falling in Capricorn and
Aries ingresses will be now dealt with.
Stanzas 42 to 44. When the Sun enters Aries or Capricorn in the asterism of Aswini,

seasonal rains will be normal; Bharani, good crops, though many calamities may hit the
people; Krittika, little rainfall and more oppression of the rulers; Rohini, rain in the
beginning and destruction of cattle; Mrigasira, little rain in the beginning and good rains
subsequently; Aridra, copious rains and some destruction of crops; Punarvasu, rains in the
beginning, disease to cattle and men; Pushyami, plenty of rains and trouble from bad
characters; Aslesha, excessive rains, fear from thieves and danger of war; Makha, plentiful
rains, fear from rulers and destruction to crops; Pubba and Uttara, destruction to enemies,
afflictions to Brahmins and Sudras and plentiful crops.
Stanzas 45 and 46. When the Sun enters Aries or Capricorn in the constellation of
Hasta, prosperity and good health are indicated; Chitta, little rain, good health and
calamities; Swatj, plentiful rains and prosperity in the country; Visakha, rains here and
there, general prosperity in the country, and affliction to Sudras; Anuradha and Jyeshta,
ruin to crops, good rains; Moola, diseases to cattle and men, obstruction to the
performance of rituals by Brahmins, and heavy rains.
Stanzas 47, 48 and 49. When the Sun enters Aries or Capricorn in the constellation
of Poorva-shadha, there will be good crops, heavy rainfall and ruin in the end;
Uttarashadha, scarcity of rains; Sravana, rains and crops plentiful; Dhanishta, rains in the
beginning, destruction of crops and drought in the end; Satabhisha, heavy rains and
plentiful availability of inferior grains; Poorvabhadra, good rainfall; Uttarabhadra, little
rainfall, people devoid of good actions and mental anguish; and Revati, no rains at the
proper seasons and still no famines.
Stanzas 50 to 54. If the Sun's entry into Aries occurs on the 1st lunar day, there will
be no rains; the 2nd and 3rd lunar days, no increase of crops though there will be rains;
4th, excessive downpour, calamities and floods; 5th, heavy rains and good crops; 6th, heavy
fighting in the country; 7th, troubles from kings though there will be ordinary rains and
damage to grain; in the 8th, proper rains and prosperous crops; the 9th, good crops and
many calamities; 10th, heavy rains, calamities and misery; 11th, good rains, increase of
inferior grains and secondary calamities to the people; 12th and 13th, scarcity of rain; and
troubles from thieves; 14th, downpour at the beginning, but no rains after 12 days; and
new Moon or full Moon, quarrels and wars, copious rains, increase of crops.
Stanzas 55 to 59. The results of the Sun's entry into Aries and various Karanas are:
Bava, great rains and ills to the country and increase of crops; Vyaghra, rains at the proper
seasons, affliction to cows and famine conditions; Kaulava, uneven, ill-distributed rainfall
and ills of different sorts; Khara, increase of cows, wealth and grains, rains will be
excessive for 12 days; Gara, heavy rains only in the beginning of the year; Vanija, no rain

in the beginning, but excessive rains at the end of the year and outbreak of diseases; Vishti,
diseases to cows, increase of crops, proper rains and calamities to the people; Sakuna, same
as Vishti, but more intense in evil; Chatushpada, deluge and loss of crops; Naga, copious
rains and increase of crops; and Kimsthugna, rains at the proper time, little loss to crops
but in the end grains grow plentifully.
Stanzas 60 and 61. If at the time of the Sun's ingress into Aries, Aries, Libra or
Scorpio rises, scarcity of rains will be the result; if Leo, uneven distribution of rains; if
Scorpio, rains will be moderate; in the remaining signs, the effects will be copious rains and
general prosperity. But if Virgo rises, rains will be little and crops poor.
Stanzas 62, 63 and 64. If the Sun occupies the ascendant at the time of the solar
ingress into Aries, proper rains though late will occur; if the Moon is in the ascendant,
there will be plentiful rains and crops; if Mars, no rains in the beginning or the end; if
Mercury, there will be he,avy rains, if the sign is watery. Otherwise rains will be very
deficient; if Jupiter, no rain in the beginning but only a little loss to crops; if Venus, rains at
improper seasons, great war, calamities to rulers, diseases to cattle, good crop-yield and
prosperity to the people; if Saturn, scarcity of rains, affliction from thieves and other
troubles and general depression; and Rahu or Ketu in a watery sign, plenty of rains.
Stanza 65. If the rising sign at the time of the Sun's entry into Aries is afflicted by
more flaws (doshas) such as the presence of Gulika, etc., there will be no rains and famine
conditions will prevail in the land.
Stanza 66. If the ascendant at the time of the Sun's entry into Aries happens to be a
watery sign and is aspected by watery planets, there will be proper rains. If the sign is a
fiery one and is associated with or aspected by fiery planets, there will be no rain.
Stanza 57. By studying the solar ingress into Aries the effects for one full year can be
predicted. By examining the monthly ingress the effects of the month can be predicted. If
the ascendant at the time of the solar entry is associated with or aspected by benefic
planets, there will be good rains and favourable crops during the year or the month
concerned. If the ascendant is afflicted by malefics, there will be no rains and consequent
failure of crops.
Stanzas 68 to 70. When the solar ingress happens to fall on days ruled by the
asterisms Rohini, Anuradha, Jyeshta, Uttarashadha, Abhijit, Sravana, Dhanishta, the year
is known as Indra Mandala. The year will be happy and prosperous. When the ingress falls
on days ruled by Bharani, Krittika, Pushyami, Makha, Pubba, Visakha and Poorvabhadra,
the year is known as Agni Mandala, The effect will be fear from fire, poverty everywhere,
crops fail and autumn crops are destroyed. When the ingress falls on days ruled by

Mrigasira, Punarvasu, Uttara, Hasta, Chitta, Swati, then the year has Vayu Mandala. Fear
from kings, storms and scarcity of rains will be the result. When the ingress occurs on days
ruled by Aridra, Aslesha, Moola, Poorvashadha, Satabhisha, Uttarabhadra or Revati, then
the year has Varuna Mandala. Good rains and general prosperity will ensue.
Stanza 71. If the Sun happens to be in Kimsthugna, Kola or Sakuna the
Sankramana Purusha is said to be in sthiti (or stability). The effect will be great rise in
prices. If the Sankramana Purusha happens to be in Naga, Gaja, Khara or Chathushpada,
then he is said to be in 'Nishanna' or 'stationary'. The effect will be moderate prices. If the
Purusha happens to be in Vyaghra, Vishti, Simha and Gara, he is injhe state of sayana or
sleep. Prices will be low.
Stanza 72. When a query regarding rains is made, the following, if seen or felt,
indicates that there will be rains. The questioner touches any watery things as wet clothes,
water, aquatic plants, fruits, etc.; he stands near a watery place, bathes in water, drinks
water; any sound expressing water and watery substance is heard.
Stanza 73. If shedding tears, sniffing, water dipping through the nose or entering
into a watery spot is perceived, there will be heavy rainfall.
Stanza 74. If at the time a halo is observed round the Sun or the Moon, or the sky is
darkened by clouds, there will be a great downpour. The direction where the rains will
pour is to be ascertained by noting carefully the side of the questioner in which wetness is
observed.
Stanza 75. If at the time of the query articles such as liquor, butter, a pregnant
woman, vessel containing water, he-buffalo, elephant, Brahmin, are sighted, there will be
rains.
Stanza 76. If the questioner happens to touch his face, eyes, testicles, etc., or when he
excretes urine at the time of the query, there will be rain.
Stanzas 77 and 78. Pisces, Cancer, Capricorn, Aquarius, Taurus, Libra and Scorpio
are watery signs. From Pisces to Scorpio in the above order the watery signs become less
and less watery. The remaining ones are non-watery. The Moon and Venus are watery
planets. Mercury and Jupiter in watery signs are aquatic.
Stanza 79. In a query bearing on rainfall, the Sun and Mars, the Moon and Venus
and Mercury and Jupiter in pairs respectively indicate no rain immediately, heavy rains
and moderate rains.
Stanza 80. If the first letter in the question happens to be ghosha letters or a long
vowel, there will be rain immediately; if it is khara or atikhara or anunasika, there will be
no rain.

NOTES
The vargas are given below.
Consonants
Vargas
Khara
Atikhara
Mridu Ghosha Anunasika
Ka-Varga
ka
kha
ga
gha
nga
Cha „
cha
chcha
ja
jha
jna
Ta „
ta
tta
da
dha
na
Tha „
tha
ttha
da
dha
Na
Pa „
pa
pha
ba
bha
ma
Suppose the 1st letter in the query is ma. It falls under anunasika, which means there will
be no rain.
Stanza 81. If a watery planet occupies a non-watery sign, there will be rain soon. If a
non-watery planet occupies a watery sign, there will be rain after some delay. A watery
planet in a watery sign brings in regular rains. A non-watery planet in a non-watery sign
brings in no rain.
Stanza 82. What is said above is applicable to Kupa Prasna (digging wells) also. In a
query bearing on rainfall it can also be used. Here adha means soon or below and upari
means at the top or in the end.
Stanza 83. In the bright half of the month, if benefics occupy the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
7th and 8th houses which should be watery signs, or the Moon is in an aquatic sign, there
will be rain.
Stanza 84. If at the time of prasna, the 2nd or the 3rd house happens to be a watery
sign, then within 20 days the rains will be so heavy that floods will rise up in rivers.
Stanza 85. If at the time of query (in the rainy season) Saturn and Mars are in the
7th house from the Sun or the Moon, or in the 4th or 8th or the 2nd or the 3rd from the
ascendant, there will be copious rains.
NOTES
In another version of the Mss. we find sitarki (Venus and Saturn) instead of vakrarki
(Mars and Saturn). Venus can never occupy the 7th from the Sun.
Stanza 86. If at the time of a query about rain during the rainy season, the Moon is
in the ascendant which should be a watery sign; or in the bright half the Moon is in a
quadrant, there will be rain all of a sudden. According as a benefic or a malefic aspects the

Moon, the rain will be very heavy, or scarce. By substituting Venus in the place of the Moon
similar results can be predicted.
Stanza 87. In a query regarding floods, if the Moon or Mercury or Jupiter or Venus
aspected by benefics occupies the ascendant or a quadrant, there will be high floods.
Stanza 88. If the planets mentioned in the above verse are aspected by malefics or
are joined by them, the rains will be very little. If the Arudha or Chatra is a watery sign
and has in it a watery planet, there will be heavy rain.
NOTES
It is said that stanza 87 is to be applied for predicting floods, which follow as a
consequence, heavy rains. If the benefics referred to are in the 4th, floods are said to result from
springs and wells; in the 7th, rivers will swell resulting in floods; and in the 10th floods will be
due to heavy rains. Malefic planets affecting the benefics obstruct rainfall. If either the Arudha
Rasi or Chatra Rasi happens to be watery, then also heavy rainfall can be expected.
Stanza 89. The 4th governs the water underground as in springs or wells, the 7th
governs the water in rivers and the 10th governs the water due to rains.
Stanzas 90 and 91. Though the above-mentioned signs and combinations indicate
heavy rains, if the ascendant has the associatian or aspect or Navamsa or Drekkana of
Mercury, there will be no rains, being disturbed by winds. If Mars, Mercury, Saturn or
Rahu occupies quadrants, rains will be quickly dissipated by adverse storms and cyclones.
Stanza 92. If the ascendant which should be a watery sign is occupied by the Moon
and Venus or if Arudha aspected by Venus and the Moon happens to be a watery sign,
there will be rains.
Stanza 93. If Arudha, the rising sign, and Chatra sign, all the three, happen to be
Prishtodaya signs, then there will be rain. If at that time Venus and the Moon are in
exaltation, the rains will continue for the whole of that day.
Stanza 94. If Mars, Mercury, Saturn and Rahu occupy quadrants, there will be no
rains, being disturbed by adverse winds. If they are associated with benefics, there will be
some rain.
Stanza 95. If Rahu and Saturn occupy watery signs, the rains will be enjoyable. If
these are aspected by the Moon and Venus, rains will be very heavy causing harm.
Stanzas 96 and 97. Pisces, Cancer, the latter part of Capricorn, Taurus, Libra,
Scorpio, Virgo and Aquarius are watery signs. Amongst planets, the Moon and Venus are
aquatic ones. Mercury and Jupiter in aquatic signs are watery. The Sun, Mars, Saturn and
Rahu in watery signs cause a small quantity of rainfall.
Thus ends the Chapter XXV

CHAPTER XXVI
Koopa Prasna
Stanza 1. In this chapter, I shall be detailing 'Kupa Prasna', explaining whether
water can be had if a well is dug at a particular place.
Stanza 2. According to some, the best time for digging wells is four months from
Capricorn while according to some others, it should be done in the month of Pisces and 3
months succeeding it.
Stanza 3. By a careful scrutiny of snake-hills, trees, grass and certain fruits, and by
Kupa Prasna, whether a water layer can be discovered in a certain spot, can be known
beforehand. The time for examining it has been given in the last verse. The time must be
such that there should be no difficulty in testing the nature of the soil.
Stanza 4. When a query is made regarding this, one should see whether there is
water or any watery substance near, or whether the first letter, in the prasna, is a jala
akshara (watery alphabet) or whether the rising sign, Arudha and the planets are strong
and favourable, or whether any indications suggest the presence of water.
Stanzas 5 and 6. If at the time of query, a dog-eater, (chandala), dancing girl, a
person who has lost his wealth, a Brahmin or a kirata (a mountaineer) is seen; or if a
rainbow is observed in the sky, then drinking water can be had in the place selected. The
water will be from an old well buried underground. If the questioner happens to touch his
neck or his face, at the time of the question, there will be water in the selected spot. If he
touches his ears, water can be used after performing the necessary purificatory measures.
If not, people will fall in the well and die.
Stanza 7. Whether there is water underground is to be ascertained from the
following yogas, on the basis of the query time.
Stanza 8. If the ascendant is a moveable sign and Rahu and the Moon join it, there
will be water in the selected spot. When the Sun occupies the 10th and Jupiter occupies the
4th, there will be water.
Stanza 9. When the Moon occupies the ascendant happening to be a watery sign,
there will be water. When a malefic is in the 4th and the Moon joins the ascendant, there
will be underground water.
Stanza 10. If the Moon is in Pisces, aspected by Jupiter and Venus and Arudha is
Virgo; if Virgo being Arudha is hemmed in between the Moon and Venus, water will be
discovered.
Stanza 11. If Capricorn rises, Venus is in Libra, Jupiter is in Pisces and the Moon is

in Cancer, or Mercury and Rahu combine in the same sign and the Moon is in Gemini,
there will be water in the selected spot.
Stanza 12. If Venus and the Moon are exalted and aspected by debilitated planets or
the Arudha or the ascendant is Taurus occupied by the Moon, there will be an old well
buried underground.
Stanza 13. When Lagna is a fixed sign occupied by Venus and Saturn or the Moon is
in Leo and Arudba is a watery sign, there will be only some water in the well.
Stanza 14. When Arudha is Pisces, the Moon is in Virgo and Jupiter occupies
Gemini, there will be water. Thus we have 13 yogas, besides two given in the verses 13 and
14. Indications of having an old well are also given.
Stanza 15. There will be no water in the well dug, if the Moon is in Taurus and Rahu
is in Scorpio.
Stanza 16. From the above yogas, indications and other sources of information, if
you come to conclude that water is available, then the direction where the well is to be dug
can be known from the following.
Stanza 17. If at the time of query the questioner feels the left side of his body, it
means water can be located in the south-west; any organ above the neck, in the north-east;
the right side of his body and any organ below the neck, north-west.
Stanza 18. If he touches any bony spot in his body, no water can be found; and other
spots of body are favourable for getting water. A fleshy spot indicates water in a miry
muddy spot; forehead denotes a rocky place.
Stanza 19. After examining these general signs and yogas, if one concludes that there
is water, then a Chandra Gupti Chakra is to be drawn and the direction determined.
Stanzas 20, 21, 22 and 23. One should seat comfortably facing the east if the Prasna
Rekha and the diagram (chakra) to be drawn is from the morning till noon; south from
noon to sunset; west from sunset to midnight; and north from midnight to next sunrise.
Eight lines should be drawn longitudinally to be intersected by five lines to be
drawn horizontally. The result is 28 squares signifying the 28 asterisms and Chandra Gupti
Chakra.
In this diagram commencing from the 1st square enter numbers 1 to 5 horizontally,
then 6 vertically down below; and 7, 8 and 9 horizontally towards the left; under 9 mark 10
and horizontally 11, 12, 13 and 14 towards the right; above 14 mark 15 and then 16.
Beginning from the last square, to 16, mark the regular order 17th to 28th.
Stanzas 24 and 25. Dividing a day's duration, viz., 60 ghatikas by 28, each asterism
gets 2 1/7 ghatikas. Dividing the time of query in ghatikas 2 1/7, we get dinarsha counted

from Aswini. The asterism indicated by the longitude of the ascendant at the time of query
is udaya nakshatra.
Stanza 26. The Dinarsha is to be inserted in the 1st square. Count in the order
marked in the diagram till the udaya nakshatra.
Stanza 27. Count from udaya-nakshatra to the asterism held by the Moon according
to the order of the diagram. The resulting square indicates the spot where the well has to be
dug. Just as in the case of the Moon, the asterism held by other planets can also be
considered.
NOTES
The above stanzas give a peculiar method of locating the water source, by consdering
what is called Chandra Gupti Chakra. This is drawn below as per stanzas 20 to 23.
NORTH
EAST
Anura
dha
[Dinar
sha]
Mrigas
ira
Satabh
isha
(udaya
naksha
tra)
W]
EST
Study the stanzas 20 to 27, keeping this diagram before you. This will enable readers to
understand the method of casting the diagram without difficulty. Assuming that the ascendant is
15° Aquarius, the time of query is 35 ghatis and the asterism for the Moon's position is Mrigasira
and for the longitude of the ascendant the asterism is Satabhisha, we arrive at the spot where
water is available thus:
Dividing 35, the time of query, by 2 1/7, we get (35/2 1/7) quotient 16 which means the
Dinarsha is the 17th from Aswini, viz., Anuradha.
As the ascendant is 15° Aquarius the corresponding asterism will be Satabhisha.
Therefore: Dinarsha is Anuradha, Udaya Nakshatra Satabhisha, Moon's Nakshatra

Mrigasira. Counting from Dinarsha to udaya nakshatra we get (see diagram) the square marked
8. Counting from udaya nakshatra (square 8) to the Moon's Nakshatra in the order of the diagram
we get Mrigasira No. 16 in the square. This particular square, which is in the S.E., indicates the
spot where water will be available. This diagram may be considered as a plan or a blue print and
the exact location can be identified.
I must say that I have tried this method quite successfully in the case of three of my
friends to help them locate the spot where water could be found for digging wells.
Stanza 28. Some great writers have included Dinarsha in working Chandra Gupti
Chakra while other great writers have excluded it.
Stanza 29. According to the latter school, the first square in the diagram should be
considered as Aswini. From this is to be counted the asterism occupied by a watery planet.
That division will indicate the spot where the well has to be dug.
Stanza 30. Here is the third view. The Udayanakshatra is to be entered in the 3rd
square and from this is to be counted the Nakshatra held by a watery planet. This division
also will give the spot where the well has to be dug.
Stanza 31. The three views given by learned men have been mentioned. A fourth
view also can be added.
Stanzas 32, 33 and 34. Consider the first division in the diagram as Aswini, and
count on till the square where Chandra Nakshatra stands. Assume this as Dinarsha, and
count on till the Chandra Nakshatra again and mark it. Assume this marked square as
udaya nakshatra and count on once more the asterism where the Moon stands. This will be
one of the spots where the well has to be constructed. Instead of the Moon we can consider
the asterisms occupied by Jupiter or Venus.
NOTES
According to this method, No. 1 in the diagram is Aswini. In our example: counting from
Aswini to the asterism held by the Moon, viz., Mrigasira we see No. 5 in the diagram. This is
styled as Dinarsha; counting again from this we get in the diagram No. 9.
This can be treated as udaya nakshatra. Again counting 5 from this we get 23. This marks
the west and the spot indicates the presence of water.
Stanzas 35 and 36. When this query is considered before noon, count from Aswini
and the 3rd square will be Krittika. In the afternoon count from Pushyami, and the 3rd
square will be Makha. After sunset, count from Swati and the 3rd division will be
Anuradha. After midnight, count from Abhijit, and the 3rd division is Dhanishta. Here is a
short description of the Chandra Gupti Chakra.
NOTES

Four different types are given, and any one of them can be followed.
Stanza 37. According as at the time of query the ascendant is moveable, fixed or
common, there will be a small spring, many springs or two springs.
Stanza 38. In certain compounds, there may be old wells buried beneath and to
ascertain where they are, the following authoritative combinations will be greatly useful.
Stanza 39. If Arudha is a fixed sign, Taurus is the ascendant and the Moon occupies
it, then it is an indication that an old well exists in the compound.
Stanza 40. When the Moon is in Scorpio and Arudha happens to be Taurus occupied
by Venus; or when Jupiter is in the 10th and the Moon and Venus are in the 4th, there is an
old well.
Stanza 41. The Moon and Venus in exaltation indicate two old wells far below the
earth. The Sun in the 7th from Arudha and the Moon in the 7th from the ascendant
indicate an old submerged well.
Stanzas 42 to 44. If the Moon and Rahu occupy the ascendant, or if Arudha being
Aquarius is occupied by the Moon and Venus; or if the ascendant is a fixed sign and the
Moon and Venus occupy it; if Jupiter and Venus are in the 4th; or the Moon is in the 10th
and Venus is in Virgo; or Venus is in the 7th and the Moon in the 4th covered by a halo in
the sky at the time of query — all these indicate that old wells are buried beneath in the
compound.
Stanza 45. All these combinations are Kupa yogas which can be ordinarily used. To
answer a query whether any well can be found in a particular spot, other indications
should also be looked into.
Stanza 46. When the rising sign and Chathra sign are watery, and the Moon is in
Arudha or the Sun is in conjunction with Rahu or Ketu in a watery sign, there is a well at
the marked spot.
Stanza 47. Saturn in the ascendant and the Moon in the 10th; or Jupiter in the 4th,
Rahu in the 7th and the Sun in the 10th indicate old submerged wells.
Stanza 48. When Rahu is in conjunction with the Sun and the Moon in the 4th, or
the Sun has a halo surrounding his disc, the indication is the existence of an old well hidden
to view.
Stanzas 49 and 50. The ascendant, Arudha and Chathra are watery signs, of which
the ascendant must be a fixed sign; or at the time of query, an outcaste appears in haste; or
a dancing girl, a person whose wealth is stolen, or a Brahmin or a mountaineer appears; or
a rainbow is seen in the sky; they indicate an old well can be found in the proposed spot
though covered by the earth.

Stanzas 51 and 52. Having thus ascertained the existence of an old well, the taste of
the water has to be noted from the planet occupying the 4th house or aspecting the 4th
house, or the lord of Lagna Navamsa. The Sun governs acid or hot taste, the Moon saltish,
Mars bitter taste, Jupiter sweetness, Venus sourness and Saturn pungent taste and
Mercury a mixture of all.
Stanza 53. The taste of water can also be known from the first letter contained in the
query of the person. A (*) varga, the Moon's taste; Kha (*) varga, taste of Mars; Cha (*)
varga, Mercury's; Ta (*) varga, Jupiter's; Tha (*) varga, Venus'; Pa (*) varga, Saturn's; Ya
(*) varga, Rahu's; and Sa (*) varga, the Sun's.
Rahu's taste is 'to have no taste' or insipid taste.
Stanza 54. The various movements of the questioner should be carefully noted and
the transit of the Moon should be studied and then the occurrence of water, where a well
has to be dug and what the depth of the well is to be, etc., ascertained.
Stanza 55. Wells have to be dug in the spots where the eyes, or the face or the
mouths of Nadis of Vastu Purusha stand. But care should be taken that those portions in
the body of Vastu Purusha which are connected with Agni are excluded.
NOTES
In Silpa Sastras we have frequent mention of Vastu Purusha. The head of Vastu Purusha
is in the north-east and the legs are in the south-west. This is the reason why wells are to be
constructed in the north-east. Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries and Taurus and western
direction are good. Readers are referred to my book Muhurtha for more details.
Stanza 56. The compound of the questioner should be divided into 12 signs; of these
the direction signified by Aquarius is the best (uttama); Pisces and Aries are ordinary
(madhyama); and Capricorn is useless (adhama).
Stanza 57. A well should not be dug in the area signified by Virgo. If dug, the owner
will die an unnatural death.
Stanza 58. If the Sun occupies the ascendant, the water will be very deep in the
ground; if Mars occupies the ascendant, the flow of water will be between rocks; and if
Rahu or Saturn occupies the rising sign, there will be no water flow.
Stanza 59. If the rising sign is occupied by the Moon and Venus, the well will be full;
if by Jupiter and Mercury, there will be moderate water. If Mercury and the Moon are in
the ascendant, there will be sand underneath from which water will sprout out. If the Sun
and Mars are in the ascendant, water will issue out of rocks.
Stanza 60. When Venus occupies the ascendant, water will have good taste. Jupiter
in the ascendant makes the water tolerably good. Saturn in a watery sign renders the water

brackish and the quantity also will be very small. Rahu in the rising sign makes the well
dry and waterless.
Stanza 61. The depth of the water-layer can be determined from the number
indicated by the letters in the first word expressed by the questioner; or the number
indicated by the rays of planets or signs.
Stanza 62. The rays of the planets that occupy the ascendant or the 4th indicate the
depth of the well. If there are more planets, the strongest should be taken. In watery places
(anupadesa) the measure is to be by cubits. In places where there is water along with trees
in moderation, i.e. semi-dry (jangala), the measurement is to be half; in dry deserts, the
measurement is to be by the average height of man. The number is to be furnished by
Graha Rasmis or planetary rays.
Stanza 63. In Kupa Prasna, the Rasmis or rays of planets are: the Sun — 16; the
Moon — 4; Mars — 10; Mercury — 9; Jupiter 7; Venus — 5; and Saturn - 21.
Stanza 64. The rays for the various signs beginning from Aries respectively are: 7, 8,
Stanza 65. These rays can be used to measure the amount of money lost in regard to
questions bearing on theft, the amount gained and to measure the time required for going
and return.
Stanzas 66 and 67. In Kupa Prasna, no differentiation need be made between the
rising sign and Arudha. It is immaterial whether the yoga-karaka planets occupy the rising
sign or Arudha. Full effects will come to pass. Besides, if the Sun's halo and other signs
described are observed in full, one can boldly predict that a well can be found submerged
in the selected spot.
Stanza 68. In both Varsha Prasna and Kupa Prasna, watery planets in non-watery
signs indicate very little water and the water layer very low and the rains will be late and
the rise of water in the rivers will be slower still. Non-watery planets in non-watery signs
give a dry waterless soil. Watery planets in watery signs give a watery layer even at the
surface. Rains will pour in, and floods will choke the rivers.
Stanza 69. The principles, suggested in the earlier chapters for predicting rain on
the basis of the first letter of the query, can be used in regard to qustions on digging wells.
Stanza 70. Note the expired ghatikas and vighatikas from sunrise till the hour of the
query. Multiply this by 28 and divide the product by 60. The remainder is the Nakshatra
counted from Aswini. This is known as "Dinarsha".
NOTES Example:
a) Let the expired period from sunrise to the time of query be 35 gh. 30 vgh. = 35.5 gh.

b) Multiplying this by 28, we get 35.5 x 28 = 994.
c) Dividing 994 by 60, we get 994 / 60 = 16, remainder 34.
Expunging multiples of 27, we get 7 which counted from Aswini gives Punarvasu.
Therefore Dinarsha is Punarvasu.
Thus ends the Chapter XXVI

CHAPTER XXVII
Bhojana Prasna
Stanza 1. In a question bearing on "meals" the ascendant indicates the physical
qualities of the man who takes meals. Its strength and its association, etc., determine the
man. While taking meals he faces that side which is indicated by the Dik to be determined
from the lord of the ascendant. The 2nd house governs the dining plates or leaves used for
taking the meal. If Saturn occupies the 2nd, the plate has a crack; if the Sun or Mars, the
plate is squeezed or depressed or the leaf is faded. The Moon governs a clean plate round in
shape. If the 2nd is a fixed sign, then the plate used is one that is generally used for eating.
NOTES
In this chapter "Bhojana Prasna" or the subject of questions on meals is taken up. The
answer that should be given when a query regarding meals, its nature, the server, and the persons
who partook, etc., is explained.
Stanza 2. The Bhakshya or the item used as subsidiary dish to rice is governed by
the 3rd house. If the Sun and Venus occupy the 3rd, then roots, surana and cheerai are
used. If it is the Sun, then the cooked thing is a round one such as "Vadai". If it is the
Moon, then it is "sweet laddu" or other round ones. If the 3rd house is jeeva and contains
Jupiter, then bread is used. The 4th house indicates the nature of drinks served. If it is
occupied by Saturn or Gulika, the water drunk is impure and contains germs.
Stanza 3. According to some writers, the 4th house indicates the person who gives
the food, his nature and temperament, his caste, etc. Of the planets who are in the 4th and
who aspect the 4th, the stronger one indicates the caste. If there are no planets standing in
or aspecting the 4th, the caste is to be determined by the 4th house. The 5th house is the
'server' or butler. If Mars occupies the 5th, he is of angry nature. If Saturn or Rahu is in
the 5th, the man is not liberal in giving or serving food.
Stanza 4. If Saturn or Rahu occupies the 5th, one is accustomed to steal food. If the
5th is an odd sign, the server is a male; if even, she is a woman. If the 5th house is aspected
by benefics, he or she is of good temperament.
Stanza 5. From the 6th house is to be looked into upadamsa items. The Sun in the
5th indicates 'dishes' that are hot and made of maricha (chillies); the Moon in the 5th
indicates too much of salt in dishes.
Stanza 6. Mars in the 6th indicates the thing is burnt or very pungent. If Mercury is
in the 6th, the dish contains items of all taste. Jupiter governs sweet dishes Venus indicates
dishes cooked with mangoes or fruits that grow in creepers.

NOTES
There is another reading. Instead of'Skanda’, ’Kanda' is seen. In that case roots are meant.
Stanza 7. Saturn in the 6th governs 'bitter dishes' containing bitter fruits, etc. Rahu,
Ketu or Gulika in the 6th indicates flesh.
Stanza 8. When these planets (Rahu, Ketu or Gulika) occupy Pisces, it is fish; Aries,
goat's flesh; Capricorn, flesh of the deer. The appropriate non-vegetarian dish should be
inferred from the nature of the sign involved.
NOTES
In so predicting, care must be taken to see whether the persons concerned are flesh eaters
or vegetarians.
Stanza 9. The 7th house governs 'seka dravya' or the appetisers. Mars or the Sun in
the 7th indicates pepper water; the Moon curds; Mercury buttermilk; Jupiter, milk;
Saturn, rice water or kanji; Venus, it is again buttermilk. If the 7th house is an aquatic sign
occupied by Saturn, it is water. Regarding this there are divergent views.
Stanza 10. If the Sun or Mars or Saturn occupy the 7th, oily matter is used. If the
Moon, it is rice water. If Jupiter, it is ghee; and if Venus, it is butter.
Stanza 11. The quality of the food is to be ascertained from the 8th house. If the Sun
is in the 8th, the food is half cooked; if Mars, it is burnt; if Rahu, it has been so cooked that
it gives a poisonous odour with poison in it; if Saturn, it gives a bad taste; and if Gulika,
either vermin or human hair or burnt cinder can be found in it. If benefics occupy the 8tb,
the food is wholesome and properly cooked.
NOTES
If there are no planets in the 8th, these effects should be gleaned from the planets that
aspect the 8th; and if there are no aspecting planets, then the results should be read from the lord
of the 8th.
Stanza 12. The 9th house indicates the persons who take food along with the
principal man 'the questioner'. The caste of the man, his colour and the number, etc., can
be specified by taking into consideration the number of planets that occupy or aspect the
9th or the Rasmis indicated by the 9th or Rasmis of various planets. If Gulika occupies the
8th, the man will get polluted while taking meals.
Stanza 13. The quantity of food eaten, or the satiety of the individual has to be read
from the 10th house. If a malefic occupies the 10th, the person is not satisfied with the
quantity served. If a benefic occupies the 10th, he is quite satisfied with the quanity given.
If the 10th house is Urdhwa-mukha, his belly is overloaded; if it is Adhomukha, it is
incomplete; if it is Tiryangmukha, it is filled moderately.

NOTES
According to some, if the 10th is an ebbing sign, or the Moon is waxing, then the person
overeats. If it is a flowing Rasi or the Moon is on the wane, then he has taken an insufficient
quantity.
Stanza 14. The 11th house indicates the nature of the conversation at the time of
meals. If the Sun is in the 11th, the talk is about rulers and political matters; if the Moon, it
is about women; if Mars, about brave people; if Mercury, about learned men; if Jupiter or
Venus, the conversation is about God and Brahmins; if Saturn, about thieves and thugs; if
Rahu, it is about visha vaidyas (healers of poison); and if Gulika, persons dead.
Stanza 15. Rest after meals is to be studied from the 12th house. Benefics in the 12th
indicate sound sleep and rest; malefics reveal disturbed sleep. If Mars occupies the 12th,
the person will lie down on a woollen blanket; if Mercury occupies the 12th, on the skins of
animals; if the Sun, on mats made of grass; if the Moon, on wooden logs; and if Jupiter and
Venus, soft cushions and beds.
Stanza 16. If the lord of the 12th is exalted, the person will sleep on good cots and
beds. If he is in debilitation, he will lie down on bare ground.
Stanza 17. These points have been summarised below as given in another treatise.
The 1st to 12th houses denote respectively the diner, crockery or plates to be used when
taking food, Bhakshya or subsidiary food; drinks; the attitude or mood of the diner;
upadamsa, liquid matter to be used; the main food; persons who take food along with the
diner; satisfaction derived from food; nature of conversation at the time of meals; and rest
and sleep after meals.
Stanza 18. According to Krishneeya, Venus governs sweet food (madhura); the
Moon, soft and cold things (snigdha); Mercury and Jupiter govern pungent things (seetha
and ruksha); the Sun saltish and pungent (lavana and kashayd); Saturn, sour and acidic
(katuka); and Mars, bitter things (tikta).
Stanza 19. Some writers are of the opinion that Jupiter governs sweet things
(madhura); the Sun acidic foods (teekshna); Saturn bitter (tikta) taste; Mercury, pungent
(kashaya) taste; Venus sour taste; Mars, hot (katukd) and the Moon, saline taste.
Stanza 20. If the rising sign is owned by a benefic or a benefic occupies the rising
sign, the food is sufficient. If the ascendant is an odd sign, the food will not be soft. If it is
an even sign, it will be soft and agreeable to the taste.
Stanza 21. If Mars and the Sun occupy a non-watery sign (8th house), the food is
either very dry or causing undue heat to the body. If they occupy an aquatic sign (8th
house), then the food is accompanied with bhakshyas. If Saturn and Rahu occupy the 8th

house, then the food eaten is very cold.
Stanza 22. If the Moon and Venus occupy a watery sign, the food is cold and is in a
liquid form. If Mercury and Jupiter occupy a non-aquatic sign, the food is served with
subsidiary dishes.
Stanzas 23 and 24. The Sun and Mars govern the meat of the stag. The Moon
governs the meat of crab and fishes. Jupiter governs the meat of elephants and horses.
Saturn governs the meat of pigs and she-buffaloes. Venus governs the meat of cows and
she-buffaloes. The vegetables governed by the different signs will be according to their
lords and the nature of the signs.
Stanza 25. Watery planets and watery signs govern watery vegetables. Village signs
and planets indicate vegetables grown in rural places. Similarly forest signs and planets
indicate forest products. Malefics indicate liquid food as rice water, barley water, etc.,
cooked with the grains appropriate to the planets. Benefics indicate the food prepared with
the grains governed by them.
Stanza 26. The Moon indicates rice water. If he is aspected by Mercury, it is rice
water along with other curries. If the Moon is aspected by Jupiter, it is rice water mixed
with ghee. If there is the aspect of Venus, it is mixed with butter. Other planets indicate
mixture with oil.
Stanza 27. The Sun and Mars indicate goat's milk. Venus denotes cow's milk or
products. Similarly the milk of other animals corresponding to signs and planets
associating or aspecting them can be guessed.
Stanzas 28 and 29. If Mars occupies the 7th, the liquid food is prepared with flesh; if
Mercury, the liquid food has green colour; if Mercury and
Venus, the liquid prepared has variegated colours being formed by different
ingredients as sambhar; if Saturn, liquid food contains dead matter of small animals; if the
Sun, the food is prepared of 'Kashta Saka'. The Sun in the 7th indicates the death of the
wife.
Stanza 30. Malefics govern the flesh of carnivorous animals. Benefics such as Venus
govern the flesh of animals, that live on grass; Mercury governs the flesh of animals that
live on flesh and grass. Jupiter governs the flesh of animals that live on grass and grains.
The Moon governs the flesh of animals that live on fishes and vermins.
NOTES
Watery signs indicate the flesh of watery animals. Quadrupedal signs govern quadrupeds.
Biped signs govern the flesh of bipeds, etc.
Stanza 31. The number that co-dine, the time, their caste and their appearance etc.,

all can be known from the planets. The plates used can also be ascertained. The 9th house
and the lord of the 9th determine these.
Stanzas 32, 33 and 34. In determining the meat dishes, Aries indicates goat's flesh;
Taurus, the flesh of cows; Gemini, Leo and Sagittarius, the flesh of fish. In regard to
vegetables, Cancer Scorpio and Capricorn and Pisces govern the family of raw fruits;
Libra, Virgo and Aquarius govern pure cooked rice. Jupiter rules payasa prepared with
ghee; Venus governs food with honey, milk and bread.
Stanza 35. According as the Arudha is a move-able, a common or a fixed sign, the
querent will have taken meals many times, twice or only once, respectively. If the Arudha
being an odd sign is connected with benefics, the person who took food was hungry at the
time. If Arudha being an even sign is connected with malefics, he was not hungry at the
time of meals. From the gestures, words and actions of the questioner, the nature of food
etc., can be known.
Stanza 36. Suppose the questioner wets his lips with his tongue or opens his eyes
widely or looks up or lifts up the palm of his hands or laughs outright, it means he has had
food.
Stanza 37. If the ascendant happening to be a benefic sign is occupied by benefic
planets the querent had sumptuous meals. If the rising deca-nate is governed by the meat
favouring planet, the querist eats meat dishes and food that is not tasty.
Stanza 38. In Bhojana Prasna, the Sun and other planets govern respectively
quadrupeds, daughters, thieves, arguments and counter arguments, wealth and pretas. The
Sun's connection indicates that the dining place was a cowshed; the Moon's the daugher
served meals; Mars, the co-eaters were thieves; Mercury, heated exchange of words took
place while eating; Jupiter, the quereut got not only food but money also; Venus, food
served by wife; Saturn, it was food connected with shraddha or death ceremony.
Stanza 39. If Arudha is owned by benefics; or Gemini, Virgo, Libra, Aquarius or a
Urdwa mukha sign happens to be the Arudha; and if benefics occupy quadrants and trines;
the lords of the 2nd and 11th combine or occupy their own houses; or interchange houses;
or they occupy or aspect the lord of Lagna; or if Jupiter and the lord of the 9th are strong
and favourably placed, then the projected business will be successful.
Proshithogamana Prasna
Stanza 40. If Arudha is a moveable sign and benefics occupy the 4th and 8th, the
person will return home. If the lord of the 10th is retrograde and occupies the 9th, the
person will come back. If the lord of the 1st is in the 6th, the traveller has not reached his

destination, but is on his way to it.
NOTES
This deals with queries regarding the return of a person who left his house and home and
is in exile. Whether he will return or not, can be foretold by this prasna.
Stanza 41. If the lord of the ascendant occupies the 11th, 12th, 1st, 2nd, 3rd or if
malefics occupy quadrants, the traveller will not come back. If the Moon occupies the 8th
and quadrants are devoid of malefics, the person will return without any mishap. In this
yoga, if benefics occupy quadrants, the person will return early with comfort. If the lords
of the 1st and 10th occupy the 11th, 12th, 1st, 2nd or 3rd, the traveller may come back
without reaching the destination.
Stanza 42. When the lord of the ascendant is exalted or is in Moolatrikona; or
another planet in retrogression occupies the 7th house, the person who left the house will
return home. When the lord of the ascendant is retrograde and occupies any house, and
Jupiter is in a quadrant, the person will return home. All the signs indicated in Chapter II
of this book may also be utilised in this context.
Stanza 43. If the lord of the ascendant or the planet, who indicates the return, is of
slow velocity, the traveller will return late; if it is of ordinary speed, the return will be in a
reasonable time; if the speed is rapid, the return will be early.
Stanza 44. If the ascendant is strong and the lord of the ascendant occupies a human
sign or a human Navamsa-sign, the person will return home walking, along with many
persons. If the ascendant lord is in a quadrupedal sign, the return will be in vehicles
appropriate to the signs. If the lord of ascendant is in the decanate of bird, the return will
be on horse-back; if the decanate happens to be watery, the return will be through watery
routes; and if the sign is sthala, the return journey will be through land routes.
Stanza 45. If the lord of the ascendant is in Sakata Drekkana, the traveller will
return in a carriage or a chariot. If the lord is in an ethereal sign or Navamsa, the return
will be by a palanquin (or in style, may be an aeroplane). If the planet indicating the return
is weak, the traveller will not come back though there may be reports of his return.
Stanza 46. Benefics occupying the 9th indicate the nature and good experiences of
the journey. Malefics reveal the difficulties the person had to face. Planets in the 8th house
denote both the good and bad experiences. The 7th house denotes all the experiences the
person had after his return home.
Thus ends the Chapter XXVII

CHAPTER XXVIII
Suratha Prasna
Stanza 1. If the Sun occupies the rising sign or the 7th; or combines with or aspects
the lords of the 1st or the 7th, there was no sexual union that day. If these combinations are
absent, there was sexual union that day. According as the 7th is associated with or aspected
by benefics or malefics, the union was happy or unhappy.
Stanza 2. If the 7th house is not joined or aspected by the Moon or Venus but is
afflicted by malefics, then there was sexual union that day. Krishnacharya is of the opinion
that if the Moon and Venus join or aspect the 7th house, co-habitation took place. If the
Moon and Venus aspected or joined by the Sun, or benefics aspect the ascendant, then the
lady had real love or passion for the husband at the time of the union. If the Moon and
Venus subject to the aspect of malefics except the Sun, aspect the ascendant, then the
woman had no real love for the husband.
Stanza 3. According as.the ascendant is aspec-ted by benefics or malefics, the
woman loved or hated the husband. If the Moon is joined by malefics, the union was
brought about by sheer force on an unwilling woman. If the Sun is joined by malefics, the
union was the result of the woman's force on an unwilling man.
Stanza 4. If the Moon is associated with or aspected by the Sun, or is in the vargas of
the Sun, the man has beauty and education, etc. If the Moon joins or aspects benefics or has
the vargas of benefics, the woman has all the good qualities of a woman.
Stanza 5. If the planet that aspects the ascendant occupies its own vargas, then the
union took place in one's own house. If that planet occupies the vargas of other planets, the
union was with another woman in a foreign place. If the said planet is exalted, the union
was with a woman belonging to a rich family; if he occupies the vargas of friends, the union
was with a related woman. If the planet is in the vargas of enemies, the union was with a
woman born of inimical families. If it is debilitated, then the sexual commerce was with a
low-born woman. The caste of the woman, etc., is to be determined from the planet
aspecting Lagna.
NOTES
If the questioner is a woman or the question is about a woman, the planet that aspects
Lagna determines the nature of the man — his qualities, caste, etc.
Stanza 6. If the Sun, Mars or Venus occupies the 7th, there was sexual commerce
with another woman. If Jupiter is in the 7th, the union was with the wife. If Mercury, a
dancing girl. The age of the woman should be ascertained from the age of the Moon.

NOTES
If a weak Moon, the woman is young; if full Moon, the woman is in the prime of her
youth. If the Moon is old, the woman also is old. Saturn in the 7th signifies a woman belonging
to another caste (Moudhya Chandra denotes a dancing girl).
Stanza 7. Young Moon denotes a woman in her teens; Saturn and the Sun an old
lady; Jupiter a woman who has given birth to a child; Mars, Venus a woman with a rough
body. In this way, the age of the man also can be determined.
NOTES
The age of the partners with whom one has sex can be ascertained by the disposition of
the planets in the 7th house, as narrated in this stanza.
Stanza 8. If the Sun occupying the vargas of the other planets aspects the ascendant,
the union is with a royal beauty; if the Moon similarly placed, the union is with a Brahmin
woman; if Venus, a Sudra woman; if Mars, a minister's wife; if Jupiter, hypocrite (...);
Mercury, Saturn or Rahu similarly disposed, a woman belonging to other religions. The
woman's accomplishments, her build, appearance and character can be read from the
decanate of the ascendant or the planet that occupies or aspects the ascendant.
NOTES
One may question the utility of these details. But in cases of alleged rape and adultery,
clues from the Prasna chart can be used to help the victim and court to track the culprit and place
of the act.
Stanza 9. These can be considered from Chathra Rasi also. If Arudha is Chathra or
the lord of Arudha occupies Chathra sign, the union was with one's own wife; if the
friendly sign of the lord of Arudha happens to be Chathra, or a friendly planet occupies
Chathra, the union was with a woman of a friendly or related family; similarly an inimical
sign of the lord of Arudha happens to be Chathra or a foe occupies Chathra the union was
with a woman belonging to an inimical family. Here friends and foes are to be determined
as per verse “jeevo jeeva budho sitendatanayo”.
NOTES
The author wants the consideration of the planetary friendships and enmities as given by
Varahamihira in his Brihat Jataka. Mihira seems to accept the views of Yavana-charya according
to whom there are only friends and foes but not neutrals.
The 2nd part of the stanza elaborates the views of Satya-charya. From the Moolatrikona
of a planet, the lords of the 2nd, the 4th, the 8th, the 12th, the 5th, the 9th and the lord of his
exaltation sign are friends of the planet concerned. The rest are enemies.
Commenting on this stanza, Prof. B. Suryanarain Rao observes thus: On page 96 of the

English translation of Brihat Jataka, "Bhattotpala observes rightly that according to Yavaneswara
there are only friends and foes but not neutrals or acquaintances. According to Satyacharya,
whom the author of Brihat Jataka holds in great admiration and respect, all the various shades of
friendship and enmity are clearly traceable. The commentator here gives lengthy explanations
with a view to simplify matters. I may quote here one or two cases so that the rest may easily be
grasped. The Sun has his Moolatrikona in Leo. The 12th from Leo is Cancer. Its lord is the Moon
and as he owns only one house he becomes the best friend of the Sun. The 4th from Leo is
Scorpio, and 9th is Aries; their lord is Mars. The Sun is exalted in Aries. Therefore Mars is a
friend of the Sun. The 5th and 8th from Leo are Sagittarius and Pisces. Their lord is Jupiter.
Therefore Jupiter is an intimate friend of the Sun. The 2nd and 11th from Leo are Virgo and
Gemini. Their lord is Mercury. The 2nd Rasi is mentioned but the 11th is not named, therefore
Mercury is a neutral of the Sun. The 6th and 7th from Leo are Capricorn and Aquarius, and as
both of those houses are not mentioned in the rule, their lord Saturn is a bitter enemy of the Sun.
The 3rd and 10th from Leo are Libra and Taurus. Their lord is Venus. Both of these houses are
not mentioned in the Sutra, and therefore Venus is a bitter enemy of the Sun. Take now Moon.
His Moolatrikona is in Taurus. The 4th is Leo, its lord is the Sun, and therefore he is a friend of
the Moon. The 2nd and 5th houses from Taurus are Gemini and Virgo. Mercury is their lord.
Therefore he is a friend of the Moon, The 7th and 12th from Taurus are Scorpio and Aries. Their
lord is Mars, 7th house is not mentioned but the 12th is named. Mars therefore is a neutral of the
Moon. The 8th and 11th from Taurus are Sagittarius and Pisces. Their lord is Jupiter, as the 11th
is not mentioned but the 8th is named and therefore Jupiter becomes neutral to the Moon. Moon
is exalted in Taurus. The 6th from it is Libra, its lord is Venus. The 6th is not mentioned and
therefore Venus becomes a neutral of the Moon. The 9th and 10th houses from Taurus are
Capricorn and Aquarius. Their lord is Saturn. 10th is not named and therefore Saturn becomes a
neutral of the Moon. Lor Mars, Aries is Moolatrikona. The fourth from it is Cancer, with the
Moon as its lord. He owns only one house and therefore the Moon is the friend of Mars. The 5th
from Aries is Leo. Its lord is the Sun, he owns only one house and as it is named the Sun
becomes the friend of Mars. Similarly find out for all the planets from their Moolatri-konas.
There are planets who own two houses while the Sun and the Moon own only one house each. If
the planet owns two houses named in the Sutra (text), then he becomes a friend. If he owns two
houses but one of them falls in the numbers named above and the other does not, then the planet
becomes a neutral. But if a planet owns two houses and none of them is named in the Sutra, then
he becomes an enemy.
Stanza 10. If the ascendant happens to be an odd sign or the planet aspecting the
ascendant happens to occupy an odd sign, then the sexual act was done once. If the above

happens to be even, then the act was conducted two times. If the vargas of the ascendant
are owned by Mars and Venus exclusively, then the sex-act was conducted as per principles
of Vatsyayana, many times. According as the varga of the ascendant is that of the Sun or
the Moon, co-habitation took place during day or night time. The place of sexual act is to
be ascertained from the ascendant.
Stanza 11. If the Moon and Mars occupy the 1st, 5th, 7th or 9th, the couple
quarrelled and kept awake. If the Moon and Saturn are in the above houses, they dreamt
that they had sexual commerce. If the Sun and the Moon are in the above houses, there was
no enjoyment but he was allowed to feel the private organs; if the Moon and Venus, the
couple managed to talk private matters and engage in private amusements.
Stanza 12. If the Moon and Jupiter are in the 1st, the 5tb, the 7th or the 9th, be had
union with an accomplished woman and there is the prospect of pregnancy. If the Moon
and Mercury, the union was not with his wife but with another woman; if Mars is in the
ascendant and Saturn is in the 7th or vice-versa, there was no sleep for the couple because
of fear from lire. The same effect can be told if these lords interchange houses.
Stanza 13. In the yoga described above, if the Moon occupies the sign joined by
Mars or Saturn the couple went on quarrelling. If the Moon is in the 7th, the quarrel was
due to the woman and if the Moon is in the ascendant, the dispute was due to the man. If
Venus is associated with Mars, or Saturn occupies the ascendant or the 7th, the couple
separated quarrelling and spent the night in different beds. If Mars is in the 3rd and the
Moon is in the 7th, there was quarrel and separation and the couple had to sleep on the
bare ground.
Stanzas 14 and 15. If the Moon and Venus occupy the 1st, the 3rd, the 4th or the 7tb,
the couple quarrelled and the dress of the woman was cut off. The house in which the union
took place is to be ascertained thus: If Saturn occupies the 1st or the 7th, the house is a
repaired one; if Mars, a burnt house; if Mercury, a house constructed by many carpenters;
if the Moon, a newly built house; if the Sun, a house made of much wood but not strong; if
Venus, a new and ornamental house; and if Jupiter, a very strong house.
NOTES
This information can be used in various other types of questions such as delivery, theft,
etc.
Stanza 16. There is another view. If the Sun is in a watery sign, the union took place
in the bath house; the Sun in other signs, indicates kitchen. Mars governs the kitchen,
Mercury rules playgrounds, Saturn governs a Sudra house or a cowshed. Rahu governs the
house of low-born people or latrines. The Moon governs palaces or temples. A weak Venus

governs an old house.
NOTES
Here the planetary position is with reference to the ascendant or the 7th house.
Stanza 17. There is still another view. If the ascendant is not aspected by any planet,
then the house where co-habitation took place is to be determined from the nature of the
ascendant. Hence it is given in the next verse.
Stanza 18. If Aries or Libra happens to be the ascendant, then the houses governed
by Mars or Venus in the above are to be considered. If the ascendant is Taurus or a
common sign, then the house governed by Mercury will be the enjoyment place. Leo rules
the cowshed. Scorpio governs the house assigned for the Moon. Cancer governs the houses
assigned for Jupiter. Capricorn a round-shaped house. And Aquarius rules the place where
serpents are worshipped.
According to another view, Virgo, Sagittarius, Pisces and Gemini rising indicate a
grannery, the mill house where rice and other grains are powdered, the kitchen and the
cowshed respectively.
Stanza 19. If the Moon occupies the signs or Navamsa signs of Saturn, or is aspected
by or associated with Saturn or occupies the 4th house, or is posited in a watery sign, the
couple had sex relation in a dark spot. If however the Sun aspects or associates with the
Moon, the spot was not dark.
Stanza 20. Certain Lakshanas or indicative signs are read from the deepa (lit lamp)
kept during daytime for luck, at the time of meals or any other auspicious occasion and
during night time for the sake of light and general prosperity.
Stanza 21. Divide the enjoyment room into 12 signs and find out where the Sun
stands. In the direction signified by the sign a lamp is kept burning, or in the direction
implied by the sign where the Sun stands — as in Aries and its trines — east; Taurus and
its trines — south: Gemini and its trines — west; and Cancer and its trines — north. If the
ascendant is strong, the direction is to be ascertained thus: Aries and Taurus — east:
Gemini — south-east; Cancer and Leo — south; Virgo — south-west, etc.
Stanza 22, Count 3 ghatikas, 45 vighatikas before sunrise and assume that Aries
lasts till 1 gh. 15 vig. after sunrise. Then the next five ghatikas is Taurus, then Gemini 5
ghatikas, and in this order, signs come in succession. Note the sign occupied by the Sun; the
direction indicated by this sign is the one where the lamp is kept lit. If the Sun occupies a
fixed sign, the lamp is fixed to the wall or to the ground; if it is a moveable sign, the light is
a lantern that can be moved from place to place; and if it is in a common sign, it is a
hanging lantern.

Stanza 23. If at the time of Prasna, the Sun is strong, the flame of the lamp is clear
and brilliant. If it is weak, the flame is feeble. In a similar manner if at the time of the
query, the Moon is strong, the oil used is clear and pure and if he is weak, the oil is impure
and mixed.
Stanzas 24 and 25. If the Moon occupies the Moon's Hora, the oil used for the lamp
is ghee. If the Moon is in the Sun's Hora, cocoanut or gingelly oil is used. If the Moon is in
the first part of the sign or Navamsa, then there is a large quantity of oil; and if it is in the
last part of the Rasi or Amsa, the oil is about to end. The nature of the wick is to be read
from the ascendant.
The nature of the wick is denoted by the planets occupying the ascendant. If there
are no planets, then the respective lords reveal the nature of the wick in the lamp. The
colour of the wick is to be known from the colour of the sign or Navamsa sign, whichever is
stronger. If both sign and Navamsa are strong, the wick has both the colours. If the
ascendant is a common sign, there are two wicks; if it happens to be in the earlier part of
the sign, then the wick is long and only a small portion of it is burnt.
NOTES
Details pertaining to the colour of the wick, the direction where the lamp is kept, the
nature of the flame, etc., cannot be quite relevant to modern times. What should impress a reader
is the depth of detail even in regard to such matters, the ancient astrological writers had gone into
by way of framing innumerable planetary combinations.
Where the sexual union took place, which caste the man or woman belongs to, whether it
was by mutual consent or by force can be relevant even today in tackling cases of rape. It is for
the readers to ponder over the details and judge for themselves their utility.
Thus ends the Chapter XXVIII

CHAPTER XXIX
Nashta Prasna
Stanza 1. Suppose a person makes a query without mentioning what it exactly is, it
is termed as Nashta Prasna. How to answer such questions has been dealt with by the great
writers Krishna Acharya and Madhava Acharya.
Stanzas 2 and 3. When the questioner without revealing the business underlying the
query puts in a vague question, "I wish to know the result of something that is in my mind.
Can you tell me the business and the result?" The answer must be given keeping in mind
the following: If Jupiter or the Moon occupies Lagna or Arudha, it is Ayur Prasna (dealing
about sickness and longevity). If Saturn occupies the 7th, the 8t'u or the 12th, consider that
it is a Chora Prasna (dealing with the loss of wealth through theft). If Jupiter is in the 2nd,
Venus in the 1st or the 4th, Mercury in the 10th, then it is about some business (Karya
Prasna).
NOTES
In all these, Nimittas also should be carefully scrutinised.
Stanza 4. Suppose a planet occupies the 1st, the 4th, the 6th, the 7th, the 10th from
Lagna or Arudha or the Moon. It has its Navamsa in Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces, then say
that it is a Chora Prasna (some wealth has been stolen away by some thief). Similarly if a
malefic occupies the 10th house from any one of these, say that it is a Chora Prasna.
NOTES
Here the planets occupying the 1st, the 4th, the 6th, the 7th, the 10th and the malefic in
the 10th, are technically known as Chora planets. If you find more planets than one, weigh the
strength and choose the strongest.
Stanza 5. Regarding this, the author of the famous treatise Shat Panchasika has
semething to say:
(a) From the Navamsa of Lagna, determine the nature of the thing stolen; (b) the
shape of the thief can be known from the Drekkana of Lagna; (c) from the Lagna Rasi,
determine the time, the place where the stolen thing is kept and direction where it is; and
(d) the caste and age of the thief from the lord of Lagna.
Stanza 6. The size and shape of the thief will be similar to Lagna Drekkana, and the
lord of Lagna will show his build, colour, dress and vesha (appearance). Here also the
strongest should be taken into consideration.
Stanza 7. In Arya Saptati, it is stated that the appearance and caste of the thief will
be exactly similar to that of the lord of the ascendant.

Stanza 8. According to Madhava, the 6th house is to be considered to identify the
thief. The planet that occupies the 6th house or the lord of the 6th reveals the caste, name
and appearance of the thief.
Stanza 9. If the planet involved occupies his own sign or Navamsa, then the wealth
has not been stolen, it is still there. If the planet occupies the sign or Navamsa of a foe, then
the wealth is in the house of his foes; similarly if a planet occupies a friendly sign or
Navamsa, the stolen wealth is in the possession of friends or relations. If the planet is
exalted or in exalted Navamsa, then it is in the hands of a rich man; if it is debilitated or in
debilitated Navamsa, it is in the hands of a low-born man. The details can be read from
Arudha and Navamsa Lagna.
NOTES
Of the three viz., the lord of the ascendant, the lord of the Navamsa Lagna and the lord of
the Bhava concerned, the last is the most powerful in awarding the results.
Stanza 10. The stolen property is in the direction signified by Arudha. If there is a
planet in Arudha, that can be taken into consideration. The direction is to be ascertained
on the basis of the verse in Brihat Jataka "pragadeesaha". If Arudha is a moveable sign,
property lies far off; if it is a fixed sign, it is near and if it is a common sign, the property is
neither far away nor nearby.
Stanza 11. If the ascendant is strong, the stolen wealth is in the direction signified by
it. If it is not strong, the direction is to be ascertained from the planet aspecting the
ascendant. According as the ascendant is a moveable, a fixed or a common sign, the wealth
is passing from hand to hand, is in a fixed place, or is in a neighbouring house or village.
Stanza 12. If the ascendant or Navamsa is a fixed sign or the ascendant is
vargottama, then the thief is one amongst the household. Otherwise the thief is an outsider.
If the ascendant or the Navamsa is a common sign without being vargottama, the thief hails
from the neighbourhood.
Stanza 13. According as Arudha is a diurnal or nocturnal sign the theft took place in
broad daylight or in the night.
Stanza 14. If Arudha is Aries, the stolen wealth is in meadows and pasture lands or
places where goats roam; if Taurus, places where oxen wander about or prefer to live; if
Gemini, a solitary place, sleeping room or a private parlour; if Cancer, places where crabs
live or in crevices; if Leo, forests, caves and hilly tracts; if Virgo, places where vegetables,
trees and plants grow in large numbers, and watery places; if Libra, market places, open
bazaars, etc.
Stanza 15. If the Arudha is Scorpio, the stolen property will be in caves, burial

grounds or hollows; if Sagittarius, the battle ground and king's residence; if Capricorn
forests, banks of of rivers, places inhabited by aboriginal tribes; if Aquarius, the kitchen,
potter's house, etc.; and if Pisces, holy temples and Brahmin's houses.
Planetary Indications of Theft
Stanza 16. If Jupiter aspects or joins the ascendant, the stolen article will be in
cowsheds, home of preceptors, temples, houses of chaste women. Venus indicates the
sleeping room, gardens, water tanks, houses of beautiful damsels; places where garlands,
flowers, ointment are kept safe. Mars governs kitchen and houses of carpenters. The Sun
signifies houses of quarrelling women, houses of beautiful women in the prime of their
youth, watery spots. Divide the Rasi where Jupiter stands into 4 parts of 7 1/2 degrees each.
If the planet occupies the first part, say, it is a cowshed; the 2nd part, home of preceptors;
the third part, temples and the fourth part, houses of chaste women.
Stanza 17. The Moon denotes the house of the dancing girl, watery places,
neighbourhood of lakes or seas. Mercury governs houses of young and youthful women,
houses of strong women, houses of beautiful damsels. Saturn governs houses of old ladies,
places where broken vessels are thrown away, places where vessels in which flesh is cooked,
washed or kept; muddy and airy and marshy spots. The exact spot can be identified by
dividing the Lagna as per the method suggested in Krishneeya.
NOTES
The place a stolen article is deposited in can be ascertained by noting the planet
occupying the Arudha Lagna. For instance according to stanza 16, if Jupiter is in Arudha, the
places will be (a) cowsheds or (b) residences of preceptors or temples or houses of chaste
women. Which is the exact locality ? For ascertaining this, divide the Arudha sign into 4 parts
and see in which part Jupiter is located. Suppose Jupiter is in Scorpio 13°. This will be the 2nd
part which means the house of a preceptor. Take the Sun again; if he is in Arudha, the article of
theft will have been kept in (a) houses of quarrelling women, (b) or houses of beautiful and
young women or (c) watery spots. In this case the ascendant is to be divided into 3 parts. If the
Sun is, say 25°, which means the 3rd part, the article will be found placed in some watery spot.
Stanza 18. The number of stolen articles is to be determined as follows: If it is Aries
7, Taurus 5, Gemini 12, Cancer 6, Leo 8, Virgo 6, Libra 7, Scorpio 7, Sagittarius 13,
Capricorn 10, Aquarius 6, and Pisces 15. The sign that has revealed the stolen articles is to
be looked into and the number as given in the stanza should be ascertained. The colour of
Arudha sign reveals the colour of the stolen thing. Regarding this, there is a difference of
opinion.

NOTES
The practical application of this method is somewhat ambiguous. For example: if the sign
signifying the theft of the articles is Aries, the number is 7. It is possible that I may not have
understood the meaning of the verse correctly.
Stanza 19. From Aries to Leo — the colour has to be taken according to the verse in
Brihat Jataka* rakta, sweta, suka tanu nibhah. Virgo governs variegated colours, Libra —
white colour, Scorpio and Aquarius — black or dark colour, Sagittarius — golden colour,
Capricorn — pinjala colour and Pisces — sky-blue.
NOTES
According to the stanza referred to in stanza 19, the colours of the 12 signs are
respectively: Aries red, Taurus — white, Gemini — green, Cancer — pink, Leo — pale white,
Virgo — pie bald, Libra — black, Scorpio — golden; Sagittarius — yellowish; Capricorn —
variegated; Aquarius — deep brown; and Pisces — white.
Stanza 20. The rasmis or rays contributed by the different planets are respectively:
the Sun 30, the Moon 28, Mars 8, Mercury 6, Jupiter 9, Venus 7, Saturn 3, and Rahu and
Ketu 2 each. The rasmis of the planets joining or aspecting the ascendant indicate the
number of articles lost in theft.
NOTES
If Arudha is stronger than the Ascendant, then the rasmis of the planets joining the former
should be considered. Wherever the word Lagna is used, it automatically implies the strongest of
the Arudha and Lagna.
Stanza 21. If the Sun, Mars or Mercury aspect the Moon, then the stolen wealth is
buried underground; if Jupiter aspects the Moon, the stolen wealth is kept suspended in
some elevated spot; if Venus, it is hidden under water; if Saturn, it is kept open exposed to
the winds. If the Moon is not aspected or associated by any planet, then the lost article will
be, on the basis of Arudha sign, kept in a vessel made of Dhalu, Moola or Jeeva as indicated
by the Arudha sign.
NOTES
If Arudha is urdhwamukha, it is high in the air; if it is adhomukha, it is low in the ground.
The nature of the wealth and when it was stolen, can be given from the planet that aspects
Arudha.
Stanza 22. Aries and its quadrants, Taurus and its quadrants, Gemini and its
quadrants represent respectively Dhatu and Karma, Moola and Bhoga and Jeeva and
Nasa. Navamsa Rasis also signify Dhatu and Moola as above.
Stanza 23. Constellations from Aswini and onwards represent in groups of three

respectively Dhatu and Karma, Moola and Bhoga and Jeeva and Nasa. Of the planets, the
Moon, Mars, Saturn and Rahu signify Dhatu; the Sun and Venus, Moola; and Mercury and
Jupiter, Jeeva.
NOTES
Zodiacal signs and constellations are said to represent Dhatu, Moola, etc. as follows:
Sign or Navamsa Sign
Signification
Aries
Dhatu and Karma
Taurus
Moola and Bhoga
Gemini
Jeeva and Nasa
Cancer
Dhatu and Karma
Leo
Moola and Bhoga
Virgo
Jeeva and Nasa
Libra
Dhatu and Karma
Scorpio
Moola and Bhoga
Sagittarius
Jeeva and Nasa
Capricorn
Dhatu and Karma
Aquarius
Moola and Bboga
Pisces
Jeeva and Nasa
The constellations also signify:
Aswini
Bharani
Dhatu and Karma
Krittika
Rohini
Mrigasira
Moola and Bhoga
Aridra
Punarvasu
Pushyami
Jeeva and Nasa
Aslesha
Makha
Pubba
Dhatu and Karma
Uttara
Hasta
China
Moola and Bhoga
Swati
Visakha
Anuradha
Jeeva and Nasa
Jyeshta
Moola
Poorvashadha
Dhatu and Karma
Uttarashadha

Sravana
Dhanishta Moola and Bhoga
Satabhisha
Poorvabhadra
Uttarabhadra Jeeva and Nasa
Revati
Stanza 24. Again a sign itself can be divided into three parts, viz., Karma, Bhoga
and Nasa. The first Drekkana is Karma; the second, Bhoga and the third is Nasa. Hence
the first part of Aries is Karma Dhatu, the 2nd part Bhoga Dhatu and the 3rd part Nasa
Dhatu. The first part of Taurus is Karma Moola, 2nd part is Bhoga Moola, 3rd part is Nasa
Moola. The first part of Gemini is Karma Jeeva, 2nd part Bhoga Jeeva, 3rd part Nasa
Jeeva. With regard to other signs we have to proceed in this way. This is the view of the
learned ia the science.
Stanza 25. With regard to odd Navamsa, Chara Rasi amsas are Dhatu, Sthira Rasi
amsas are Moola and Ubhaya Rasi amsas are Jeeva. In regard to even Navamsas, the
reverse holds good, viz., Chara — Jeeva, Sthira — Moola and Ubhaya — Nasa Dhatus.
NOTES
This stanza deals with the rulership of Dhatu, Moola and Jeeva, in regard to Navamsa
signs. An odd Navamsa may happen to be chara or moveable (example Aries Navamsa Rasi) or
common (e.g. Gemini Navamsa Rasi). An even Navamsa can be sthira (e g. Taurus) or Chara
(e.g. Cancer). Hence according to this stanza when the Navamsa is odd, Chara Rasi amsas
signify Dhatu, Sthira Rasi amsas Moola and Ubhaya Rasi amsas Jeeva.
Navamsa Rasi
Its Nature
Indication
Aries — odd
Chara — moveable
Dhatu
Taurus — even
Sthira — fixed
Moola
Gemini — odd
Ubhaya — common
Jeeva
Cancer — even
Chara — moveable
Jeeva
Leo — odd
Sthira — fixed
Moola
Virgo — even
Ubhaya — common
Dhatu
Libra — odd
Chara — moveable
Dhatu
Scorpio — even
Sthira — fixed
Moola
Sagittarius — odd
Ubhaya — common
Jeeva
Capricorn — even
Chara — moveable
Jeeva
Aquarius — odd
Sthira — fixed
Moola
Pisces — even
Ubhaya — common
Dhatu
Stanza 26. If Arudha Lagna, Navamsa, the planet that occupies Arudha and the
Arudha Nakshatra, happen to be Dhatu, then the stolen wealth is iron, stone, copper, earth,
bronze, gold, silver, lead — minerals as such. If in the Dhatu Rasi, the Navamsa, the

asterism and the conjoined planet signify Moola, the stolen article is made of roots or
treasure. If in the Dbatu Rasi, the Navamsa, the asterism and the joining planet are Jeeva,
then images and idols made of metals are the stolen articles.
Stanza 27. If all the factors involved signify the Moola, it indicates vegetables,
sprouts and fruits. If the Rasi signifies Moola and the rest of the factors signify Dhatu, it is
jaggery, dry fuel, clothes and all burnt things. If the Rasi is Moola and the other factors are
Jeeva, then images made of wood and animals living in the holes of trees, parrots, nests,
cowshed, etc., are indicated.
Stanza 28. If the sign and the other factors are Jeeva it indicates elephants and other
animals, governesses who take care of children, pregnant women, shepherds, etc. If the
Rasi is jeeva and the remaining factors are Dbatu, things indicated aie half-burnt things,
corpses and bones. If the Rasi is Jeeva and the others signify Moola, the things indicated
are claws of tigers, skins, hair of animals, tusk of an elephant, horns and woollen blankets.
Stanza 29. Aries governs Dhatus, as gold, coins (pana), silver, copper, lead lamps and
vessels and iron.
Stanza 30. Taurus governs Moola such as clothes, trousers, hats, hard dress, sandal,
all things made of cotton, beds, pillows, etc.
Stanza 31. Gemini has governance over Jeeva such as snakes and bears, wild flies
and bees, rats, wild cats, etc., etc. Cancer governs Dhatus as pick axe, swords and other
weapons. Capricorn is also similar to Cancer.
Stanza 32. Leo governs Moola — roots, rice plants, chunna, betel leaf, blackgram,
littlegram, plantains, jack fruits and mangoes. Virgo governs Jeeva — as all flesh used by
women while eating. Libra rules Dhatu — as butter milk, milk, curd, skins, blankets.
Stanza 33. Scorpio governs Moola — as family of fruits and roots, poisonous
planets, pepper, liquor and opium, etc. The first half of Sagittarius indicates human vargas
and the 2nd half elephants, horses, snakes and cocks. Aquarius is similar to Leo. And Pisces
has all those things given for Gemini besides serpents and fishes. The lost articles should be
ascertained on the basis of Arudha and Navamsa.
Stanza 34. All signs can be divided into four parts, Dhatu, Moola, Jeeva and Mrita.
Stanza 35. The first Drekkana of every sign is Dhatu, the 2nd is Moola and the third
is Jeeva. This is the view of Madhavacharya.
NOTES
According to another interpretation, the 1st, the 2nd and the 3rd parts of a sign signifies
Dhatum, Moola and Jeeva. The original word used in thryamsa, which means one third. Mi. K.
K. Kurup, a well-known astrologer of Kerala, explained to me as early as 1968 that thryamsa

could be considered as a Drekkana i.e., one-third of a sign.
Stanza 36. If a planet is placed in the Dhatu portion of a Nara Rasi, bangles, chains,
swotds, small bells and such things useful to men are signified. Planets occupying the Dbatu
portion in a watery sign denote water pots and cooking utensils.
NOTES
According to verse 34, each Rasi has been divided into four parts, indicating respectively
Dhatu, Moola, Jeeva and Mrityu. Nara Rasis or human signs are Gemini, Virgo, Libra, first half
of Sagittarius and Aquarius. If in a Nara Rasi, Arudha falls in the first part, the articles signified
are bangles, chains, swords, etc. Cancer is a watery sign. If the Arudha is in the first (of the four
parts) it indicates water pots, cooking utensils, etc.
Stanza 37. The thiefs appearance will correspond to the rising Drekkana if the
ascendant is strong. If it is weak, it will correspond to the shape of the planet occupying the
7th; or the strongest of the planets disposed in quadrants describe the appearance of the
thief. If there are many planets there will be many thieves and the nature of the thieves
should be ascertained from the planet in retrogression.
Stanza 38. According as the planet signifying the thief is in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th or
5th house the theft will have been committed by the querist, a family member, a brother,
mother and uncles and children respectively. Similarly if the planet signifying the thief is in
its own vargas, the questioner will be the thief; in the vargas of the 2nd lord, family
members; in those of the third lord, brothers; of the fourth lord, mother; of the 5th lord,
children, etc. If such a planet is in the 6th or 8th, the thief will be an enemy.
Stanza 39. The habitation of Jupiter and Mercury is in villages; the Moon and
Venus in watery places; the Sun, Mars and Saturn in forest regions; Virgo, Libra and
Sagittarius in cities; Gemini, Aquarius, Aries and Taurus in villages; Leo and Capricorn
(first half) in forests; Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces and the latter part of Capricorn in water.
The birthplace of the thief will be in accordance with the habitation of the planet ruling the
thief.
Stanza 40. Examine the habitation of Chora Graha and settle the birthplace of the
thief. The residence of the thief should be ascertained from the sign occupied by the chora
planet. If the habitation and residence of the planet happen to be the same, then he is Jiving
in the place of his birth.
Stanza 41. The Moon can be considered as proceeding from a village to a forest,
Venus from a forest to a village, Venus travels in a shallow watery surface, the Moon
travels in a deep well.; Rahu moves in a snake hole, hollows or pits; Saturn wanders in a
burial ground and thick forests; the Sun in mountains and Mars amongst creepers in

mountains.
NOTES
The significations given in this stanza can enable one to predict the whereabouts of the
thief. If the planet involved is the Moon, then the thief will be proceeding from a village to a
forest. These principles are to be adapted to fit into modern conditions.
Stanzas 42 and 43. The first Drekkana indicates 'standing', the 2nd Drekkana
indicates Tying down' and the third indicates 'sitting'. Thieves also can be considered to be
in this stage. 'Human Drekkanas' denote the most distinguished amongst the thieves.
Monkey-face, horse-face, dog's face, pig's face, serpent — these Drekkanas indicate very
bad persons amongst thieves.
Stanzas 44 and 45. The shape of the thief, his dress and weapons are all to be
determined from the nature of the 36 Drekkanas. What they are, has been detailed in
Brihat Jataka. The first word of every stanza in that chapter has been given in these two
stanzas for easy reference and remembrance.
Stanza 46. All vowels are governed by the Sun; the Moon rules ya ra la va; Mars —
kavarga; Venus — chavarga; Mercury — tavarga; Jupiter — thavarga; Saturn —
pavarga; and Rahu the remaining letters. The signs also govern the alphabetical letters (as
given in the notes). From this the name of the thief can be determined.
NOTES
All the 16 vowels are governed by the Sun. The other planets and signs signify the
various letters as follows: ya (*) ra (*), la (*), va (*) - the Moon; ka (*), kha (*), ga (*), gha (*),
jna (*) - Mars; cha (*)) chha (*), ja (*), jha (*) — gna (sr) — Venus; ta (*), tha (*), da (*), dha
(*), na (*), — Mercury: tha (*), thha (*), da (*)t dhha (*), na (*) — Jupiter; pa (*), pha (*), ba
(*), bha (*), ma (*) — Saturn: ssa (*), sha (*), sa (*), ha(*)t la (*), ksha (*) - Rahu
Signs govern the letters as follows: —
Taurus — u (*), oo (*), ru(*) sha (*)
Gemini - roo (*), sa (*)
Cancer - ye (*), eye (*), ha (*)
Virgo - am (*), aha (*), ksha (*)
Libra — ka (*)
Scorpio — cha (*)
Sagittarius — tha (*)
Capricorn — ta (*)

Aquarius — pa (*)
Pisces- ya (*), ra (*), la (*), va (*).
Stanza 47. Arudha, the lord of Arudha, the sign occupied by the lord and the
Navamsa of the lord of Arudha, should be considered. The letter indicated by the strongest
will be the first letter of the thief. The house of the thief is the sign occupied by the lord of
the 6th. The lord that aspects or joins the 6th, the lord of the 6th, the Navamsa sign of the
lord of the 6th, the 6th house Rasi — the letters of these (the strongest and having more
significations) may be taken as the initial letter in the name of the thief.
NOTES
Suppose a person keeping something within the palm of the hand says "What is there
inside this?", or he puts in queries "What is the name of the thief?", "What did I lose?, what is
the matter in my mind ?" etc. This stanza enables us to answer such queries. We should be
guided by the first letter in his questions. If Lagna is aspected by a planet, the first letter of the
word in the question will be the one indicated by the planet; if it is not aspected, then the letter
indicated by the planet occupying Lagna; and if there is more than one planet, always take the
strongest.
Stanza 48. In the previous verse, by Amsa, we have to take Navamsa, Dwadasamsa
and Trimsamsa, the lords of these to be noted and their letters to be examined. If a planet
occupies its own varga, then the letter to be noted is the one owned by the planet. If he
occupies another varga, then the combined letter formed by adding his letter to the letter of
the lord of the varga. If the planet occupies a fixed sign, then the name contains 4 letters; a
moveable sign denotes 2 letters. A common sign denotes 3 letters and also includes
'surnames'.
Stanza 49. Calculate the longitude of Gulika. The quotient obtained by dividing the
unexpired vighatikas in the Navamsa of Gulika by 100 indicates the planet. If it is one, it is
the Sun; if two, the Moon and so on. The constellation governed by the planet so got
indicates the first letter in the name of the thief.
The quotient, obtained by dividing the unexpired portion of Gulika Navamsa by 75,
gives the expired signs — the letter indicated by the next sign is the first letter in the name
of the thief.
Stanza 50. For the time of query, the longitudes of the Moon and Gulika are to be
calculated and the stronger of the two should be treated as Arudha. From it, the nature of
the wealth lost as Dhatu, Moola, Jeeva, etc., should be ascertained. The sign occupied by
the lords of the 2nd from Arudha indicates the place where the stolen wealth is hidden
according to the dictum "Matsau ghatee nrumithunam'".

NOTES
At the time of question the sign occupied by the Moon or Gulika, whichever is stronger,
should be treated as Arudha and the nature of the article — Dhatu, Moola or Jeeva, ascertained
on the basis of the Arudha so arrived at. The nature of the place where the stolen article is
deposited should be ascertained from the nature of the sign the 2nd lord occupies. The nature of
the sign should be considered as per the stanza *matsau ghatee nrumithunam given in Brihat
Jataka.
The translation of this verse along with notes by late Prof. B. Suryanarain Rao are given
below: —
"Meena is represented by two fishes lying close to each other with their heads pointing in
opposite directions; Kumbha is shown by a person bearing a water pot; Mithuna is indicated by a
man with a club and a woman with a lute, in close embrace; Dhanus is described as a Centaur
with the hind part resembling that of a horse and the front of an archer; Makara bears the
representation of the face of a deer with the hinder part of a crocodile; Tbula represents the
appearance of a man with a balance in hand; Kanya is shown by a virgin seated in a boat with a
crop in one hand with a light in the other, and the other signs are represented by their names and
move in places congenial to their nature."
"Pisces is formed of one fish with its tail against the head of the other and vice versa. The
sign will be later on called Ubhayodaya or that which can rise either way, for we see a head and a
tail on each side of the figure. Kumbha in Sanskrit means a pot and Makara means a crocodile.
Thula means balance and Kanya means a virgin. Dhanus means a bow and the rest are easy to
understand. The places most congenial to their natures will be controlled by them and they also
have a great likeness for such regions and the products of those regions. Watery surfaces are
liked by fish and crab, ordinary jungles and grassy plains are for ram and bull. Deep forests and
caves are for lion. Streets in the cities are for balances. Towns are for men and women or the
couple. Military grounds are for archers.
"Crocodiles are fond of watery places. Scorpions are fond of underground crevices and
holes. The representations of these creatures are very familiar to our readers to require any
further explanations."
Stanza 51. According as the lord of the 2nd (from Arudha) ooccupies a moveabie, or
a fixed or a common sign, the stolen wealth is far off, is near, is midway. There are two
types of thieves, viz., (a) abhyanthara (b) bahya. The 3rd house denotes the former while
the 6th governs the latter. If the lord of one of these combines with or is aspected by the
lord of the 2nd, or if a chura planet occupies the 11th, it can be said that the missing wealth
has been stolen. If the lords of chora houses are not connected with the lord of the 2nd or

the 11th, then the missing wealth has not been stolen but is only misplaced.
NOTES
Chora houses are the 6th and the sign occupied by the lord of the 6th.
Stanza 52. If the ascendant is owned, joined or aspected by a malefic, then the stolen
wealth cannot be got back. If the ascendant (owned or joined by a malefic) is aspected by a
benefic, a portion of the wealth will be recovered; or full wealth at a distant time or the lost
wealth will be replaced by another. If it is owned, joined and aspected by benefics, the
whole amount will be got back. If it is owned or joined by benefics but aspected by a
malefic, the money cannot be got back though it can be discovered where it is.
Stanza 53. If the full Moon is in the ascendant aspected by Jupiter or Venus or if a
benefic occupies the 11th house, the lost wealth can be recovered soon.
Stanza 54. Here we have given only a brief account of nashta prasna or queries
bearing on lost articles. Those who are desirous of learning more may refer to the famous
treatise Krishneeya.
Thus ends the Chapter XXIX

CHAPTER XXX
Nashta Jataka
Stanza 1. To ascertain the four factors beginning from the birth star of the querist,
the method implied in the verse "moortitwe" is explained in the following few stanzas.
NOTES
This chapter is entitled Nashta Jataka. When a person does not kn ow his birth time or has
no horoscope but still wants his life read, a birth horoscope can be prepared according to certain
rules, and they have been described here.
Stanza 2. The zodiacal factors assigned from Aries to Pisces respectively are 12, 5, 10, 3,
8, 1, 6, 11, 4, 2, 9 and 7. This is to be deducted from the root or base number 49, the balance
multiplied by 7 and the product divided by 27. The remainder counted from Aswini gives the
birth star.
NOTES
The 12 signs have been assigned numbers as follows: Aries 12, Taurus 5, Gemini 10,
Cancer 3. Leo 8, Virgo 1, Libra 6, Scorpio 11, Sagittarius 4, Capricorn 2, Aquarius 9 and Pisces
7. The base or Kuta number is 49.
Example:
(a) Arudha Lagna = Scorpio.
(b) The number assigned to it is 11.
(c) Deducting 11 from the base number 49, we get 49 — 11 = 38.
(d) Multiplying the balance by 7, we get 38 x 7 = 266.
(e) Dividing the product by 27, we get 266 / 27 = 9 plus remainder 23.
(f) Counting 23 from Aswini, we get Dhanishta as the birth star.
Stanza 3. To determine the position of Jupiter, the ascendant and the Sun
respectively (at the time of birth) deduct 7, 14 and 21 from Kuta (49). Thus we get as root
numbers 42 for Jupiter, 35 for the Ascendant and 28 for the Sun. Subtract the number
allotted to each of the signs (zodiacal factors) as in the previous verse from the base
numbers. The balance is to be multiplied by 7 and divided by 27. The remainder in each
case is the constellation occupied by Jupiter, the Sun and ascendant respectively, counted
from Aswini.
NOTES
The method suggested in these verses for constructing the birth chart in cases of
unknown birth time, differs from those recommended in Brihat Jataka and other standard
classics.

This stanza gives a method for ascertaining on the basis of Prasna chart, the nakshatra or
the constellation occupied by Jupiter, the ascendant and the Sun at the time of birth. The number
49 (Kuta) is taken as the starting point.
Example:
What were the planetary positions at birth of the native X whose birth details are not
available ?
Rahu
Lagna 7-55
RASI
Moon 28-16
Mars 28-50
Merc R 2-50
Venus 12-50
Sat 0-38
Ketu 3-56
Sun 29
Arudha
(Positions are only approximate in the query chart)
As in Stanza 2, the Kuta here also is 49.
Determination of Jupiter's position
49 -7 = 42 Root number for Jupiter
Jupiter is in Sagittarius in the Prasna chart. The number assigned to Sagittarius is 4.
Jupiter's root number minus 4=42-4 = 38
38x7 = 266. Dividing 266 by 27 we get 266/27 = 9 plus 23 remainder.
Counting 23 from Aswini, we get Dhanishta as the constellation occupied by Jupiter at
birth. Determination of the Ascendant/
49 — 14 = 35 Root number for the Ascendant.
The Ascendant at question time is Aquarius which is assigned the value 9.
Therefore, Ascendant root number minus 9 = 35 - 9 - 26: 26 x 7 = 182. Dividing 182 by
27 we get 6 plus 20 as remainder.
Counting 20 from Aswini, we get the constellation occupied by the Ascendant as
Poorvashadha.

Determination of the Sun
49 -21 - 28 — Root number for the Sun.
The Sun at the query is in Scorpio whose number is 11.
The Sun's root number minus 11=2S — 11-17
17x7=119. Dividing 119 by 27 we get 119 / 27 = 4 plus 11 as the remainder.
Counting 11 from Aswini, we obtain Pubba as the constellation occupied by the Sun at
birth.
Stanza 4. Multiply the expired portion (in ghatis) of the Navamsa occupied by the
Moon by 9, divide the product by 27. The remainder counted from Aswini gives the Janma
Nakshatra (or the birth star). The birth star can also be obtained by treating the ascendant
at the time of query likewise.
NOTES
Let us assume the position of the Moon at the time of query is Virgo 22°. He has passed
six Navamsas and is in the 7th. the expired longitude in the 7th being 2°.
The Moon takes roughly 60 ghatikas to transit one asterism or 13° 20' of an arc.
Therefore for each degree of longitude, the corresponding time will be 4 ghatis 30 vighatis and
for each Navamsa 15 ghatis.
Example
Moon =28° 16', i.e., in Pisces Navamsa; i.e., the Moon has crossed 1° 36’ in Pisces
Navamsa.
The Moon takes approximately 60 ghatis to cover 1 aste-rism or 13° 20' of arc.
The constellation at birth is the 11th or Pubba.
The Lagna longitude can also be similarly dealt with. But which constellation — that
arrived at from the Moon or the one arrived at from the ascendant — is to be taken is left in
doubt.
Stanza 5. Varaha Mihira in his Brihat Jataka in the chapter on 'Nashta Jataka' has
dealt with certain nimittas or indicative signs with the help of which the position of the
Moon at birth can be ascertained.
NOTES
In the following stanzas, the author lists the nimittas or indicative signs by carefully
noting which one can infer the Moon's position at the time of a querist's birth.
Stanza 6. If at the time a query is put, the astrologer sees before him pricky leaves or

thorny plants or goats, the image or picture of a goat or woollen blankets; or if he hears a
goat's cry or the name of goat mentioned, it may be inferred that the querist's birth Moon
was in Aries. Similarly if the astrologer sees an ox, cow, the skin of these animals, images or
pictures of these animals, plough, yoke, ghee, grass and straw, or if the names of these
animals are heard mentioned, the Moon's position is in Taurus.
Stanza 7. The querist's Moon will be in Gemini if the indicative signs are: a couple
coming together, musical instruments such as Veena, beds or sleeping materials or
thambula are seen. Mud-crab, old leaves and water indicate Cancer.
Leo is denoted if mention of lions and tigers is made or their images seen or if
elephants, deer and pigs are seen or their sounds heard. Indicative signs for Virgo are
boats, lamps, paddy, burning cinder or stories regarding these.
Stanza 8. Merchandise, measures, weighing machines, bargaining, merchants,
counting, weighing, indicate Libra; Scorpio indicates snakes, scorpions, vermin and visha
vaidya. Bows and arrows, a man bearing these or horses signify Sagittarius.
Stanza 9. Capricorn denotes the family of deer, their horns and skins, hearing their
sounds. Aquarius is signified by pots, potters and water pots. Pisces will be the querist's
Moon sign if the indicative signs are fishes, nets and water. If these signs are seen or if their
names are heard mentioned, then the appropriate sign shoufd be considered.
NOTES
The science of nimittas is a deep one based perhaps on the appreciation of the fact that in
Nature everything is interrelated and not isolated When a person who is about to start on an
errand encounters the crossing of a cat he feels success may not attend his errand. The cat as
such has nothing to do with the person or the errand. Nor is it a coincidence. As Carl Jung says, it
is synchronicity and such a phenomenon gives us an indication of what is likely to happen.
The nimittas listed in the above stanzas for fixing the Moon sign at birth are only
indicative. If for instance when a querist wants to know his Janma Rasi, which he is not aware
of, and if at that time some one carrying deer horns passes before the astrologer, he can assume
that the Moon was in Capricorn. An astrologer who wishes to go by nimittas should be highly
experienced and wedded to a life of simplicity, truth and humility.
Stanza 10. The birth Moon of the querist will be the strongest sign out of the
ascendant, the 5th or the 9th from it at the time of query. If they are equally strong then the
sign indicated by the organ the querist happens to touch at the time of query, or the sign
where he stands, or the sign signified by the Prasna letters will be the Janma Rasi.
NOTES
The question Lagna is Aquarius. Therefore, either Aquarius, Gemini or Libra can be the

birth Moon-sign of the querent, the strongest sign being the most likely. Of the three, Gemini
being the strongest, it can be inferred to be the Moon-sign at birth.
Stanza 11. Take the strongest of the planets aspecting Arudha. According as such a
planet occupies an odd or even sign, the radical Moon is in an odd or even sign owned by
the concerned planet. The question of odd or even does not arise in regard to the Sun and
the Moon. If there are no aspecting planets, take the strongest of the four amongst Arudha,
the 4th, the 7th and the 10th therefrom. Likewise the birth ascendant can be taken as the
strongest of the Lagna, the 4th, the 7th or the 10th, or the sign owned by the stronger
planet aspecting the query ascendant.
NOTES
In the chart above, no planets aspect Arudha. Of Aquarius (the 4th), Taurus (the 7th), Leo
(the 10th) and Scorpio (Arudha), the strongest is Scorpio. This becomes the Moon-sign at birth.
Of the Lagna (Aquarius), the 4th, the 7th and the 10th, Scorpio is the strongest. This becomes the
ascendant at birth. Under stanza 3, the numerical method gives Sagittarius as the birth ascendant
and stanza 4 gives Leo as the birth Moon-sign. By an intelligent recourse to nimittas one sign for
each Lagna and the Moon must be finally determined.
Stanza 12. Count from Arudha to the ascendant. Double this number. Deduct from
this the number of the weekday and add to the balance the number of the constellation at
the time of Prasna. Expunging 27 and counting the remainder from Aswini, will give the
birth asterism.
NOTES
Example
(a) Arudha to the ascendant - Scorpio to Aquarius - 4
(b) Doubling 4, we get 8
(c) 8 — Weekday (Thursday) = 8-5 = 3.
(d) 3 + constellation at Prasna (Aslesha)
i.e., 3 + 9 = 12. Since the 6gure is below 27, count 12 from Aswini to get the birth
constellation. Makha is the birth star.
Stanza 13. Take the number of persons present at the time of putting a query
including the astrologer and the questioner. Multiply this by 3 and divide the product by
27. The remainder counted from Aswini or Makha or Moola, according as the ascendant
fat the time of query) is a moveable, fixed or common sign gives the birth star.
NOTES
Suppose the number of persons present at the time of query (including the astrologer and
the consultor) is 8. Multiplying this by 3, we get 24. As it is indivisible by 27, count 24 from

Makha (as the ascendant Aquarius is a fixed sign). This gives Bharani as the birth star.
Stanza 14. The birth month is to be fixed as follows: When the Sun occupies the 6
signs beginning from Arudha, the birth will be in Uttarayana. When he occupies the 6 signs
from the 7th house, then it is Dakshinayana.
When the Sun occupies Arudha sign, the birth month is Gemini; if he is in the 12th
therefrom, it is Cancer; if he is in the 11th house, Leo; if in the 10th, Virgo; if in the 9th,
Libra. In this way the (solar) month of birth is to be ascertained.
Stanza 15. If the ascendant at the time of query falls in the first 15 degrees, the birth
is in Uttarayana; if it is the second half of the sign, the birth is in Dakshinayana. According
as at the time of query, the questioner touches the left or right side of his body, the birth is
in Dakshinayana or Uttarayana.
Multiply the number of Arudha sign counted from Aries by 9 and divide the product
by 27. The remainder counted from Asvvini will give the Nakshatra at the time of birth.
Stanzas 16 and 17. If the ascendant at the time of the query is odd, it is to be
inferred the native is born in the first six signs counted from Aries. Here the first 15
degrees is to be allotted to three Rasis, the first 5 is Taurus, the next 5 Gemini and the next
5 to Aries. If the ascendant happens to be in the second half of an odd sign, the birth
ascendant is to be Leo, Virgo and Cancer (note the order).
In the case of even signs, the birth ascendant will be one amongst the six counted
from Libra.
Here again, the order to be noted is Scorpio, Sagittarius and Libra. If the query
ascendant is in the second half of an even sign, the order to be followed is Aquarius, Pisces
and Capricorn (5° each).
NOTES
The principles are simple.
Example: Suppose the query ascendant is 23° in Aries, an odd sign, the birth ascendant is
one of the signs from Aries to Virgo. If it is in the second half of an odd sign, the birth ascendant
can be either Leo, Virgo or Cancer. The ascendant point has fallen in the 2nd part (20° to 25°) of
the second half of the sign. Therefore the ascendant is Virgo.
Stanza 19. From Ashta Mangala number, the year of the birth, month, Nakshatra and
Lagna can also be ascertained.
Stanza 20. Keep the Moon's longitude in two places. From one deduct the ascendant
point. Add the remainder to the original longitude of the Moon. This can be considered as the
Moon's position at the time of birth.
Stanza 21. If the query ascendant is Aries, the birth month is Vaisakha; if Taurus,

the month is Jyeshta. In this order we can calculate for the rest, of the signs. Again if Lagna
is odd and is aspected by male planets, the birth is in the bright half; if the ascendant sign
is even, and is aspected by female planets, then the birth is in the dark half.
NOTES
If Lagna sign is odd and is aspected by female planets, the strongest should be taken and
the paksha fixed.
Stanza 22. If you perceive or hear any signs or sounds, which can be classified under
any Drekkana sign, then it is to be inferred that the Sun occupies that Drekkana.
Stanza 23. The sign occupied by the lord of exaltation sign of the lord of Arudha,
will be the Moon's position at the time of the querist's birth. The sign occupied by the lord
of the debilitation sign of the lord of Arudha will be the birth ascendant. If the questioner
happens to sit at the time then take the 7th from query ascendant; if he happens to stand,
take the 10th; if he happens to get up, take the ascendant sign itself; and if he is about to
sit, take the 4th. Such a sign can be the ascendant at birth.
Stanza 24. In Brihat Jataka, Varahamihira has detailed a method of fixing the birth
ascendant in the verse "Hora Navamsa Prathima".
Stanza 25. Count the Decanates from the Drekkana rising at the time of query to the
Decanate occupied by the Sun at the time. Expunge multiples of 12. The remainder counted
from the rising sign at query will be the rising sign at birth.
NOTES
This stanza simply gives the methods enumerated by Varahamihira in his Brihat Jataka.
Two methods are given:
1. The birth Lagna is the Navamsa sign of the query Lagna.
Lor instance if in the query chart the Navamsa Lagna is Leo, then in the birth chart the
Lagna will be Leo.
2. Take the Drekkana of the ascendant in the query chart. Count from it till the Drekkana
occupied by the Sun. Note the number of Drekkanas, expunge multiples of 12. The remainder
counted from the query ascendant gives the birth ascendant.
Example: The 2nd Drekkana of Taurus rises at the time of query and the Sun is in the 3rd
in Libra, The number of Drekkanas intervening between these two is — Taurus 2, Gemini 3,
Cancer 3, Leo 3, Virgo 3 and Libra 3 — total 17. Expunging the multiples of 12, the remainder is
5, which counted from Taurus gives Virgo as the birth ascendant.
Stanza 26. According as the rising Drekkana at the query time is the 1st, the 2nd or
the 3rd, Jupiter at birth will be in the ascendant sign or the 5th or the 9th from it. Or
Jupiter will be in the sign of the Drekkana held by him, or the 5th or the 9th from it.

NOTES
This stanza appears at first sight to be somewhat confusing. Jupiter's position at birth is
ascertained on the basis of the sign rising at the time of the query.
Example: Suppose the rising sign at query is 22° Aquarius, which means the third
Drekkana. This means Jupiter at birth is in the 9th from the rising sign, viz., Libra.
In the query chart if Jupiter is in the 1st Drekkana, in the birth chart he will be in the
same sign; if in the 2nd Drekkana, in the 5th from his query position; in the 3rd, in the 9th sign
from his own query position.
Stanza 27. The Janma Kala Guru can be considered to be the Dwadasamsa Rasi of
Udaya Lagna. The Dwadasamsa sign of the ascendant at query will be the sign occupied by
Jupiter. Taking into consideration the body-build of the querist and the 12-year cycle of
Jupiter, his radical position can be fixed.
NOTES
A parivartana or cycle of Jupiter takes roughly 12 years. To ascertain the number of
revolutions which Jupiter had passed in the querists case, the planet that occupies the ascendant
at query has to be looked into. If it is the Moon, the number is 1, Mars — 2, Mercury — 3, Venus
— 4; Jupiter — 5, the Sun — 6, Saturn — 7. If there is more than one planet in the ascendant,
the strongest planet must be taken and the number of revolutions completed fixed. The Moon in
Lagna denotes 12 years, Mars 24 years, Mercury 86 years, etc., in this order. If there are no
planets in Lagna, the number of revolutions should be fixed from the lord of the Lagna. By
looking at the physical characteristics of the man, the number of revolutions can be verified.
Stanza 28. One Rasi - three Drekkanas; one Drekkana = 10 degrees; 1/12 Drekkana
= 50 minutes (Drekkana Dwadasamsa). Find out which Dwadasamsa of the Drekkana, the
query ascendant occupies. Count that number from the ascendant and Jupiter will be in
the sign.so arrived at, at the time of birth. According as the query ascendant is in the 1st,
2nd or 3rd Drekkana, Jupiter at birth will occupy the Navamsa sign of the query
ascendant, or the 5th, or the 9th from it. The 10th house from the Navamsa of the Moon at
the time of query will be the position of the Sun at the time of birth.
Stanzas 29 to 33. Madhava describes how Janma Nakshatra can be fixed by noting
the various parts of the body beginning from the head the questioner touches at the time of
query.
If he happens to touch the head — Krittika; forehead — Rohini; eyebrows —
Mrigasira; ears —Aridra; cheeks — Punarvasu; chin — Pubba; teeth —Aslesha; neck —
Makha; right shoulders — Pubba; left shoulders — Uttara; hands — Hasta; fingers —
Chitta; finger nails — Swati; chest — Visakha; heart — Anuradha; breasts — Jyeshta;

stomach — Moola; right flanks — Poorvashadha; left flanks-Uttarashadha; navel —
Sravana; waist — Dhanishta; sex-organ - Satabhisha; right thigh — Poorva-bhadra; left
thigh — Uttarabhadra; knee caps — Revati; lower part of the knees —Aswini; and feet —
Bharani.
Or the 26th star counted from the query star will be the birth asterism; or the birth
star can be ascertained on the basis of the limbs touched by the querist clearly.
NOTES
Several methods have been given for determinig the Ascendant, the Moon-sign, the Sun
and Jupiter at the time of birth, when the birth particulars of the native are not available.
Sometimes each method gives a different sign or constellation. The astrologer must, using these
signs and also paying due attention to omens at the time of query and by observing carefully the
querent's physical appearance, approximate age and mannerisms, combine the varying clues to
determine the native's Ascendant, Moon-sign, birth-Sun and birth-Jupiter. Readers may also refer
to the chapter on Nashta Jataka or Unknown Birth Times in Hindu Predictive Astrology.
Thus ends the Chapter XXX

CHAPTER XXXI
On Dreams
Stanza 1. If in a query chart, the Sun occupies the ascendant or the Moon aspects
the ascendant, or the 7th house happens to be the Sun sign, it must be inferred that the
person had dreams the previous night. The duration of the dreams will correspond to the
expired portion of the ascendant. The time can be ascertained from the lord of Lagna also.
If the lord of Lagna is the Moon, it was only for a few seconds (kshana). For other planets
take the Naisarga periods.
NOTES
If any body puts the question, "Have I had any dreams today? if so, what is the nature of
the dreams?" the combinations given in this stanza have to be applied.
Stanzas 2 to 5. If the Sun occupies the rising sign, burning fire, blazing torches, red
clothes, etc., were seen; if the Moon is in Lagna, women, white, river and flowers; if Mars,
gold, pearls, red clothes, raw flesh, flowing blood, etc.; if Mercury the native dreamt that he
flew through the heavens; if Jupiter, there was a happy social party with relations; if Venus,
the native crossed watery surfaces such as lakes and seas; and if Saturn, he climbed hills
and elevated places. If many planets are found in the ascendant, these dreams will be seen
in turns. If these occupy inimical or debilitation signs, the dreams will be bad. If the planets
are defeated in planetary fight, then again they will be bad. If they are in combustion, the
dreams will be disjointed.
Stanzas 6 to 9. The nature of dreams can be known from the nature of Arudha,
Chathra, ascendant and the fourth house thus; Aries — temples; Taurus — devas; Gemini
— Brahmins and saints; Cancer — water containing plant life and grass cut from the
earth; Leo — hill men and buffaloes; Virgo — cohabitation with women; Libra — gold,
merchants and those in power; Scorpio — horses, beetles, poison; Sagittarius — barks of
trees, flowers and fruits; Capricorn — men and women together; Aquarius — looking
glass; and Pisces — gold and oceans.
NOTES
What one has seen in his dream can be ascertained from the horoscope on the basis of the
Arudha sign, or Chathra sign or the rising sign or the fourth house. It implies that the strongest of
the above factors is to be considered. Assuming that the rising sign is the strongest and it
happens to be Scorpio, the querist will have seen in his dream horses, beetles or poisonous
medicines, etc.
Stanza 10. The above is taken from Jnana Pradeepika. Still there are some more

peculiarities and they are culled out from Ashtanga Hridaya (a medical treatise).
Stanza 11. If one dreams that when he is engaged in drinking liquor along with dead
men (pretas) be is dragged up and down by a dog, the result is he will be attacked by high
fever and die.
Stanzas 12 to 15. If one dreams that while wearing red flowers and clothes and
having one's body dyed red and enjoying all sorts of pleasures, one is carried by a woman,
he will be attacked by 'Rakta Pitta'. Riding on buffaloes, pigs, dogs or camels southwards
indicates death by consumption. Dreaming of thorns, creepers, bamboos and palm trees
sprouted from one's throat, denotes attack of Gulmaroga and death from it.
Dreaming that while anointed in ghee with no clothes on, performing a homo, a
lotus plant sprouted from one's throat, it indicates attack by leprosy and death.
Seeing in a dream that one with low class people indulged in drinking ghee, butter
and other oily liquids, signifies an attack of premagha and death from it.
Stanza 16. The dream that one dived deep in waters when dancing with Rakshasas,
will get one madness and death. If, however, he dreams that he is carried away by 'pretas'
he will die from apasmara (epilepsy).
Stanza 17. If one dreams that he had a ride on a camel, cat, ape, tiger, pig, pretas or
a jackal, he will get a sudden accidental death.
Stanza 18. After dreaming that one consumed a large quantity of bread and roasted
things, he weaks up and vomits the very same materials, he will die suddenly. If he dreams
that he witnessed an eclipse, he will get eye disease.
Stanza 19. Dreaming that the Sun or the Moon falls down from the sky signifies loss
of eye-sight.
Stanzas 20 to 28. If one dreams of the following, he is said to experience dreadful
results. Birds building their nests on the dreamer's head; getting shaved; encircled by
crows or eagles; surrounded by pretas, pisachas, women, beef-eaters; getting lost in
byepaths filled with creepers, grass bamboos and thorny plants, lying down in cremation
grounds or deep pits; happening to fall on dust and ashes; slipping on watery surfaces,
wells, tanks and miry spots; being dragged down by the force of water currents; one sings,
dances, plays on musical instruments; decorates oneself with red flowers and red clothes;
gets old age; becomes fat; smears one's body with oil; gets married; gets shaved; eats
cooked food and dishes; takes butter and ghee; drinks liquor; vomits; gets iron and gold;
gets defeated in fight or in argument; gets imprisoned; meets with accidents; loses sandals;
skin in the legs gets dried; feels highly elated, laughs at angry seniors and family elders.
Lamps, stars, planets, teeth, idols of Gods, one's own eyes, either fall down or are

destroyed; hills tumble down, one enters a forest filled with red flowers, or places of sinful
acts; gets into a dark abyss; lies down in the burning ghat; falls down from hill-tops or
house tops; fishes alone; sees persons with ochre robes, naked people, ascetics, persons with
blood-shot eyes and dark-coloured people.
Stanza 29. When ones sees in his dream a woman black in colour, having aptitude
for sinful actions, with long nails, hair and breasts, and wearing flowers and clothes, having
no reddish tongue, he may die early.
Stanzas 30 and 31. Bad dreams are caused by the surcharge of the tridoshas in the
nervous and sensory systems. Sick persons happening to see such dreadful dreams are said
to die. If persons of sound health see such dreams, they will get dangerous sickness. By
God's favour, some may recover but in most cases such sickness will end fatally.
Stanza 32. Drishta, Sruta, Anubhuta, Prar-thita, Kalpita, Bhavija and Doshaja are
the seven kinds of dreams. The first five types of dreams do not bring about the indicated
results. Dreams seen during daytime are also ineffective.
NOTES
The ancient experts in the phenomenon of dreams appear to have dived deep into the
subject and their views as regards the nature of dreams, what kind of dreams would portend
disasters, etc., are now drawing the attention of psychologists and para-psychologists.
Seven kinds of dreams are listed in the above stanza. They are drishta or things which
one may have seen in life; (2) shruta — things we have heard in life; (3) anubhuta — things
actually experienced through smell, taste and touch; (4) prarthita — things desired in life; (5)
kalpita — fancied or imaginary things; (6) bhavija — not included in the above 5 categories or
those due to one's own imagination; and (7) doshaja — dreams caused by a surcharge of
tridoshas.
The author appears to be of the opinion that the first five kinds need not be considered as
the signified results may not happen. He is also of the view that dreams experienced during
daytime are of no significance.
Stanzas 33 to 35. Dreams that are forgotten soon after waking, those seen
continuously for a long time or seen before midnight are not effective. It at all, they will
bear fruit after a very long time. Dreams seen in the early morning hours will bear fruit the
next day. If one sleeps after the dream, the effect will be little. If one happens to see bad
dreams, dana, homo, japa, dhyana and puja must be done to reduce the evil effects. If a
good dream is seen after a bad dream, the former alone will prevail.
Stanzas 36 to 41. The following are good dreams. One experiencing them will get
good health and wealth. Seeing deities. Brahmins, cows, oxen, living relatives, kings, good

people, burning fire, tank with clear water, good watery surfaces, unmarried girls, smiling
handsome boys in white clothes, rakshasas, brilliant and booming with blood, umbrella,
looking glass, poisonous medicines, flesh, white flowers, white dress, human excreta,
ointments, fruits, hillocks, house-tops and storeyed houses, trees having fruits, men, lions,
elephants, horses ond other vehicles, rivers, fords, oceans, journeys to the north and east,
sexual connection with those women who could not be enticed, death, escape from danger,
satisfaction of pitris and heads of famlies, weeping, getting up from the fallen place and
harming the enemies.
Stanzas 42 to 46. The causes of dreams are: (a) inflammation of the humours, (b)
consequence of the major and sub-periods, (c) worry or things about which one thinks
much, (d) abhichara or incantation of enemies, (e) guhyakas, (f) previous associations with
other beings. Dreams caused by the excitation or disturbance of vatha are: climbing up hill
tops and trees, travelling through skies. Dreams caused by the disturbance of pitha are
characterised by seeing things radiant and resplendent as gold, red flowers, as the Sun, fire,
etc. Dreams caused by phlegmatic disturbance are: seeing the Moon, stars, white flowers,
lotus and rivers. Dreams caused by disturbances to the humours, wind, bile and phlegm
signify ordinary results, Dreams caused by planetary periods indicate effects appropriate
to them. Those caused by chinta and drishta will be the same as seen or wished. Dreams
indicating that persons are wounded by animals distorted in shape are caused by
abhichara. Grihyakotha as seeing bright and dazzling things is caused by the humour
pitha. Dreams caused by the planetary periods and worry will not be effective.
Stanza 47. A night has four Yamas. If the dream is seen in the 1st Yama, the result
will be, before the lapse of one full year; in the 2nd, before the lapse of 6 months; in the
3rd, before the lapse of 3 months; and in the 4th, before the lapse of one month. If the
dream occurs at dawn, the result takes place soon.
Stanzas 48 to 58. The nature of dreams has to be learnt from other works. Here is a
dream, narrated in Ramayana seen by Bharata. "I saw my father falling down from the
top of a mountain into a deep solution of cowdung dressed in dirty clothes and with hair
untied; the oceans dried, the Moon having fallen down and the earth pervaded by dismal
darkness; the tusk of the royal elephant torn away and the blazing fire suddenly
extinguished; my father sitting on an iron throne wearing a red dress and (at that time)
being railed by copper coloured and dark women; my liberal father starting to the south
wearing red garlands of flowers, smeared with red ointments, and journeying on a donkeyyoked chariot; my father being dragged by a demoness wearing red dress, having a
deformed face and putting on a face of forced smile; my throat gets dried, mind has no

peace, I, Sri Rama, father or Lakshmana, am going to die. Is not my father happy now? are
my brothers Rama and Lakshmana not free from all disease?; Sri Rama's mother also is
free from all diseases; the mother of Lakshmana also is free from sickness; my mother who
is not good is also free from sickness; what does she say ?"
Stanza 59. The dream narrated above is a very bad one, as the results that came
from it affected his parents, his brothers and more than all his own life.
Stanzas 60 and 6L If a Brahmin sees a dream showing that a person is drinking
liquor or blood, then he will get learning or knowledge. If any other than a Brahmin sees
this, he will get wealth. If an ordinary man sees in dream king, elephant, horses, oxen and
cows and a sick man, his desires will bear fruition. If a person born in a royal family sees
this, he will soon become a king.
Stanza 62. If a person dreams that he has obtained sandalwood paste, couch, pearls,
betel leaves, jathi flower and wealth, it is very good.
Stanza 63. If a person sees in his dream that he is bitten by insects or leeches, he will
get children or wealth. If he sees in a dream that he is entering a terrace, he will become a
king though born in a low family.
Stanza 64. If he sees in a dream as if eating some ghee preparations (payasa) in a
dirty lotus leaf in the middle of a tank, he will become a learned pundit.
Stanza 65. If in the dream one sees krauncha bird (cock)" or kukkuta or balaka
bird and wakes up all of a sudden, he will get a wife with endearing words or a girl with
similar qualifications.
Stanzas 66 and 67. If a sick man sees the globes of the Sun and the Moon in a dream,
then be will recover from sickness soon. A man without sickness will get wealth and health,
of he sees blazing fire, flowers, fruits, looking glass, rubies, pot containing curd, rice and
milk, he will become a prosperous man.
Stanza 68. Dreams seen in the first yama of the night will bear fruit in one year, in
the 2nd yama in 8 months, in the third in 3 months and in the fourth in 10 days.
Thus ends the Chapter XXXI

CHAPTER XXXII
Ashtakavarga
Stanza 1. In the chapter dealing with the question of issues, a reference has been
made to Ashtakavarga. How it is to be worked is detailed in this chapter.
Stanza 2. In his own Ashtakavarga the Sun's benefic places are 1-2-4-7-8-9-10-11
from himself, the same places from Mars and Saturn; the 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th from the
Moon; 3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th 11th and 12th from Mercury; the 5th, 6th, 9th and 11th from
Jupiter: the 6th, 7th and 12th from Venus; and the 3rd, 4th, 6th, 10th, 11th and 12th from
the ascendant.
Stanza 3. In his own Ashtakavarga, the Moon is auspicious in the 3rd, 6th, 7th, 8th,
10th and 11th from the Sun; in the 1st, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 10th and 11th from himself; in the
2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th and 11th from Mars; in the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 8th, 10th and
11th from Mercury; in the 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th and 11th from Jupiter; in the 3rd, 4th,
5th, 7th, 9th, 10th and 11th from Venus; in the 3rd, 5th, 7th and 11th from Saturn; and in
the 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th from the ascendant.
Stanza 4. The benefic places of Mars in his Ashtakavarga will be they 3rd, 5th, 6th,
10th and 11th and from the Sun; the 3rd, 6th, 11th, from the Moon; the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th,
8th, 10th and 11th from himself; the 3rd, 5th, 6th and 11th from Mercury; the 6th, 10th,
11th and 12th from Jupiter; the 6th, 8th, 11th and 12th from Venus; the 1st, 4th, 7th, 8th,
9th, 10th and 11th from Saturn; and the 1st, 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th from the ascendant.
Stanzas 5 and 6. The benefic places of Mercury Ashtakavarga will be the 5th, 6th,
9th, 11th and 12th from the Sun; the 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th and 11th from the Moon; the
1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th from Mars; the 1st, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th, 11th
and 12th from his own; the 6th, 8th, 11th and 12th from Jupiter; the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th,
8th, 9th and 10th from Venus; the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th from Saturn;
and the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th and 11th from the ascendant.
Stanzas 7 and 8. The benefic places of Jupiter in his Ashtakavarga will be the 1st,
2nd, 3rd, 4th, 7ih, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th from the Sun; the 2nd, 5th, 7th, 9th and 11th
from the Moon; the 1st, 2nd[ 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th and 11th from Mars: the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 5th,
6th, 8th, 10th and 11th from Mercury; the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th and 11th from
his own; the 2nd, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th and 11th from his own; the 2nd, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th and
11th from Venus; the 3rd, 5th, 6th and 12th from Saturn; and the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 6tb,
7th, 9th, 10th and 11th from the ascendant.
Stanza 9. The benefic places of Venus in his Ashtakavarga will be the 8th, 11th and

12th from the Sun; the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, 11th and 12th from the Moon; the
3rd, 4th, 6th, 9th, 11th and 12th from Mars; the 3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th and 11th from Mercury;
the 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th from Jupiter; the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th and
11th from his own; the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th from Saturn; and the 1st, 2nd,
3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th and 11th from the ascendant.
Stanzas 10 and 11. The benefic places of Saturn in his Ashtavarga will be the 1st,
2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th and 11th from the Sun; the 3rd, 6th and the 11th from the Moon;
the 3rd, 5th, 6th, 10th, 11th and 12th from Mars; the 6th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th from
Mercury; the 5th, 6th, 11th and 12th from Jupiter; the 6th, 7th and 12th from Venus; the
3rd, 5th, 6th and 11th from his own; and the 1st, 3rd, 4th, 6th, 10th and 11th from the
ascendant.
The figures have been given on the basis of alphabets. The places given above are to
be reckoned from their positions in the horoscope.
Stanza 12. In giving the digits, letters indicating zero (0) are to be taken as 10. The
previous number is 9. Na is 10, Ka is 12 and Ra or Pra is 12.
Stanza 13. In marking the benefic places, a certain order has been followed by
Varaha Mihira in his Brihat Jataka. That order has to be followed in order to know,
beforehand, the order of reductions i.e., sodhana karma.
Stanza 14. The signs which have no akshas or benefic points are to be considered as
adhama or lowest signs with 1, 2, 3, are also adhama (low). Those with four are madhyama
or moderate in strength: and above 4 are sobhana or auspicious.
Stanza 15. When the Sun transits in his own Ashtakavarga signs having 8 bindus the
effects will be wealth and prosperity from royal favour; 7 — wonderful welfare, happiness
and pomp; 6 — rising power: 5 — wealth; 4 — both good and bad will be equal; 3 —
fatigue through journey; 2 — sinful actions; 1 — severe sickness; no bindus — death.
Stanza 16. In his own Ashtakavarga the Moon while in transit gives the following
results; a sign counting 8 bindus — happiness, prosperity, pomp and help from relatives; 7
— gain of clothes, comfortable food, gain from relatives; 5 — courage and mental
satisfaction; 4 — misery and ill-health; 3 — quarrel with relations; 2 — quarrels brought
about by one's wife and one's wealth; 1 — irreparable losses; and no bindus — sorrow,
extreme panic and death.
Stanza 17. When Mars in his own Ashtakavarga transits signs with 8 bindus — gain
of landed property and money, victory; 7 — prosperity, through brothers; 6 — favour
through kings; 5 — pleasing experiences; 4 — good and bad in equal proportion; 3 —
separation from brothers and women; 2 — quarrel due to wife and wealth; 1 — fear from

weapon, fire and diseases as small pox, etc.; and no bindu — diseases in the stomach, fits
and death.
Stanza 18. When Mercury transits in his own Ashtakavarga signs with 8 bindus —
respect from kings; 7 — increase of wealth and learning; 6 — success attending all efforts;
5 — reconciliation with relations; 4 — want of spirit in everything; 3 — anxiety through
disturbed thoughts; 2 — diseases caused by the tridosha; 1 — imprisonment by force and
unexpected calamities: and no bindu — death caused by loss of everything.
Stanza 19. When Jupiter transits in his own Ashtakavarga signs with 8 bindus —
sovereignty and kingly prosperity; 7 — gain of wealth and happiness; 6 — gain of clothes,
vehicles and gold; 5 — ruin to enemies, accomplishment of desired objects; 4 — gain and
loss equal; 3 — nervous debility and ear diseases; 2 — royal frowns; 1 — loss of wealth and
relations; and no bindu — derangement of the mind, loss of wealth and children.
Stanza 20. When Venus transits in his own Ashtakavarga signs with 8 bindus —
comfort from good clothes, women, flowers and wholesome food; 7 — gain of ornaments
and pearls; 6 — happiness from agreeable wife; 5 — meeting with friends; 4 — good and
bad equal; 3 — quarrel with the people of the locality and relatives; 2 — diseases and
dismissal from one's profession; 1 — fear from water and poison; and no bindu — all sorts
of calamities.
Stanza 21. When Saturn transits in his own Ashtakavarga signs with 8 bindus —
acquisition of administrative control over a village or a town; 7 — gain of servants (maid),
or asses or camels; 6 — respect from thieves, hill tribes and army chief; 5 — gain of grains;
4 — good and bad equal; 3 — loss of wealth, servants, wife and happiness; 2 —
imprisonment, fear and diseases; 1 — dirty fallen life; and no bindu — ill-luck in
everything.
NOTES
The effects declared for planets transiting the different signs in their own Ashtakavargas
are enumerated above. The description of results is general and should not be applied verbatim.
Moreover effects of transits as from the Moon are also to be considered. Suppose Saturn transits
the 12th from the Moon which may happen to be the 3rd sign having 6 bindus from his position,
in his own Ashtakavurga. How to reconcile the results? This is a tough problem for a student of
astrology. I have dealt with this subject in detail in my book Ashtakavarga System of Prediction
to which I would refer my readers.
Stanza 22. When planets transit signs with no bindus they produce only evil.
Similarly when they transit signs with 8 bindus, the results will be brilliant. Every sign has
8 kakshyas or orbits. When a planet transits in its own ashtakavarga a kakshya devoid of

bindus, evil can only happen. Only when he transits the kakshya owned by the lord who
has contributed a bindu (aksha lord), good will happen. In this way should be studied good
causing and evil producing kakshyas.
NOTES
Here a reference is made to kakshya or an orbital division. There are 8 kakshyas of 33/4
degrees in a sign ruled respectively by Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon and
the Ascendant.
The following is reproduced from my book Ashtakavarga System of Prediction:
Prasthara Ashtakavarga
We have hitherto learnt how to cast Bhinnashtakavargas of the different planets, the
combined Ashtakavargas of all planets and the reduction of the bindus by the processes of
Trikona and Ekadhipatya.
The next in importance is the diagrammatic representation of spreading out the benefic
points (bindus) contributed or donated by each planet in respect of each Ashtakavarga. The
benefic points (bindus) contributed by each of the planets are isolated so that while predicting
Gochara or transit results or interpreting Dasas or analysing Bhavas the exact period or nature of
effect can be clearly located. The tabular representation of the spreading-out or isolation of the
benefic points, given out by each planet, is called "Prasthara Chakra".
According to classical writers, draw east to west 9 lines and north to south 13 lines and in
this chakra (diagram) containing 96 houses, enter the points contributed by each planet (before
reduction) in the descending order of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon and
Lagna.
The following is the Prasthara Chakra of the Sun's Ashtakavarga in the Standard
Horoscope:
The Sun is in Virgo. Therefore the spreading-out starts from Virgo. In Table II, the bindus
in the horizontal row against each planet indicate the auspicious places (in the Sun's
Ashtakavarga) from the Sun and from other planets. The bindus in the vertical rows are those
contributed by the different planets reckoned in the order of their orbits from the earth. For
example the total figure in Virgo (in Sun's Bhinnashtakavarga) is 4 and these four bindus are
contributed by Saturn, Mars, the Sun and Mercury. The Moon, Jupiter, Venus and Lagna have not
made any contribution. The Prasthara Chakras have to be prepared for each planet. The
following are the Prasthara Chakras of the other planets in the Standard Horoscope.
For instance in the Sun's Prastharashtakavarga, no bindus have been contributed by
Jupiter, Venus, the itfoon and the Ascendant. When the Sun transits his own kakshya (11° 15' to
15°) good will happen. When the Sun transits the kakshyas devoid of bindus unfavourable results

will happen.
Table II Sun's Prastharashtakararga
Sun Virgo Venus
Libra Mercury
Scorpio Mars
Sagittarius
Capricorn
Ascendant
Aquarius Moon
Pisces
Aries
Taurus
Gemini Jupiter
Cancer
Saturn Leo
Total
Saturn
Jupiter
Mars
Sun
Venus
Mercury
Moon
Ascendant
Total
Stanza 26. In the previous verse, the effects of Ashtakavarga as read from transits of
planets have been given. The general effects of the Ashtaka-vargas will now be given:
The Sun's Ashtakavarga Effects
Stanza 27. In the month of the Sun's transits in his own ashtakavarga of signs
having more auspicious bindus, it is auspicious to perform marriage ceremonies and other
good actions and undertake long distance journeys, etc. When the transited sign has less
than 4 bindus, the opposite results will happen.
Stanza 28. One should worship God Siva and serve the rulers, in the direction
indicated by the sign having the largest number of bindus. Prosperity results when the
sacred lamp is lit in the evening to worship Siva and obeisance to the king is paid in the
directions signified by the signs having the largest number of bindus.
Stanza 29. Total up the number of bindus in the four consecutive signs beginning
from the Sun; in the next four signs from the 5th; and the next four signs from the 9th. If
the first total is greater than the 2nd or the 3rd, the first part of the day is good for
beginning any auspicious work such as conducting marriage, interviewing important
persons etc. If the 2nd is greater than 1st and 3rd, the 2nd part of the day will be good for
these. If the 3rd is greater than 1st and 2nd, the 3rd part of the day is good. The part of the
day corresponding to the least total is inauspicious for any good work. The Moon's
Ashtakavarga.
Stanza 30. When the Moon transits signs in his own Ashtakavarga containing more
bindus, it is auspicious to perform the first tonsure of the baby and all business agreeable
to the mind. For a man to marry a girl, for a king to employ a servant, for a servant to

serve a king, for a student to begin studies under a teacher, for a teacher to begin teaching
and for all persons to receive relations and make friendships select the days of the Moon
transiting signs where bindus abound.
NOTES
When yoking pairs, in matrimony, take the man bom in a sign having more bindus
according to the female's horoscope and vice versa.
Stanza 31. Seeing early in the morning persons born in signs which are associated
with more bindus in the Moon's Ashtakavarga will prove fruitful. It is equally good for
giving gifts such as clothes to persons born in such signs.
Stanza 32. Good work should not be done when the Moon transits signs devoid of
bindus. Of course, those actions will be fruitless. To associate with such people or to see
such people born in signs with no bindus in the morning is productive of evil.
NOTES
Here the reference is to persons born in signs devoid of bindus in the Moon's
Ashtakavarga in their horoscopes.
Stanza 33. Wells and tanks found or dug in directions signified by signs holding
many bindus are productive of health. To worship Durga and to pay homage to queens
such Rasi Diks are good.
NOTES
The direction indicated by the sign holding the largest numbers of bindus in the Moon's
ashtakavarga is favourable for taking bath, for taking drinks, for digging wells and tanks and for
worshipping Goddess Durga or interviewing a queen. One is well advised to set apart one's
house or room in the direction suggested above for the purpose of worshipping God.
Mars Ashtakavarga
Stanzas 34 and 35. When Mars transits the bindu-abounding signs in his own
Ashtakavarga transactions connected with lands or gold will be favourable. One should set
apart a room in such a direction for the worship of God Subrahmanya and for interviewing
with the Army Chief or for conducting any transactions relating to lands and gold and for
cooking and conducting Homas and vanquishing enemies. When Mars transits a sign
having less than 4 bindus it is not auspicious for all the above activities.
NOTES
In this chart Aries has the highest number of bindus. During the period of transit of Mars
in this sign, it would be auspicious to interview military officers or persons in authority. Aries
represents east. One can have his kitchen in the eastern part of his house, or have homa
performed. When Mars transits Cancer which has the least number of bindu or Pisces which has

no bindus the period is not conducive for the activities mentioned above.
Mars
Ashtakavarga
Mars
Mercury's Ashtakavavga
Stanza 36. In Mercury's Ashtakavarga, if there are no bindus in the 2nd house from
Mercury, the native will be mute. If there are 2 or 3 bindus, his words will be Chapala Vak.
Stanza 37. If there are 4 bindus, he will be able to give a suitable reply. If there are 5
or 6, he will talk agreeably and his words will be honoured. If there are 7 bindus, he will be
a poet.
Stanza 38. If there are 8 bindus in the 2nd house from Lagna, the person will be
unassailable in speech. If there are no bindus in it, he will not be able to speak out his own
needs and desires.
Stanzas 39 and 40. If there are bindus contributed by malefics, his speech will be
affected and vain glorious. If the bindus contributed are by benefics, he will talk modestly.
If the bindu is contributed in the 2nd by the Sun, his speech will be patronising; if by Mars,
his speech will be harsh and provocative; if by Mercury, pleasing; if by Jupiter, clear and
intelligent; if by Venus, abounds in Puranic stories and ideals; and if by Saturn, mixed up
with falsehood.
Stanzas 41 and 42. If the 2nd house from Mercury (in his own Ashtakavarga) has a
bindu contributed by the Moon in debilitation or occupying an enemy's house, the native
will talk loosely and carelessly this and that. If out of Rahu, Gulika and Ketu, two of them
occupy the 2nd house, he will indulge in abusive talk. In assemblies he will only talk rot
such as thieving, co-habitation, and ill-reports of others, stories of low-born people and illbred persons. If Gulika is in the 2nd, he will talk only scornful words.
Stanza 43. If in his own Ashtakavarga Mercury occupies a sign devoid of any
bindus, the person will be dis-spirited. The same result can happen when Mercury transits
such a sign.
Stanzas 44 and 45. When Saturn transits the sign devoid of bindus after reduction,

there will be loss of children, brothers and friends. If the said sign happens to be the 3rd,
6th, 11th from the Moon, it will not be that bad. When Saturn passes in transit through
signs with no bindus, the period will be calamitous.
Stanza 46. When Saturn transits a sign that has no bindus in Mercury's
Ashtakavarga and which happens to be the 8th or 12th from the Moon, the person will
either be fatally sick or die.
Stanza 47. When Mercury transits a sign which has 4 bindus, education must be
commenced. Any litigation launched then will be successful.
Stanza 48. The direction indicated by the sign having the largest number of bindus
should be selected for beginning education, for going to school and for recreation grounds.
Such a direction is also favourable for worshipping Vishnu and paying obeisance to the
heir-apparent. For getting success in litigation one should choose the time at which the sign
holding a large number of bindus rises.
Jupiter Ashtakavarga
Stanza 49. When Jupiter transits signs having more than 4 bindus in his own
Ashtakavarga the time is auspicious for religious functions, initiation into mantras
performing japa, homa, deva puja, Vedic studies, feeding Brahmins, undertaking remedial
measures to get children, earning and saving money. When he transits signs having a few
bindus such actions will be fruitless.
Stanza 50. The spot, indicated by the sign having abundant bindus, is to be selected
for feeding brahmins, performing mantra japa and daily salutations. Gold ornaments and
other things should be deposited in the direction indicated by the Dik having more bindus;
for interviewing the Guru, learned Brahmin and ministers, this direction will be favourable
for success in all undertakings.
Venus Ashtakavarga
Stanza 51. When Venus transits in his own Ashtakavarga, signs having more bindus,
the time is propitious for purchase of beds, mats, pillows, etc., for beginning study of music,
conducting and doing all things for conventional happiness.
Stanzas 52 and 53. After carrying out the reductions note the number of bindus. The
place indicated by the sign-direction having more bindus is favourable for getting a lady
married, to have the bedroom in the house and to secure a bride from the direction
signified by the sign having the highest number of bindus.
Saturn Ashtakavarga
Stanza 54. When Saturn transits signs having more number of bindus (in his own
Ashtakavarga), it is fruitful to employ servants, and to begin agricultural operations. Select

that quarter signified by the sign having the largest number of bindus for cultivation, for
keeping agricultural implements, for constructing latrines and for throwing away refuse,
and for storing fuel.
Chara Chakra
Stanza 55. Total the bindus in Aries and its trines representing the East; Taurus and
its trines signifying South; Gemini and its trines denoting West; and Cancer and its trines
signifying North. The direction that has the largest number of bindus is the most
auspicious.
Stanzas 57 and 58. So far we have dealt with individual Ashtakavarga. Collective
Ashtakavarga is now detailed. In a Rasi mark the following numbers in regular order
beginning from the Sun at the time of birth: 3, 3, 3, 3, 2, 3, 4, 5, 3, 5, 7, 2; from the Moon 2,
3, 5, 2, 2, 5, 2, 2, 2, 3, 7, 1; from Mars 4, 5, 3, 5, 2, 3, 4, 4, 4, 6, 7, 2; from Mercury 3, 1, 5, 2,
6, 6,1, 2, 5, 5, 7, 3; from Jupiter 2, 2,1, 2, 3, 4, 2. 4, 2, 4, 7, 3; from Venus 2, 3, 3, 3, 4, 4, 2, 3,
4, 3, 6, 3; from Saturn 3, 2, 4, 4, 4, 3, 3, 4, 4, 4, 6,1; and from the ascendant 5, 3, 5, 5, 2, 6,1,
Stanza 59. When the bindus in each sign are totalled Samudaya Ashtakavarga is
obtained.
NOTES
When the bindus are totalled we get 43 for the Sun, 36 for the Moon, 49 for Mars, 46 for
Mercury, 36 for Jupiter, 40 for Venus, 42 for Saturn, and 45 for the ascendant, the total being
337. This can be got by adding up the various individual Ashtakavargas.
Stanza 60. In the collective Ashtakavarga, signs having more than 30 bindus can be
said to be the best (sreshta); those getting between 25 and 30 — middling (madhyamd); and
those below 25 — last (kashta). The best signs should be selected for all good work,
journey, etc., worst signs should be avoided. Persons born in best signs can be taken for
association. They will bring in good. Persons born in worst signs will be a source of
affliction.
Stanza 61. The sum total of the bindus in the 2nd, 4th, 9th, 10th and 11th is known
as Vithaya (164). If the total exceeds 164, the native will be prosperous; if the total is less
than 164, then his expenses will be high; and if it is 164, income and expenditure will be
equal.
Stanza 62. The sum total of bindus in the 6th, 8th, 12th houses is known as theertha
(76). If it is less than 76, income will be greater. If it exceeds 76 expenses will be greater. If it
is 76, both will be the same.
Stanza 63. In the collective Ashtakavarga, the minimum number of bindus required

are: Lagna 25, 2nd house 22, 3rd house 29, 4th house 24, 5th house 25, 6th house 34, 7th
house 19, 8th house 24, 9th house 29, 10th house 36,11th house 54 and 12th house 16. If the
numbers exceed these, the houses will be strengthened, if they are less than these, the
houses will be weakened.
Stanza 64. If the 4th and the 2nd houses, having secured more than the minimum
suggested above, are afflicted by malefics, the native will inherit family property.
Otherwise he will have no paternal wealth.
Stanza 65. Likewise if the 10th house contains more than the minimum bind us and
is free from affliction, one will earn vast wealth; if the 11th house is similarly disposed, one
will earn without any exertion.
Stanza 66. If the ascendant and the 9th house are similarly disposed, the native will
find a treasure trove at the age signified by the number of bindus in the ascendant.
Stanza 67. If the bindus in the 11th are greater than those in the 12th, one will
become wealthy; if they are less he will become poor. If the bindus in the 11th are more
than those in the 10th, the native's gains will be appropriate to the exertions put forth. If
not, they will be less.
Stanza 68. Houses having at least the minimum number of bindus indicated in verse
63, and aspected by their respective lords and unafflicted by malefics, will be fruitful of
effects. Otherwise the reverse will be the case.
Stanza 69. The sum of the bindus in the 1st, the 5th and the 9th is known as
bhanduka; the sum of the bindus in the 2nd, the 6th and the 10th is known as sevaka; the
total of the 3rd, the 7th and the 11th is poshaka; the total of the 4th, the 8th and the 12th is
ghataka. If ghataka number is greater than the rest, the native will be miserably poor; if it
is less than poshaka, one will be wealthy; if bhanduka number is bigger, one will have help
from relatives; if it is less, he will have no help from his relatives and friends; and if sevaka
is greater benefit from service will be greater for him.
Stanza 70. Add together the bindus of the four signs from Pisces, four signs from
Cancer and four signs from Scorpio. Pisces to Gemini, Cancer to Libra and Scorpio to
Aquarius represent the 1st, middle and last parts of life. Whichever total of the three
sections of life, is greatest, it indicates happiness and prosperity during that period of life.
The period of life corresponding to the less number of bindus will be marked by disease
and sorrow.
Stanza 71. Kendra, Panapara and Apoklima houses denote the three sections of life.
Add together the bindus in each of these sections. That section of life will be happy and
prosperous, whose total is the greatest.

NOTES
In stanza 70, the three sections of life viz., childhood, youth and old age are represented
by Pisces to Gemini; Cancer to Libra; and Scorpio to Aquarius. The bindus in each of these
sections is to be added together. That section of life — childhood, youth or old age, will be
happy, whose total is the greatest. Suppose in a horoscope the 1st, 2nd and last sections get
respectively 110, 112 and 115. The happy period of life will be during his old age.
Kendra houses are the 1st, the 4th, the 7th and thelOth; panapara houses are the 2nd, the
5th, the 8th and the 11th; and the apoklima houses are the 3rd, the 6th, the 9th and 12th. Total the
bindus in respect of the Kendra, Panapara and Apoklima houses. Here that part of life-childhood,
middle age and old age-will be happy, the total in the section belonging to which is the highest.
Stanza 72. The total of the bindus in the 1st, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th and 10th houses is
antarbhaga. The total of the bindus in the rest of the houses is bahirbhaga. If antarbhaga
number is greater than bahirbhaga, mental peace, attention to all good karmas, education
and culture will result. If bahirbhaga is greater than antarbhaga, pomp, vanity, power and
misery will be the result.
Stanza 73. Total the bindus from the ascendant to the sign occupied by Saturn,
Saturn to the ascendant; ascendant to Mars; and Mars to the ascendant severally. In each
case multiply the sum by 7 and divide the product by 27. The quotient will indicate the age
when the native will be afflicted by diseases and other misfortunes.
NOTES
To know the years of misfortune, a simple method is given. Total the number of bindus
from the ascendant to the sign occupied by Saturn (i); from the sign occupied by Saturn to
ascendant (ii); from the ascendant to the sign occupied by Mars (iii); and from the sign occupied
by Mars to the ascendant (iv). Multiply each of these (i, ii, iii and iv) by 7 and divide the product
by 27. The age at which one faces troubles correspnnds to the age equal to the quotient. Suppose
the total number of bindus in a horoscope from Lagna to Saturn is 229 (i) and from Saturn to
Lagna is 158 (ii); from Lagna to Mars is 307 (iii) and from Mars to Lagna is 83 (iv).
i) 229 x 7 / 27 = Quotient 59, Remainder 10
ii) 138 x 7 / 27 = Quotient 40, Remainder 26 iii) 307 x 7 / 27 = Quotient 79, Remainder
16iv) 83x7/27 = Quotient 21, Remainder 14
The years of difficult stress, ill-health will be 59, 40, 79 and 21. We can also say that
when malefics Saturn, Rahu and Mars transit the constellation signified by the remainder, one
faces much trouble, opposition and sorrow. Lor instance in (I) the remainder is 10 which counted
from Aswini gives Makha. When Saturn, Mars and Rahu transit Makha the native is exposed to
the happening of unfortunate events.

Stanza 74. In the year represented by the bindus in the unfavourable house occupied
by Rahu the native will be affected by poison. Similarly the age shown by Mars will witness
surgical operation, and the age shown by Saturn will reveal sorrows and diseases.
NOTES
Suppose the signs occupied by Rabu, Mars and Saturn have respectively 38, 29 and 30
bindus. It implies that the years 38th, 29th and 30th will respectively indicate hint of getting
poisoned, likelihood of undergoing surgery and facing sorrows and diseases. It occurs to me that
the evil results suggested can happen only when the planets are afflicted. In my own humble
experience the years become significant for the results concerned only when the planets are in
the 8th and the 6th. The astrology-student can easily test this principle by studying a number of
horoscopes.
Stanza 75. At the age corresponding to the bindus in the signs occupied by Venus
and Mercury, the person will enjoy wealth, fame and children; have marriage and mental
happiness and acquire education, honour and fame.
NOTES
If for instance the figure in the sign occupied by Jupiter is say 25, then at the age of 25,
the native may beget a child and enjoy wealth and fame. Similarly the indications in regard to
Venus and Mercury should be noted. Before these rules are applied one must make sure that the
native has the appropriate combinations in the horoscope.
Stanza 76. The Ashtakavarga charts can be applied to the interpretation of Dasa
results thus: Mark the Ashtakavarga of the Dasa lord. Divide the Dasa periods into 12
parts. The first (sub) period will be represented by the sign wherein the lord stands. The
2nd sub-period will be the 2nd from the Dasa lord and so on. Thus each sub-period will
have the same number of months as Dasa period. The sub-periods of the signs where
bindus abound will be good; whereas, the sub-period of the Rasi in which the bindus are
less will be generally bad.
NOTES
I have elaborated this method in my book Ashtakavarga System of Prediction, to which
the reader is referred. Generally the results of a sub-period will pertain to the Bhava to which the
sign in question has reference. Take for instance the Dasa of Mercury placed in Leo, ascendant
being Aquarius. The 12 sub-periods, each of 17 months, will be formed by the sign occupied by
Mercury and the subsequent 11 signs. The 1st sub-period indicates the results pertaining to the
Bhava it signifies. Here, the ascendant being Aquarius, the results will relate to the 7th house.
Depending upon how Mercury is disposed here the results will be good or bad. If in Mercury's
Ashtakavarga, Leo has more bindus then results will be happier. If it has no bindus, the 7th house

results will be adversely affected.
Stanzas 77 and 78. Bhinnashtakavarga is put to two kinds of reduction. In the
matter of Trikona Sodhana or triangular reduction: if in one of the signs that make up the
Trikona, the number of bindus is 0, the bindus in the remaining bindus shall be eliminated.
If the three signs of a trikona group have bindus, deduct the least number from each of
these. If equal number of bindus are in the signs of a triad, eliminate wall. If two signs have
no bindus, remove the bindus in the 3rd also.
Stanza 79. After carrying out trikona reduction, the ekadhipatya reduction should
be carried out in respect of all signs except Cancer and Leo. If both the signs (owned by the
same planet) have the same number of bindus eliminate both the figures. If the bindus in
one sign are less than the other, deduct the smaller number from both. If both signs contain
planets, do not eliminate the figures.
NOTES
Stanzas 78 and 79 deal with trikona sadhana (triangular reduction and ekadhipatya
sodhana (reduction due to ownership of two signs by a planet).
Aries, Leo and Sagittarius constitute Mesha trikona. Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn make
up Vrishabha trikona; Gemini, Libra and Aquarius constitute Mithuna trikona and Cancer,
Scorpio and Pisces belong to Karkataka trikona. Reduction is to be applied to the bindus in each
trikona group.
After this the second reductions (ekadhipatya sodhana) is to be done on the basis of the
ownership of two signs each by a planet, Cancer and Leo being excepted.
There appears to be some differences amongst classical astrological writers as to how
these reductions are to be carried out.
I am not elaborating this subject further as I have dealt with it exhaustively in my Hindu
Predictive Astrology and Ashtakavarga System of Prediction with examples. Hence the reader is
advised to read these books.
Zodiacal and Planetary Factors
Stanza 80. After the two reductions multiply the remaining bindus in the different
signs by their respective zodiacal factors, viz., Taurus and Leo 10; Gemini and Scorpio 8;
Libra and Aries 7; Virgo and Capricorn 5; Cancer 4; Sagittarius 9; Aquarius 11; and Pisces
12; and add up all the 12 products. The result is Rasi Guna Yoga or sum of the zodiacal
factors.
Likewise multiply the bindus in the signs occupied by the different planets by their
respective planetary factors, viz., the Sun 5, the Moon 5, Mars 8, Mercury 5, Jupiter 10,
Venus 7 and Saturn 5. The total of all these is Graha Guna Yoga or sum of the planetary

factors. When the sums of the zodiacal and planetary factors are added together, Suddha
pinda is obtained.
Stanza 81. Multiply the bindus in the 9th from the Sun in his own Ashtakavarga
(before reduction), by the Suddha Pinda of the Sun. Divide the product by 27. The
remainder, counted from Aswini, will be the asterism, which when transited by Saturn
causes the death of the father.
Stanza 82. Multiply total figures in the Sun's Ashtakavarga (after reduction) by the
figures in the 9th from the Sun. Divide the product by 27. The remainder counted from
Aswini represents the constellation, Saturn's transit of which will be fatal to the father.
Stanza 83. After having fixed on the basis of the Sun's Ashtakavarga the
constellation the transit of which by Saturn causes the death of father, we shall deal with
the positions of Jupiter and the Sun at the time of father's death.
Stanza 84. The Suddha Pinda of the Sun should be multiplied by the figures in the
7th from Jupiter in the Sun's Ashtakavarga and this product divided by 27 and the
remainder counted from Aswini indicates the star, the transit of which by Jupiter causes
father's death. Similarly multiply the Suddha Pinda of the Sun by this figure in the 7th,
from the Sun (before reduction) in his own Ashtakavarga. Divide the product by 27. The
remainder from Aswini gives the constellation the transit of which by the Sun indicates the
father's death.
Stanza 85. With the help of the Sun's Ashtakavarga, the month when the native will
die can be ascertained. Again the positions of Saturn, Jupiter and the Sun at the time of
mother's death can also be known. They are explained below.
Stanza 86. The remainder obtained by dividing by 12, the product of the Sun's
suddha pinda and the figures in the 8tb from the Sun in his own Ashtakavarga (before
reduction) indicates the sign (counted from Aries), the Sun's transit of which indicates the
month of the native's death.
Stanza 87. Multiply the figures in the 4th house from the Moon (before reduction) in
his own Ashtakavarga by his Suddha Pinda and divide the product by 27. The remainder
counted from Aswini indicates the star, Saturn's transit of which causes the mother's death.
Stanza 88. Just as we have calculated the positions of Jupiter and the Sun at the
time of death of father from the Sun's Ashtakavarga, in the same manner, we can find out
their positions from the Moon's Ashtakavarga at the time of mother's death.
Stanza 89. Multiply the Suddha Pinda of Mars by the bindus in the 3rd from Mars
in his own Ashtakavarga and divide the product by 12. The remainder counted from Aries
represents the sign, Jupiter's transit of which indicates help from brothers. The Dasa of the

lord of this sign will also be favourable to the native and brothers will do him good.
Stanza 90. The number of bindus in the 3rd from Mars in his own Ashtakavarga
gives the number of brothers and sisters. Classification into male and female is dependent
on the sex of the planets who have contributed the bindus. Just as we calculate sons from
the Ashtakavarga of Jupiter, we should calculate brothers from Mars Ashtakavarga. When
Mars transits the sign having no bindus (after reduction) the native's brothers will die.
Stanza 91. Multiply the Suddha Pinda of Mercury by the number of bindus in the
2nd from Mercury in his own Ashtakavarga (before reduction). Divide the product by 12.
The remainder counted from Aries represents the sign, the Dasa and Bhukti of the lord of
which is favourable for the progress of education. Jupiter's transit of this sign also favours
similar results.
Stanza 92. All the indications of Mercury as karaka can also be considered as
happening during this period.
Jupiter's Ashtakavarga
Stanza 93. Details about progeny are to be ascertained from the Ashtakavarga of
Jupiter. The number of children will correspond to the number of bindus (after reduction)
in the sign occupied by the lord of the 5th from Jupiter. The conduct and nature of the
children will be similar to the nature of the lords who have contributed the bindus.
NOTES
I feel we should take the number of bindus before reduction and not after reduction. It
will not be possible to assign the remaining bindus to the different planets.
Stanza 94. If lords who have contributed bindus (indicated in the previous verse) are
exalted or retrograde, then the number should be trebled. If they are in their own sign, or
their own Navamsa or in vargottama, the number is to be doubled. If they are in
debilitation or in enemies' houses, the children will die. Male lords and lords occupying
male houses indicate male children. Female lords and lords in female houses indicate
female children.
Stanza 95. The question of issues can also be examined from the lords of the 5th
from the Moon and the Ascendant and from the lord of the 9th from Jupiter. The bindus
found in the houses occupied by the above lords (after reduction) give the number of
children.
Stanza 96. The above methods are culled out from Chandrika an annotation of
Hora. There is also another method of determining issues from Jupiter's Ashtakavarga.
Stanza 97. Find out the number of bindus in in the Ashtakavarga of Jupiter in the
5th house from Jupiter and exclude the following: — (a) the enemy of Jupiter; (b) the

enemy of the lord of the 5th from Jupiter; (c) the planet in combustion; (d) the planet
occupying an inimical place; (e) planet in debilitation; (f) the lord of the debilitation sign of
the lord of the 5th from Jupiter and (g) Saturn.
Stanza 98. Total up all the bindus in Jupiter Ashtakavarga (after reduction).
Subtract those found in the signs occupied by malefics. The remainder indicates the
number of children.
Stanza 99. In the Dwadasamsa chart note the strongest sign out of the (a) 5th from
Ascendant; (b) 5th from the Moon and (c) the 5th house from Jupiter. The number of
bindus found in the strongest will be the number of children.
Stanza 100. There will be birth of an issue when Jupiter transits the asterism
represented by the remainder obtained by multiplying the bindus (before reduction) in the
5th from Jupiter by Jupiter's Suddha Pinda and dividing the product by 7.
Stanza 101. When Jupiter transits the asterism represented by the remainder
obtained by multiplying Jupiter's sodya pinda by 7 and dividing the product by 27 children
will be born. If the Navamsa occupied by Jupiter is stronger than the Rasi occupied by him,
the above remainder should be counted not from Aswini but from Dhanishta.
Stanza 102. Multiply the Sodya Pinda of Jupiter by 4 and divide the product by 12.
The remainder counted from Aries represents the month of birth of an issue.
Stanza 103. Multiply the Sodya Pinda of Jupiter by 7 and divide the product by 27.
The remainder counted from the asterism occupied by Jupiter (at the time of birth) gives
the asterism of the child to be born.
Stanza 104. The child's birth ascendant is the sign represented by the remainder
obtained by dividing by 12 the product of Jupiter's Sodya Pinda and 9,
Stanzas 105 and 106. Note the lord of the kakshya occupied by Jupiter in the
husband's horoscope and find out whether this planet has contributed a bindu in the 5th
from Jupiter in his Ashtakavarga in the wife's horoscope. When Jupiter transits this
particular sign, birth of an issue occurs.
The month of birth can be known thus. Note the Navamsa occupied by the lord of
kakshya (occupied by Jupiter) in the husband's horoscope.
When the Sun transits the Navamsa Rasi of this kakshya lord, or its trines, the issue
will be born.
When the Moon transits the sign occupied by Gulika, birth of the child occurs. The
ascendant of the coming child will be the Navamsa-Rasi of Gulika or 5th or 9th from it.
Note the sign occupied by the lord of the kakshya in which the lord of the 5th from
Jupiter is placed. When Jupiter transits this sign an issue will be born. This should be

treasured as a secret.
Stanza 107. Note the bindus in the 5th sign from Jupiter (after reduction). Add up
all the bindus after reduction in the Ashtakavarga of Jupiter. Multiply the bindus in the 5th
from Jupiter (after reduction) by the total bindus (after reduction) in Jupiter's
Ashtakavarga. Divide the product by 12.
Stanza 108. Note whether the 5th sign from Jupiter has bindus and whether Jupiter
occupies favourable places (Ishta Bhavas). If they are favourable, note the sign occupied by
the planet and his Navamsa. When the Moon transits the strongest of these two signs or the
5th and the 9th from them, a child will be born.
NOTES
Two factors are to be considered here: (a) the lord of the 5th house from Jupiter, if it has
bindus; the lord of the favourable place occupied by Jupiter. Take the strongest and see where he
is placed in the Rasi and Navamsa. When the Moon transits the stronger of these two, birth takes
place.
Moon
Ascdt.
Example
Mars
Jupiter
In this chart the 5th from Jupiter has 4 bindus. Hence take the lord of this sign, viz.,
Jupiter. Jupiter himself is favourably placed in Scorpio. Take the lord of this sign, viz., Mars.
Between Jupiter and Mars, Jupiter is stronger as he is in the 10th kendra. In the Navamsa he is,
say, in Cancer. Therefore the Navamsa Rasi is Cancer. Between Scorpio and Cancer, the former
is stronger. Therefore when the Moon transits Scorpio or its trines, viz., Pisces or Cancer, the
birth of the child takes place.
Stanzas 109 and 110. Take the Ashtakavarga of Jupiter in the woman's horoscope.
Note the bindus found in the 5th from Lagna, the Moon (and Jupiter); they represent
daughters. Note the bindus in the 9th house from the above; they indicate sons. In the
male's horoscope, bindus in the 5th represent sons and the 9th governs daughters.
NOTES
This difference will be noted carefully.

Stanza 111. Multiply the bindus in the 9th house (in Jupiter's Ashtakavarga) by
Jupiter's Sodya Pinda. This gives the number of sons. By multiplying the Suddha Pinda by
the bindus in the 5th, we get daughters. The number of male and female children is to be
ascertained from the bindus in the 5th house.
Venus Ashtakavarga
Stanzas 112 and 113. Consider the signs occupied by the lords of the 7th and 9th
from Venus; the signs occupied by the lords of the 9th from the Moon and the ascendant;
the sign occupied by the lord of exaltation sign of the lord of the 7th from the ascendant,
the sign occupied by the lord of debilitation of the lord of the 7th from the ascendant. In
Venus Ashtakavarga (after reduction), count the bindus in these signs. If the lord of the 7th
is very strong, the largest number, and if weak, least number of bindus indicate the number
of wives the man will have.
Stanza 114. Multiply the Sodya Pinda of Venus by the bindus in the 7th from Venus
in his own Ashtakavarga. Divide the product by 27.
When Jupiter transits the asterism represented by the remainder, marriage takes
place.
Stanza 115. Marriage is also likely when Jupiter transits a sign represented by the
figure remaining when the product of the Sodya Pinda of Venus and the bindus in the 7th
from Venus is divided by 12; or in the Dasa of the lord of this sign.
Saturn's Ashtakavarga
Stanza 116. Total the bindus (before reduction) in Saturn's Ashtakavarga from the
ascendant to the sign occupied by Saturn; and from the sign occupied by Saturn to the
ascendant. These two numbers will indicate the age when the native will be attacked by
disease and other misfortunes. The total of the above two figures also indicates the age of
troubles. If the end or a beginning of a malefic Dasa coincides with the age represented by
tiiese three figures, then death may take place.
Stanza 117. Multiply the Sodya Pinda of Saturn by bindus in the 8th from Saturn in
his own Ashtakavarga. Divide the product by 27. When Saturn transits the asterism
represented by the remainder, or the trinal asterisms, death will take place.
Stanza 118. Multiply the bindus in the sign occupied by Jupiter in Saturn's
Ashtakavarga by Saturn's Suddha Pinda. Divide the product by 12. When Jupiter transits
the sign represented by the remainder death will take place. Similarly multiply the Sodya
Pinda of Saturn by the bindus in the sign occupied by the Sun and divide the product by
12. When the Sun transits the sign represented by the remainder, death will take place.
Stanza 119. When the signs containing less bindus in Saturn's Ashtakavarga rise

every day, there will be some mishap. When the Sun transits such signs, there will be
greater misfortunes or even death may take place.
Stanza 120. If after reduction (in Saturn's Ashtakavarga) the sign Saturn occupies
and the 7th Rasi from it are devoid of bindus, the native will have an unnatural death in a
solitary place. If however friendly planets aspect these signs, relations will be near him.
Stanza 121. Multiply the Sodya Pinda of Saturn by 7 and divide the product by 27.
The remainder represents the constellation the transit of which by Saturn may prove fatal
to the native.
Stanza 122. Multiply the Suddha Pinda of Saturn by the bindus in the sign occupied
by Saturn and divide the product by 27. Add this remainder to the remainder suggested in
the previous stanza. Divide the sum by 27. The remainder represents the asterism the
transit of which by Saturn may cause the native's death.
Stanza 123. So far Ashtakavarga and its effects have been described in detail. With
the help of Ashtakavarga, Ashtakavarga Dasas can also be calculated. This can be had from
other Sastras.
NOTES
With this the author closes Prasna Marga adding an account of himself and recapitulating
what he has described in the 32 chapters that comprise the entire treatise.
Stanza 124. My (the author's) native place is Edakad. My mother's name is "Sri".
My father's name is Maha Deva. My prosperity is due to my devotion to the Goddess of
Edakad. I write this work for the benefit of my pupils who may learn it without effort.
Stanza 125. In the first chapter, I have dealt with the nature of the Sastra, persons
who have the authority to interpret the science, qualities required in an astrologer,
characteristics of Prasna and Jataka both of them to be treated in the same level.
Stanza 126. In the second chapter, what the astrologer has to follow, what the
questioner has to do, the sthiti of the questioner, Arudha Lagna, etc., have been detailed.
Stanza 127. In the third chapter, nimittas have been detailed. In the 4th chapter,
Prasna Chakra is drawn up according to Ashtamangala Prasna.
Stanza 128. In the 5th chapter, the calculations regarding Lagna Sphuta and others
are given. In the 6th, Sutra, Trisphuta, etc., and their effects are described. In the 7th
chapter examination through Ashtamangala is treated at full length. In the 8th, the effects
of Arudha and Lagna are given.
Stanza 129. In the 9th chapter, the discussion of longevity through Prasna and
Jataka is conducted. In the 10th chapter, death-inflicting periods as based on Prasna and
Horoscopy are reviewed.

Stanza 130. In the 11th chapter, signs and periods indicating death are examined
through both Prasna and Horoscopy.
Stanza 131. In the 12th, diseases and how they are caused is the subject-matter. In
the 13th when disease begins and when it ends and kindred topics are explained.
Stanza 132. In the 14th chapter, how Bhavas are to be examined is discussed. In the
15th, the topic is favour or disfavour of gods and others, and how to propitiate them.
Stanza 133. In the 16th, certain Lakshanas are examined. In the 17th and 18th,
queries bearing respectively on marriage and children have been discussed. In the 19th, the
prospects of having children as read from horoscopy have been thoroughly gone through.
Stanza 134. In the 20th, the subject is the examination of the 7th house. In the 21st,
agreement of the couple is examined. In the 22nd, Gochara effects are given. In the 23rd,
the topic is Karma Vipaka.
Stanza 135. In the 24th, the topics are queries on rulers, deities, war and hunting. In
the 25th, indications for rainfall have been given. The 26th deals with wells.
Stanza 136. In the 27th, queries bearing on food, gain and whereabouts of a
traveller have been taken up. Sex and sexual union have been detailed in the 28th chapter.
In the 29th, moksha, and in the 30th, unknown horoscopes have been detailed.
Stanza 137. Dreams, how they are caused and their effects are the subject-matter of
the 31st chapter. And in the 32nd, Ashtakavarga has been detailed.
Stanza 138. Let those who have unfair notions keep away from this book, just as
some Saivites being a rival party keep away from Vaishnavites.
NOTES
Some Saivites, it seems, being a rival party to Vaishnavites were decrying the value of
this book at that time. The author says let this treatise be of no use to them. It seems in the
eastern districts there was an astrologer named 'Easwara' and that he was speaking low of this
book. What the author says is that his rivals' disciples need not be benefited by this book.
Stanza 139. Everything contained in this treatise is based on Sastraic authority.
Therefore study what is contained in this carefully and have faith in the value of the
teachings contained therein and your words will never turn false.
Stanza 140. As requested by my disciples, I prepared this book with care. The first
part contains 16 chapters, and the second part contains another 16 chapters. Thus in all in
32 chapters, the treatise is complete.
Thus ends the Chapter XXXII Here ends the second part of Prasna Marga.

Index of Technical Terms
A
Abhichara:
Incantation by a foe for evil purposes
Abhisheka:
Pouring holy water on the idol with Vedic chanting
Adhaka:
Vessel of 20" diameter, and 8" deep
Adhara:
Container
Adheya:
Contained
Adhomukha:
Signs Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Sagittarius and Capricorn
Aditya:
Sukta Hymn to the Sun
Affliction:
Aspected by or joined with Mars, Saturn, or Rahu
Agnibhuta:
These signs are explained in Chapter 14.
These are Aries, Leo and Sagittarius
Agni Mandala:
Solar ingress into certain stars
Agnimantra:
Hymn to Fire
Aindragnisukta:
Combined hymn to Fire and Indra
Akasabhuta:
Airy signs
Alpatmaja signs:
Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio
Angana:
Premises
Anupachaya:
Houses other than 3, 6, 10, 11 from the rising sign
Anishtabhava:
Houses 6, 8, 12
Anupadesa:
Watery places
Antra:
Intestines
Apasmara:
Epilepsy
Apoklima:
Houses 3, 6, 9 and 12 from the rising sign
Aruchi:
Tasteless
Arudha Lagna:
The sign rising at the time of query. See 2. 7 to 11.
The direction faced by the querist determines the sign
Ascendant:
Sign rising at the time of birth or query
Ashtaka Sraddha:
A kind of offering to the manes
Ashtakavarga:
System explained in Chap. 32
Arsa Roga:
Piles
Atikhara:
Letters Kha, Chha, Tha, Thha, Pha
Atisara:
Dysentery
Ayu Sukta:
Hymn for longevity

B
Benefics:
Jupiter, Venus and full Moon
Bhagandhara:
Fistula
Bhagya:
Ninth house
Bhagva Sukta:
Hymn for wealth
Bhanduka:
Total of bindus in houses 1, 5 and 9 from Lagna
Bhadra tithi:
Lunar days 2, 7 and 12
Bhadra dipa:
Auspicious lamp
Bhava:
House
Bheri:
Drum
Bhumibala:
Vitality of the earth for war. It depends on the lunar month
Bhuta:
Hob-goblin
Bija Sphuta:
See Chapter 19, verses 5 and 11
Biped:
Gemini, Libra, Aquarius and first half of Sagittarius
Brihaspati:
Jupiter
Chakra puja:
Worship of the sacred nine triangles
Chandragupti Chakra:
See Chapter 26, verses 20 to 23
Chandrabhilasha Rasi:
See Chapter 17, verse 41
Chara nakshatras:
Constellations Punarvasu, Swati, Sravana,
Dhanishta and Satabhisha
Chatushpada:
Quadruped signs
Chatra Rasi:
The sign obtained from the Veedhi Rasi. Count the number
of signs from Arudha to the Lagna and then count
this number from Veedhi Rasi to get this
Chidra tithi:
Lunar days 4, 6, 8, 9, 12 and 14
Chaitanya:
Consciousness
Chora Rasis:
Sixth house and the house where the sixth lord is
Combustion:
Planet close to the Sun is powerless
Common signs:
Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces
D
Dana:
Gift

Datta Sphuta:
Dhanu:
Dinarsha:
Diurnal signs:
Dosha:
Drona:
Duritamsa:
Dusthana:
Dwadasamsa:
Eunuch planets:
Eunuch signs:
Even limbs:
Female Drekkana:
Fixed signs:
Gaja:
Gana homa:
Ghataka:
Ghosha:
Ghatika:
Gochara:
Graha Yuddha:
Gulika:
volume
Gulma:
Add the longitudes of Mercury, Saturn and the fifth lord.
Multiply this product by five
Bow
Multiply the ghatis from sunrise by 28 and divide it by 60.
The remainder counted from Aswini gives this constellation
Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius and Pisces
Defect, blemish
Four adhakas (a measurement)
The second and the third padas of samhara nakshatras.
These are 3, 6, 9, 12, 15,18, 21, 24, 27 counted by Aswini
houses 6, 8 and 12
One-twelfth part of a sign. It is equal to 2° 30’
E
Mercury and Saturn
Signs owned by Mercury and Saturn
Face, eyes, ears, hands, etc.
F
The one-third part of a sign ruled by the Moon or Venus
Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius
G
Elephant
A sacred offering
Total of bindus in houses 4, 8 and 12
Letters gha, jha, dha, tha, bha
24 minutes
Transit of planets
Planets conjunct within one degree
A sensitive point explained on pages 160 to 162 of the first
Disease of the spleen
H

Havana:
A fire offering
Hora:
15° of a sign is a hora. In odd signs the first part is ruled by the
Sun, and the second by the Moon. In the even signs it is reversed
Indra Mandala:
When solar ingress is into the constellations of Rohini, Anuradha,
Jyeshta, Uttarashadha, Abhijit, Sravana and Dhanishtha
Jala bhuta:
J
Watery signs
Jangala:
Semi-dry place
Janma Rasi:
The sign having the Moon at the time of birth
Jaya tithi:
Lunar days 3, 8 and 13
K
Kakshya:
Each sign is divided into eight parts. These are ruled in the
sequence of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury,
Moon, and Lagna
Kalyanadighria:
Sacred butter
Kamila:
Blindness
Karmas:
Actions: results of past actions
Kala hora:
The order in which the lords of the Horas follow is Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury and the Moon.
The first Hora is that of the lord of the week day.
Karsya:
Emaciation
Keeta Rasi:
Scorpio
Kendra
Houses 1, 4, 7, 10 from Lagna
Ketu
South node of the Moon
Khara
Letters ka, cha, ta, tha, pa
Kimsthugna
One of the Karanas
Kola
The first decanates of Cancer and Capricorn and last
one of Scorpio
Kshetra Pinda
Oblation
Kshetra Sphuta
See Chapter 19, verses 5 and 11
Kshipra nakshatras
Aswini, Pushyami, Hasta

Kushmanda Homa
Kusa
Lakshana:
Luminaries:
Mahodara:
Malefics:
Manes:
Mantapa:
Maudhya Chandra:
Moveable signs:
Mridanga:
Mridu Nakshatra:
Mrigaya:
Mutra Kriccha:
Naga:
Nakandhya:
Nanda tithi:
Navamsa:
Nimitta:
Nocturnal signs:
Odd limbs:
Panaphara:
Panchamrita:
Panchagavya:
A sacrificial offering with pumpkins
Sacred grass
Omens: indicative signs
The Sun and the Moon
M
Dropsy
Mars, Saturn and Rahu
The dead ancestors
An open sheltered place in the temple precincts
Moon within 12° of the Sun
Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn
A musical instrument, drum
Constellations Mrigasira, Chitta, Anuradha and Revati
Hunting
Urinary disease
N
Snake
Partial blindness
Lunar days 1, 6, 11
One-ninth part of a sign
Omens or indicative signs
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Sagittarius and Capricorn
O
Head, chest, stomach, vasthi, thighs and legs
P
Houses 2,5,8 and 11
A mixture of sugar, ghee, honey, milk and curds
A mixture of five articles (milk, curds, ghee, cows urine
and cow-dung) derived from the cow

Parivesha:
Halo round the Sun and the Moon
Paksha:
Fortnight
Panduroga:
Leucoderma
Payasa:
Milk and sugar preparation
Parigha:
A bludgeon, an iron club, the 19th yoga in astronomy
Pitta:
Bile
Parva:
Lunar days 8, 14, 15
Paura:
Resident
Pitris:
Manes
Poshaka:
Total bindus in houses 3, 7 and 11
Pratichandra:
Moon though enveloped in clouds emanates a radiance
round in shape, mock Moon
Prasada:
Palace
Pratipada:
The first lunar day
Pratisurya:
Mock Sun
Preta:
Spirits of the dead
Puma tithi:
Lunar days 5, 10, 15
Prishtodaya:
Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Sagittarius signs and Capricorn
Q
Quadruped:
Second half of Sagittarius, first half of Capricorn,
Aries, Taurus, Leo
Querist:
One who puts the question
R
Radical:
Referring to the natal chart
Rahu:
North node of the Moon
Rahu Mantra:
A Vedic chant for Rahu
Rasmi:
Ray. See Chapter 19, Verses 79 and 80
Rudra Sukta:
Hymn to Rudra known as Namakam
S
Sakuna:
Omens: Indicative signs
Samasaptaka:
Planets in opposition
Sankha:
Conch

Sankramana:
Santana Chandra:
Santana Gulika:
Santana Graha Sphuta:
Santana Guru:
Santana Ravi:
Santana Sukra:
Santana Tithi:
Santana Trisphuta:
Santana Yoga Sphuta:
Sarpabali:
Sekadravya:
Sevaka:
Saubhagya Sukta:
Shashtyamsa:
Sleshma:
Smriti:
Smti:
Sthayi:
Sukshma deha:
Sula:
Surya Kalagni Chakra:
Tila homa:
Trikona:
Trimsamsa:
Solar ingress into a Zodiac sign
Longitude of the Moon multiplied by five
Longitude of Gulika multiplied by five
Product of the longitudes of the Sun, the Moon
and Jupiter multiplied by five
Longitude of Lagna multiplied by five plus longitude
of Yamakantaka multiplied by five
Longitude of Lagna multiplied by five
Longitude of Venus multiplied by five
Lunar day on which the query is put. Santana Chandra minus
Santana Ravi also. See Chapter 19, verses 34 and 35. Longitude
of the Moon multiplied by five minus five times the longitude
of the Sun
Add Santana Chandra, Ravi and Guru Sphuta
Add Santhana Guru to Yamakantaka and multiply it by nine
A rite to propitiate the serpent deity
Appetisers
Total of Bindus in houses 2, 6 and 10
A Vedic hymn
One-sixtieth part of a sign
Phlegm
Remembered texts on religion and thics
Revealed scriptures
defending party
Subtle body
Colic
Position or number of the constellation from the Sun.
See also Surya Sula Chakra.
T
A religious rite offering sesamum
Houses 1, 5 and 9 from Lagna
One-thirtieth’ part of a sign
U

Ubhayodaya:
Upachaya:
Upadamsa:
Urdhvodaya:
Utsava:
Vargas:
Varga Chatushtaya:
Varuna Mantra:
Vata:
Vata Roga:
Vayu bhuta:
Vayu Mandala:
Vayu Sukta:
Vedha:
Vina:
Vishaghatika:
Visarpa:
Vishtikarana:
Waning Moon:
Watery signs:
Yamakantaka:
Sign Pisces
Houses 3, 6, 10, 11 from Lagna
Ancillary items of food
Also called Urdhvamukha or Sirshodaya. These are Gemini,
Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio and Aquarius
Festival
There are seven major divisions of a sign. These are Rasi,
Hora, Drekkana, Saptmasa, Navamsa, Dwadasamsa,
Trimsamsa etc.
These are Navamsa (1/9), Nava-navamsa (81),
Navamsa-Dwadasamsa and Dwadasamsa
Hymn to Varuna beginning with "Imam me varuna srudhi"
Wind
Rheumatism
Airy signs Gemini, Libra and Aquarius
The time of solar ingress into Mrigasira, Punarvasu,
Uttara, Hasta, Chitta, Swati
Hymn to the wind Deity
Check
Lute, a fretted instrument of music
See page 42 of the first volume
Serpis
It is on the lunar days 4, 8, 12 and 15 of the bright half.
In the dark half the lunar days are 3, 7, 10 and 14
W
From the eighth lunar day of the dark half of the month
to the seventh lunar day of the bright half
Cancer, Pisces and the second half of Capricorn.
Y
A sensitive point rising at 14, 10, 6, 2, 26, 22, 18 ghatis
after sunrise starting with Sunday.

Yama Sukra:
Yayi:
Yoga Sphuta:
Ascendant rising at 22, 18, 14, 10, 6, 2, and 26 ghatis
after sunrise from Sunday onwards
Invading party
Add the longitude of the lord of Lagna to the planet
concerned to get this

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED - DELHI
First Edition: 1985
Second Revised & Enlarged Edition: 1992
Reprint: Delhi, 1994
© Copyright Dr. B.V. Raman, 1992
All Rights Reserved
ISBN: 81-208-1035-x (Paper)
Also available at:
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004
16 St. Mark's Road, Bangalore 560 001
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
PRINTED IN INDIA
BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRIJAINENDRA PRESS,
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110 028
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT. LTD.,
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007
